Morphological evolution of musical interface:
design approach
(work in progress)
S.K. Kasich
Computer Music
UC San Diego Department of Music
skasich@ucsd.edu

ABSTRACT
The recent advancements in digital fabrication have led to a
wider access to prototyping in all sorts of fields. Beginning of
the last decade was marked by the word “revolution” in relation
to “maker’s culture” at least in some publications [3, 15]. This
has influenced the sphere of physical computing in arts and
NIME sphere as well. As currently there are more and more
possibilities to create new instruments, we suggest that it can be
useful to think about approaches to conceptualize these
creations. This paper is an attempt to propose a methodology
for NIME prototyping, based on evolutionary metaphor.
First we observe the application of evolutionary concepts to the
field of music technology, briefly discussing its appearance in
related publications. We then assemble our own operational
concept, which can be used for the direct prototyping of
interfaces. Mainly by introducing metaphorical “DNA”, inside
which the “gene” of “interactive kinematic concept” is of a
particular interest, and also by applying the now obsolete but
useful “Meckel–Serres recapitulation hypothesis”
(embryological parallelism) as a model for rapid prototyping.
Understanding the speculative nature of such an approach we
do not offer it as a scientific basis for classification, research or
prediction, but as a workable concept for development, which
can lead to valuable results.
In the end we describe two case studies of NIMEs, which were
prototyped in the discussed fashion, showing illustrations and
reflecting on the practicalities.
Author Keywords
electronic musical instrument, musical instrument design,
ergonomics, playability, methodology, human computer
interface

CCS Concepts
• Applied computing → Sound and music computing;
1. INTRODUCTION
Imagine a kind of science, which can be focused mainly on
visual and mechanical properties of musical instruments and on
physical interactions with them? Shapes, colors, sizes, folding
capabilities, haptics etc. Putting aside acoustic, musical and
other properties. Something like a “Deaf Organology”. If it does

exist, then it does so in an intersection between Ergonomics,
Kinematics, Interface Design, Organology, Semiotics, Topology
etc. We can use a term, taken from biology, and call it
“Morphology of musical interfaces''. In this paper we apply a
biological metaphor even further and suggest that musical
instruments perform their kind of evolution - changing their
shapes in time obeying Natural Selection. This means we can
try to apply other biological analogies to them, possibly related
to the theory of Evolution. Thus we are talking about
“Morphological Evolution of Musical Interface” as a
subdivision of the aforementioned “science” - observation of
changing shapes in time. If not science, then it at least can be
regarded as a certain scope on the history of musical
instruments. And one reason for us to have it - is that it can be
useful for the practice of creation of NIMEs.
About terminology. We will be using terms “musical
instrument” and “musical interface” in a lot of cases here as
synonyms. We will use the term “class” sometimes when
talking about analogies between animals and musical
instruments classifications, without very detailed descriptions
and distinctions. There might be some other terminological
vagueness further in the text, but we tried to be as clear as
possible.
2. Biological metaphor and technical
objects
We can try to lay some basis for the use of biological terms
while talking about anthropogenic objects - e.g. machines - by
introducing the Actor-Network theory (ANT) and Morphology.
2.1 ANT
Actor-Network theory (ANT) - a social theory and
methodology, which tends to describe all the processes as
networks of relationships between so-called “actors”, and which
was largely popularized by works of Bruno Latour [12]. The
most interesting for us though, is the particular emphasis on the
importance of “non-human actors'' in these relationships [22].
2.2
2.1.1 Networks
Though the term “network” within the ANT was seen as
problematic by Latour himself, it plays the most central part in
the whole theory [12]. Networks in ANT are characterized by
lack of hierarchy and constant process of performance and


exchange between the actors, as well by translations happening
between different networks. Being in development since the 80s
- ANT was very much in line with global domestication of the
idea of networks as an influential model for different types of
research and development [7, 12, 27]. Network emphasizes the
importance of interconnections, and questions the hierarchy
between the actors.
Here are the important terms in ANT, which circulate around
the network model:
- Actor (actant) - something which instigates the activity and
performs the relationship within the network. Can be humans
and non-humans.
- Actor-network - the interconnections between the actors.
- Quasi-object - is an entity, which organizes the network and
serves as a glue or a common motivation to it.
In application to our study, we can translate it like this:
- Actors - humans (musicians in a wider sense), non-humans
(musical instruments).
- Actor-network - musicking (as coined by Christopher Small) -
music in the form of diverse processes.
- Quasi-object - music.
2.1.2 Non-human actor
It can be said that everything, besides humans and symbols, can
be regarded as non-human actors in ANT [22]. The “technical
object” - is a large topic in this field itself. It is a non-human
actor, but can be represented as a sort of network as well [2].
We will not go there in this text. What is important for us, is
that a musical instrument in this view can be defined as a
non-human actor, which is involved in non-hierarchical
relationships with human actors. And “non-humans have
agency, as Latour provocatively puts it” [22]. Let’s leave it here
so far.
2.3 Morphology in biology and design
Morphology is commonly understood as a study of forms and
academically manifested in different fields, but mostly in
linguistics. We are more interested in Morphology as a
discipline, related to biology, where it is believed to be a “failed
science”, but nevertheless very influential in historical context,
established a path for such areas as: embryology, systematics,
functional morphology, comparative physiology, ecology,
behavior, evolutionary theory, or histology [17]. Biological
morphology was simply speaking - investigation of visible
features (shapes) of animals and plants, attempts to compare
and classify them, etc. Both fathers of modern theory of
Evolution by Natural Selection - Charles Darwin and Alfred
Russel Wallace - were doing sort of morphological studies. The
important feature of this understanding of the term
“morphology” for us - is that it was a study of
three-dimensional shapes of non-humans.
The practical field, which is constantly concerned with study of
3d-forms - is design. We can talk about morphology of
technical objects (which are designed), the same way, we used
to talk about animals and plants [1]. For the same reason - to
compare and classify them. But also - to design new ones.

2.4 Evolutionary metaphor
Besides being the most influential theoretical concept in
modern biology - Evolution by Natural Selection is also a
widely used explanatory model for different processes in frames
of other sciences. For example Evolutionary Economics,

Evolutionary Psychology, Evolutionary Epistemology,
Evolutionary Computation, Molecular Darwinism, etc. All of
which are currently stored under the umbrella of so-called
“Universal Darwinism”. The successful practical application of
at least some of these fields can probably prove the explanatory
power of what we can call “evolutionary metaphor”.
“Morphological evolution” - can be understood as the evolution
of shapes, and is currently discussed in both biology and
robotics design among other fields [1, 11].
3. Musical instrument as a non-human
actor
As stated earlier, in frames of ANT, agency is granted to
non-human actants [22].
Presumably even before ANT, there were other examples of
putting agency onto some non-human entities, which previously
were not supposed to have it. Famous one and related to our
exploration - is Richard Dawkins’s “Selfish Gene” [6]. The
book shows evolution as a process, in which genes keep their
shapes, by using living beings as tools (or we can say
transportation). Basically it gives agency to gene (a relatively
small assemblage of molecules). The name of the book itself is
a name of a molecular assemblage (“gene”) prepended with a
motivational-emotional attribute, previously used for humans
only (“selfish”).
We won’t go so far, to assume that musical instruments may
have emotions and motivations (although it may happen they
will soon), but at least we can grant them enough agency to
have their own evolution. And from this point of view - the
change of shapes, which happens in this evolution - is a result
of many conditions (relationships within the networks in ANT
terms), of which human will is only one of.
4. Evolution of music instruments
The evolutionary metaphor applied to historical music
technology development is met in publications on the subject.
Usually though it is never augmented with the methodological
steps, which we provided in sections 1, 2 and 3 of this paper.
One example is in Michael Spitzer’s “The Musical Human”:
“Musical instruments evolve. They rise and thrive, or fall into
extinction like dinosaurs” [23, p.143]. And after that phrase the
author provides some detailed examples, also comparing
biological taxonomies to Hornbostel-Sachs classification.
Another one is in Thor Magnusson’s “Sonic Writing”, where he
talks about “..the evolutionary mechanics of design” of musical
instruments [14, p.10]. And later: “From one perspective the
move of musical practice to use electronic and digital
technologies might seem like a drastic rupture, while from
another it appears to be a natural evolution” [14, p.13].
Magnusson’s work is particularly interesting for us, because he
is concerned with the question of memory, which is embodied
in the design of musical instruments. We will touch on it later,
but another useful observation from this source - is what the
author calls “Epochs or Epistemes”. They can be “roughly
defined as the instrumental paradigms of the nineteenth,
twentieth, and twenty-first centuries, here framed as
representations of practices with acoustic, electronic, and digital
technologies” [14, p.6].
The Epistemes can be considered as an example of stages of the
Evolution:


Acoustic to Electronic to Digital.
5. Morphology, kinematics and
ergonomics
Music instruments have shapes. So we can apply Morphology
to them. But they are also tools to be used - to interact with. The
interaction in most cases happens through physical movements
of human (or non-human) actors. Those movements are partly
restricted, and partly identified by the shape of the instrument.
Kinematics is the subdivision of mechanics, which studies
motion of points, bodies and systems of bodies [24, 26]. In
application to musical interfaces Kinematics can be used to
study movements of the player, or motion of the mechanical
parts of the instrument, in case it has ones [4]. Kinematic
calculations can be used to research and improve Ergonomics of
musical interfaces. And Ergonomics - is an interdisciplinary
field and a term, which describes the relation between design of
the object and comfort of human operation with it. Ergonomics
of musical interfaces is an active research field, especially in
NIMEs [9, 16, 25].
We can see the term “morphology” being used in the NIME
field sometimes as part of the language of “dynamic or fixed
morphology” of sound, taken from works by Trevor Wishart
and others [18, 19, 20]. That sound morphology is in constant
connection with the design of the interfaces intended for live
performance. But as mentioned above - in the context of this
paper we use the term “morphology” directly applied to the
physical shapes of the instruments.
As morphology of musical interfaces evolves - so does
kinematics of interactions with them, so does their ergonomics.
6. Ergodynamics and DNA: the memory
question
At some point one class evolves into another one. Lyre becomes
harp, harp becomes piano [23]. So not only the shape changes,
but also the name. The instrument starts to be differently
classified. What is the significant feature which is crucial for
the new class to form distinctively from the previous one? If we
continue to reflect the evolutionary paradigm, we can say that
the drastic change in DNA leads to change in shape, and all of it
is determined by some change in the environment. That’s where
we need to find the analogy to “DNA” in our construct.
We suggest that in order to keep the name of the class (keep
being a version of itself) in the process of this evolution, the
instrument has to keep it’s “DNA”. So if we look into the
attributes, which stay intact, when the shape evolves - we will
identify it.
Lyre evolves into piano, when keys are added. When does the
piano stop being a piano?
When it loses keys. Not when it loses the strings inside, because
digital piano is still called “Piano”, while technically being an
electronic synthesizer with keyboard control.
Guitar probably stops being guitar when it loses its neck. Not
strings again, because you could find digital stringless
“guitars”. E.g. Yamaha EZ-EG, MI Guitar by Magic
Instruments, Z6 by Starr Labs, etc..
Guitar example is particularly helpful, because everyone is
aware of the “existence” of the Air Guitar. This type of guitar is
so popular that it has its own festivals and awards. And it still
keeps the name of the class - guitar. It also can serve to us as the
very clear marker of the “DNA”. Until you can perform with it
as with guitar - it is a guitar. In other words - as long as the
ergonomics of its shape provokes the kinematics associated

with the class - we will tend to classify it equal to other
members of the class.
We can call it the "interactive kinematic concept". It describes
main interactive attributes, which are manifested in the design
of the main elements of control.
The “i.k.c.” is an ergographic agent or the carrier for
ergogenetic memory in terms, which Thor Magnusson uses in
his book [14]. He particularly talks about Ergodynamics - as a
name for the experience from the actions with the musical
interface, which is related to “Ergogenetic Memory” - as
“incorporated memory on how to use the object”.
Ergodynamics is also related to “Ergographic analysis” - as a
potential way to focus on the evolution of the object, but not the
static form of it.
“Ergodynamics is for music technologies (and perhaps any
interface) what the concept of “gameplay” is for game
developers..” [14, p.11].
In short “i.k.c.” - describes what kind of kinematics are learned
to play the instruments called by certain names. The difference
between movements of fingers of a pianist playing piano and a
clarinetist playing clarinet - is the difference between “i.k.c.”.
It is a good time to remind, that we are doing generalizations
here, and totally aware of instruments like “steel guitar” or
“keyboard gusli” (Clavichord Gusli), which can be left for now
as a peculiar mutations.
We can suggest that “i.k.c.” in most cases is crucial for the
instrument to sustain it’s name and attribution to class in the
process of evolution of shape. It is the way the interface keeps
memory about itself.
But “DNA” in most cases is probably wider. It may consist of
different units (genes), but mainly: expected timbres, functional
purpose of the instrument, etc. The “interactive kinematic
concept” (“i.k.c.”) might be just part of it.
7. Recapitulation
Recapitulation (Meckel–Serres law) - was an influential
evolutionary hypothesis, which is currently considered debunct.
It can be summarized in its founder Ernst Haeckel's phrase
"ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny" [8].
Besides the literary formulation of this theory was refuted with
time, some elements of its logic were adapted in modern
biology”[13].
If we can say that music instruments have phylogenesis
(historical evolution) and they certainly have ontogenesis (each
of them gets produced and degrades individually), - then we can
speculate further and try to apply recapitulation analogy onto
our object.
We suggest taking it as a model to approach the design of
musical interface. In other words: ontogenesis of the instrument
can follow the phylogenesis. This is especially useful, if we
would like to develop a new class of instruments.
Following Richard Dawkins’s reflections on genes having
agency and being non-human actors, we can start the design
process with assembling the “DNA”, and then follow some
evolutionary stages of prototyping [6].
For example, Magnusson’s epistemes:
- Acoustic - Electronic - Digital
Another example of phylogenetic stages can be - eras of
production of electronic synthesizers. They started historically
as kludge assemblage from existing objects, used for other
purposes - like oscillators from physics labs at WDR. They
evolved into schematics built individually from scratch or with


use of pre-assembled parts by individuals. And they further
evolved into repeatable industrial designs.
- Kludge - D.i.y. - Industrial production
Perhaps the stages can be combined, and other stages can be
observed in the historical evolution of music interfaces.
This can be the outline for this recapitulative design method:
1) create the DNA - a description, which would include:
“i.k.c.”, expected timbres, functional purpose of the instrument,
and maybe something else.
2) take or imagine some evolutionary stages.
3) prototype through those stages.
8. Design case study N1 : Dlld
Dlld (a.k.a. “dillidee” with all letters doubled) - one-hand-held
expressive electro-acoustic instrument.
1) “DNA”: solo instrument to be played with one hand, can be
used to accompany singing, can have diatonic or chromatic
scales
2) “i.k.c.”: one hand operation, maximum expressivity with
limited controls, using second hand optionally to manipulate the
acoustic features of sound propagation, shaking of the hand
creates natural vibrato acoustically (but not via digital sensing)
3) Stages of ontogenesis: (based on Epistemes example)
– Acoustic stage - assembled using repurposed existing objects
(see Figure 1)

Figure 1
– Electronic stage - combining pre-assembled parts of electric
and acoustic nature (see Figure 2)

Figure 2

– Digital stage - using DSP board and DAC programming with
plaster corpus (see Figure 3)

Figure 3

9. Design case study N2 : FrR
FrR (a.k.a. “fingerring” with double “R”) - simple and cheap
interface for live performance with spatial sound.
1) “DNA”: simple intuitive control for multichannel sound,
using two hands, timbre independant, as cheap and affordable
as possible, not necessarily has tempered scales
2) “i.k.c.”: two hand operation, take sounds with one hand,
direct them in space with the second hand, using the control
panel which can be isomorphic to the positioning of acoustic
outputs in the space.
3) Stages of ontogenesis: (based on “Synthesizer” example)

- Kludge stage - basic electronic assembly using found objects -
not specifically designed for the interface (see Figure 4)

Figure 4
- D.i.y. stage - basic self-made design, using all sorts of
available maker sources and tinkerings (see Figure 5)


Figure 5
- Industrial production - (see Figure 6)

Figure 6
And why won’t we add a stage from another phylogeny ?
- Digital version based on touchscreens (in concept) (see Fig.7)

Figure 7

10. Conclusion
Morphological Evolution of Musical Interface - is not a science
(yet). But as we showed in this paper - it is a perspective, which
can be helpful in structuring the design, and maybe provoking
some curious questions for further hypothesis and explorations.

11. REFERENCES
[1] E. Aaron, J. Hawthorne-Madell, Ken Livingston, J.H.
Long Jr. Morphological Evolution: Bioinspired Methods
for Analyzing Bioinspired Robots. Frontiers in Robotics
and AI. 8 (2022)
[2] M. Akrich. The De-scription of Technical Objects. In:
Bijker, W.E. and Law, J., Eds., Shaping Technologies/
Building Society. Studies in Sociotechnical Change, The
MIT Press, Cambridge/London, 1997, 205-224.
[3] C. Anderson. Makers: The New Industrial Revolution.
Crown Business, New York, NY, 2012.
[4] E.O. Boyer, Q. Pyanet, S. Hanneton, F. Bevilacqua.
Learning Movement Kinematics with a Targeted Sound.
Sound, Music & Motion, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science. Vol. 8905, (2014).
[5] N. Collins. Hardware Hacking. Copyright Nicolas Collins,
2013, 2014.
[6] R. Dawkins. The selfish gene. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, UK, 1976.
[7] C.A. Doxiadis. Ekistics, the Science of Human
Settlements. Science, v.170, no.3956 (October 1970),
393-404.
[8] S.F. Gilbert. Ernst Haeckel and the Biogenetic Law.
Developmental Biology, 8th edition. Sinauer Associates,
Sunderland, MA, 2006.
[9] M. Graf, M. Barthet. Mixed Reality Musical Interface:
Exploring Ergonomics and Adaptive Hand Pose
Recognition for Gestural Control. Proceedings of NIME
2022.
[10] P.F. Hagolani, R. Zimm, R. Vroomans, I. Salazar-Ciudad.
On the evolution and development of morphological
complexity: A view from gene regulatory networks. PLOS
Computational Biology, 17, 2 (2021), e1008570
[11] S. Kriegman, N. Cheney, J. Bongard. How morphological
development can guide evolution. Nature. Scientific
Reports, 8 (2018), Article number: 13934.
[12] B. Latour. Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to
Actor-Network-Theory. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
UK, 2005.
[13] S. Lovtrup. On von Baerian and Haeckelian
Recapitulation. Systematic Zoology, 27, 3 (1978), 348–352.
[14] T. Magnusson. Sonic Writing: Technologies of Material,
Symbolic, and Signal Inscriptions. Bloomsbury Academic,
London, UK, 2019.
[15] MAKE: Arduino Revolution!. Make magazine. (Vol. 25,
Jan. 2011). O'Reilly Media, Sebastopol, CA, 2011.
[16] H. Motohide. Ergonomic Design of A Portable Musical
Instrument. Proceedings of NIME-03, Montreal, Canada,
2003, 77-82.
[17] L.K. Nyhart. Biology Takes Form: Animal Morphology
and the German Universities, 1800-1900. University of
Chicago Press. Chicago, il, 1995.
[18] G. Paine. Gesture and Morphology in Laptop Music
Performance. In: Roger T. Dean (ed.), The Oxford
Handbook of Computer Music. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, UK, 2011, 214–232.
[19] G. Paine. Gesture and Musical Interaction: Interactive
Engagement Through Dynamic Morphology. Proceedings
of NIME-04, Hamamatsu, Japan, 2004, 80-86.
[20] G. Paine. Interfacing for dynamic morphology in computer
music performance. The inaugural International
Conference on Music Communication Science. Sydney,
Australia, 5-7 December 2007, 115-118.
[21] I. Peretz. The nature of music from a biological
perspective. Cognition, 100, 1 (2006), 1-32.


[22] E. Sayes. Actor–Network Theory and methodology: Just
what does it mean to say that nonhumans have agency?
Social Studies of Science, 44, 1 (2014), 134–149.
[23] M. Spitzer. The Musical Human: A History of Life on
Earth. Bloomsbury, New York, NY, 2021.
[24] J. Stiles Beggs. Kinematics. Taylor & Francis. Abingdon,
UK, 1983.
[25] S.A. Storm. Assessing the Instrumentalist Interface:
Modifications, Ergonomics and Maintenance of Play. Phys
Med Rehabil Clin N Am, 17 (2006), 893–903.

[26] O. Vinogradov. Fundamentals of kinematics and dynamic
of machines and mechanisms. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,
2000.
[27] M. Wigley. Network Fever. Grey Room, 39, 4 (2001),
82–122.