Principles of Instrument and System Design
for LaptOperas
Anne K. Hege
Mills College at Northeastern University
5000 MacArthur Blvd.
Oakland, CA, USA
a.hege@northeastern.edu

Curtis Ullerich
Iowa State University
2427 Union Dr.
Ames, IA 
curtis@ulleri.ch

ABSTRACT
In this article, we describe the creation of an instrument
ensemble control system for The Furies: A LaptOpera, an opera
for laptop orchestra and live vocalists based on the Greek
tragedy Electra.1 We outline the practical considerations that
inspired the creation of this system for the opera and the
principles that guided this system's design. Through a detailed
description of the development of the rope instrument and the
design of the instrument ensemble control system, this paper
offers tools and reflections on useful design strategies to
support the rehearsal and performance of evening-length
multimedia works.2
Author Keywords
Instrument design, Wekinator application, machine learning,
instrument ensemble control system, opera, musical
multimedia, performance, rehearsal, and system design.
CCS Concepts
• Applied computing → Sound and music computing;
Performing arts; • Computer systems organization →
Dependable and fault-tolerant systems and networks;
Redundancy; Reliability; Maintainability and Maintenance; •
Human-centered Computing → Human Computer Interaction
(HCI); Interactive Systems and Tools; • Computing
Methodologies → Machine Learning;
1. INTRODUCTION
The Furies: A LaptOpera began in the spring of 2019.
Commissioned by the Stanford Laptop Orchestra, the work
explored instrument building to unify the expressive and
performative artistic vision of an opera for laptop orchestra and
live voices (a laptOpera). Incorporating live vocals, staging, and
setting into the instrument design process, composer, librettist,
and creator Anne Hege, along with her collaborative team,3
attempted to create a work that could embody the societal
questions around cycles of violence posed within the Electra
myth, the inspiration for the opera’s narrative.

3 The creative team included Curtis Ullerich, Ge Wang, Elena
Georgieva, Camille Noufi, and Matt Wright.

2 This article complements and extends Hege, A., Nouﬁ, C.,
Wang, G., & Georgieva, E. (2021). "Instrument Design for
The Furies: A LaptOpera." NIME 2021.

1 Video documentation of the premiere of The Furies: A
LaptOpera (2022) - https://vimeo.com/717188488.

Between this project's beginning in 2019 and the full opera
premiere in 2022, the instrument design team4 faced many
challenges in satisfying both the artistic vision and the practical
necessities of live opera. This paper offers tools and reflections
on design strategies to support the rehearsal and performance of
an evening-length work. Through an in-depth discussion of one
instrument within the opera, its artistic design principles, and
the practical design elements, including the instrument
ensemble control system, developed over time to support
necessary rehearsal and performance demands, we offer basic
principles for instrument construction for opera and long format
multimedia works.

Figure 1: the rope instrument in "Loving It All" from The
Furies: A LaptOpera. All photos in this article were taken by
Ge Wang.
2. HISTORY OF THE FURIES: A
LAPTOPERA
The Furies: A LaptOpera5 was created in stages, beginning with
Act III in the spring of 2019,6 Act I in the fall of 2019, and from
January through early March 2020, the ensemble prepared for
the full premiere postponed due to COVID-19. In the summer
of 2022, the project was remounted and received a full premiere
on Stanford's CCRMA Stage on Nov. 11-13th, with a fourth
performance at Mills College at Northeastern University Chapel
on Nov. 17th, 2022. The final version consists of five laptop
stations with six laptop players/chorus members and four

6 Link to video documentation of the premiere of Act III of The
Furies: A LaptOpera (https://youtu.be/NScHznvVxrw).

5 Documentation of this project can be found on the project
website - https://laptopera.org/.

4 The instrument design team 2019-2020 included Anne Hege,
Camille Noufi, Elena Geogieva, Ge Wang, and Matt Wright
and 2020-2022 Curtis Ullerich and Anne Hege.


soloists (Sidney Chen, Shauna Fallihee, Alice Del Simone, and
Anne Hege). Between May 2020 and the premiere, computer
programmer, instrument designer, and instrument ensemble
control system designer Curtis Ullerich and composer and
creator Anne Hege met regularly to develop and hone the
instrument design throughout the opera. This time allowed the
team to solve practical problems within the instrument design to
create reliability, repeatability, and random access ability to
support the rehearsal and performance of the final opera. This
paper outlines critical design decisions made to fulfill this
work's artistic vision and practical needs.
3. INSTRUMENT DESIGN
The Furies: A LaptOpera has fourteen unique instruments with
multiple variations within a single instrument type. These
variations lie within a spectrum of differences that could be
compared to something as similar as a separate part (a second
violin part) or as different as an alto flute or piccolo compared
to a standard C flute. For this paper, we will focus on specific
design successes that created clear principles of design for our
project demands.

Figure 2: Performance setup for The Furies
3.1 The Rope Instrument in "Aegisthus'
Prayer"
The rope instrument first appears in The Furies during
"Aegisthus Prayer" in Act III as a border between the world of
the furies/ghosts and the world of the living. In its first
presentation, it is a length of rope that stretches across the back
of the stage. The rope is attached to three GameTrak controllers,
each connected to a laptop station with a co-located directional
speaker. Mid-act, the furies gather behind the rope. They
represent the demand for moral order and retribution that
plagues Aegisthus. As Aegisthus sings his prayer, the furies
respond to his questioning lament and plea for Apollo's
guidance by theatrically pushing forward on the rope and
collectively testing the barrier between their realm and the
living world. A class in the ChucK programming language
broadcasts GameTrak data to Wekinator over OSC and listens
for five classification values from Wekinator.[11][2] Each
classification value is mapped to the gain of a continuously
looping sample. This instrument is parameterized with two
arguments: Wekinator model name and a list of 5-sample banks
of wav files, which performers cycle through by stepping on a
button.

Figure 3: Physical layout of the rope instrument on stage
Our setup has five performance stations with one laptop
each, and a separate laptop to issue control commands to
the performance stations. This is all connected into a LAN
with wired ethernet switch.
Musically, the rope acts as an ambient drone using ghost-like
samples filtered to the key of Bb Major, tonally supporting the
vocal line. Using the Wekinator machine learning application,
the instrument uses a classifier model trained on GameTrak
tether input (left x, y, z and right x, y, z) to continuously mix
five samples. The model outputs the mix (volume values for
each sample), using the rope position as input (tether axis
values, which track the points of attachment to the rope in
space); the training7 is the same for all players, but the samples
are different for each of the three stations, resulting in different
but complementary output even if all performers move in
unison. The rope serves as a form of analog networking. Each
person's movement impacts the movement of all, and the
ensemble negotiates how to move together through feeling,

7 When using the terms “model” and “training,” they are
interchangeable and directly reference the machine learning
attributes of the Wekinator application utilized by the rope
instrument.


sight, and responsive listening. Fast movement creates more
texture and change in the sonic realm as the rope position
moves through the spaces mapped to different mixes by the
model. The instrument in this iteration allows for improvisation
and responsive action. All samples support the key, and there
are no wrong notes, allowing the performers to focus on
textural, dynamic, and dramatic expression.

Figure 4: furies and ghosts play the rope in "Aegisthus'
Prayer"
3.2 Three Instrument Design Principles
Performers in The Furies must think about singing,
choreography, and playing an instrument simultaneously. Each
performer plays several different instruments throughout the
show. Limited access to equipment and rehearsal time with the
ensemble required instruments that could be mastered in a
limited time. With performers' attention already divided, the
instruments must function in a way that does not burden
performers with worries like: Will this work like it did last
time? Will I trigger something wrong? Do I need to tiptoe
around particular behavior because mistakes are hard to move
past? Is my request for starting a piece over going to be hard to
accommodate?
Consequently, when considering instrument design, one of the
chief goals was to reduce performers' cognitive load while
allowing a cohesive mental model of each instrument. This was
accomplished through interaction design and guided by
instrument design principles outlined below.
3.2.1 Principle 1: Random Access
Instruments should afford access to any of their available
sounds and capabilities immediately. Consider how a piano
allows random access to any note on the keyboard, as opposed
to a piano roll which requires sequential access to the notes in a
piece. A saxophone likewise affords random note access in a
less obvious way via fingerings. Random access allows player
agency in the performance of a piece. It affords mastery, which
creates manageable challenges and fun. This makes playing the
instrument an engaging experience for the performer. It also
benefits the audience by visually communicating how the
instrument works and demonstrating players' agency. Given that
this work uses bespoke instruments (and many of them), this
allows the audience a direct way to understand what is
happening on stage. At the ensemble level, random access is
likewise essential. The ensemble should be able to start at any
scene, stop or start in the middle of a scene, and run the show
multiple times. The rope instrument, for example, is trained to
give specific gains to five samples based on the tether location.
Every player can immediately access all possible sample gains
as long as their movement is not physically limited by others (as
they all hold the rope). This allows the ability to start at any
moment within this movement for rehearsal or performance.

3.2.2 Principle 2: Repeatability
The same motion or action should produce the same sound
every time. This feeds into audience understandability and
allows skill and control by the performer. With repetition, the
performer develops muscle memory as they master the
instrument in an aural-physiological loop. In scenes where the
rope is interacting with a machine learning model providing
mix values for a bank of samples, the playable space remains
consistent, allowing the performers to develop a memory of it
over time, finely playing the textural and dynamic contrasts
across the space by moving through it using practiced
movements of the body. For example, in "Aegisthus' Prayer"
with the Rope Instrument, each player comes to learn their
sample bank and tether space so that they can build tension
collectively through engagement with specific spatial locations.
Over time, rope performers learn to play in response to each
other, guiding individual and collective movement.
Repeatability is crucial to the ensemble's ability to "play" the
instrument.
3.2.3 Principle 3: Independence with Mutual
Reinforcement
Each performer's instrument should be able to stand alone
musically while reinforcing and complementing what other
performers are doing. In "Aegisthus' Prayer," tuning the
samples to reinforce the tonic key allows a mutual
reinforcement of musical purpose. Textural and timbral
elements support the dramatic action. Still, the rope instrument
functions with one of three stations independently. This allows
for the potential of human or machine error without losing the
entire instrument. One station may fail to load, but this will not
impact the sounding of the other two stations. Because they
sonically reinforce each other, the soloist can continue with the
functioning stations.

Figure 5: the furies perform "Glorious Guilt" with the Rope
Instrument surrounding Electra and Orestia.
4. INSTRUMENT ENSEMBLE
CONTROL SYSTEM DESIGN
To fulfill the artistic goal of creating instruments that are part of
the stage setting, reinforce character relationships, and function
as a part of the narrative, we were required to build new
instruments and often multiple instruments for each scene. To
coordinate and manage these instruments, their design updates,
the transitions from scene to scene, rehearsing within a scene
with the ability to stop and start at different musical moments,
and create a control system where things can be restarted as
needed due to human error or technical difficulties, the opera
required an instrument ensemble control system. This system


became the overarching architecture that housed and managed
the running of each individual instrument and was crucial to the
successful live performance of this ninety-minute work. Below
are four principles that guided the creation of our instrument
ensemble control system.
4.1 Four Instrument Ensemble Control
System Design Principles
The first iteration of the instruments consisted of scripts run
individually on performance station laptops by each performer
as they entered their scene. By the full opera premiere, we had
built a comprehensive instrument ensemble control system to
manage all of this. The multi-year process of creating,
rehearsing, revising, and remounting The Furies clarified some
implementation priorities.
4.1.1 Principle 1: Robustness
Amidst the unpredictable conditions in rehearsal and
performance, the ensemble should produce consistent
output/results. The realities of playing a piece shift, so we
accept this fact and design for it. Variables included but were
not limited to the number of players available, the amount of
time any component of the system has been running, whether
every cable is firmly plugged in, whether the power on our
network switch was turned on and off, the order in which we
rehearsed the scenes, and changing which particular laptops
were used for particular performance stations. We designed our
code to perform consistently amidst these changing variables.
4.1.2 Principle 2: Fault Tolerance
When something inevitably goes wrong, the ensemble should
keep running smoothly; we should be able to recover from it
gracefully, and ideally, the audience shouldn’t notice. Because
instruments are designed with random access and mutual
reinforcement, even restarting an instrument means we should
not need to start at the top of a scene or halt the show. The
absence of one station should not disrupt the musical continuity
or impact the other stations' ability to keep running. 
4.1.3 Principle 3: Reconfigurability
The ensemble's shape and size should be flexible. Each
instrument should be usable by the entire ensemble, with or
without a technician, and by a subset of the ensemble or a
subset of stations.
4.1.4 Principle 4: Encapsulation
Each system component has clear boundaries and interfaces for
interacting with it. This isolates components from one another
so that failure/breakage is contained to one component. This
design priority underpins all the others. This also provides a
core point of software engineering stability, keeping our
software more maintainable over time. By having clear
interfaces between components, we can do automated testing of
these units, enabling us to catch regressions as we modify the
system.
5. INSTRUMENT ENSEMBLE
CONTROL SYSTEM TO THE RESCUE
The Furies has many scenes and many instruments.
Consequently, we need a mechanism to transition through them.
Our instruments' hardware setup is a laptop+speaker that
remains in the same position on stage throughout the whole
show (see Figure 2). There is a tether controller connected that
can change position and be attached to different accessories. We

change from one instrument to another by changing the
software running on the laptops.
Having performers individually manage the changing of
instruments from scene to scene by interacting with laptops on
stage causes a break in immersion and stymies narrative
momentum. It also increases the surface area of mistakes made
by having ten people change the state of five laptops multiple
times in one show. Managing these transitions this way also
requires all performers to have a more detailed knowledge of
the inner workings of each instrument, the precise transition
timing necessary for the show, and the technical knowledge to
properly kill and launch ChucK scripts. This extra cognitive
load makes it hard to focus on their primary dramatic roles.
In our instrument ensemble control system, each performance
station is running a lightweight Kotlin server. The code for
every instrument in the opera is wrapped in an Instrument class
in Kotlin with templated start() and stop() methods which
encapsulates the process management for both ChucK (our
synthesis code) and Wekinator (our machine learning model).
This server launches child processes for instruments and sends
information and diagnostics in response to remote procedure
calls (RPCs) from a control station (another laptop). This allows
an on-stage or off-stage technician to interact with the ensemble
of instruments as a whole without interrupting the flow of the
performance. 

Figure 6: ensemble control system software architecture


In the event that something significant goes wrong, the
technician can query the state of the whole ensemble and can
control instruments with simple commands, e.g.,
StartInstrument(instrumentName) and StopInstrument
(instrumentName).
This client-server architecture is stateless, meaning no process
running on any machine directly depends on any process or data
on another machine to keep its currently running processes
healthy. Each component can be restarted independently
without affecting the others. Components can reconnect after
unexpected disconnection like a cable getting unplugged or a
laptop running out of battery. This doesn't necessarily mean the
system itself automatically recovers from all faults, but the
system continues to run (the show goes on) and allows for the
component to be corrected/restarted without stopping or
restarting the whole ensemble.
With each performance station running an independent server,
multiple clients can interact with it (send commands to
start/stop instruments and query status information). We take
advantage of this by using two client implementations: One is a
run-of-show script that simply advances to the next cue in the
opera each time a button is pressed. The other client is a
command console that supports the gamut of available
commands. We can add additional control stations to the LAN
as necessary, e.g., to allow an off-stage technician to monitor
what is happening and fine-tune the timing of a cue by simply
opening another laptop and launching the control client which
can then send RPCs to the already-running performance station
servers.
As discussed above in our design principles and implementation
priorities, having performance stations run independently and
produce sound independently provides some inherent fault
tolerance in our system. Their produced sound stands alone, but
each station is mutually reinforcing. If, due to an error, a station
is offline, a keen listener may notice, but it won't significantly
affect the musical cohesion of the performance.
The instrument control system uses a configurable list of hosts
to determine which role each laptop plays. The specific
instrument and configuration loaded for a given scene depend
on its location on stage. The isolation discussed above, and this
configurability means we can run the rope instrument with any
subset of performance stations, including just one host (which
can run on the same machine as the control station), for
lower-lift practice time.
Finally, if we need to make code or configuration changes on
the fly, we have a simple packaging and deployment
mechanism that works over the performance LAN. We can
make a code or configuration change and have it running on the
whole ensemble in two minutes, physically interacting only
with the control station.
6. CONCLUSION
Through this article, we have explored practical and artistic
considerations of instrument design and the creation of an
instrument ensemble control system for The Furies: A
LaptOpera. We have described practical design principles that
create robust, reliable, and repeatable instruments that work
within a system that considers the mental bandwidth of the
performers. The practical principles and tools outlined above
can be used to support the successful creation of instruments for

a live performance production with both performance and
rehearsal demands.
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.
Our thanks to all performers of The Furies: A LaptOpera,
including SLOrk 2019 (Munira Alimire, Hassan Estakhrian,
Ben Gaiarin, Hillary Hermawan, Kunwoo Kim, Mark Sabini,
Ryan Smith, Cara Turnbull, Jack Atherton, Trijeet
Mukhopadhyay), SideLObe 2019 (Raul Altosaar, Andrea
Baldioceda, Madeline Huberth, Mike Mulshine), Sidney Chen,
Shauna Fallihee, Alice Del Simone, Catie Cuan, Amy Foote,
Monica Covitt, Matt Wright, Nette Worthy, Cole
Thomason-Redus, Brendan Larkin, Constantine Basica, David
Kerr, and the CCRMA community.
8. ETHICAL STANDARDS
This project received support and funding from a
CCRMA-funded Visiting Artist position (2019-2020) and a
New Music USA Project Grant (2019) for the premiere of Act
III. It also received funding through individual donations with
ﬁscal sponsorship through Fractured Atlas. There were no
potential conﬂicts of interest (ﬁnancial or non-ﬁnancial). We
had informed consent when the research involved human
participants. No animals were involved in this research. The
code used in our instrument design is open source.
9. REFERENCES
[1] Cook, P.R., 2001. "Principles for Designing Computer
Music Controllers," In Proceedings of New Interfaces for
Musical Expression.
[2] Fiebrink, R. et al., (2010). "Toward Understanding
Human-Computer Interaction in Composing the
Instrument." In Proceedings of the International Computer
Music Conference 2010.
[3] Hege, A. (2012). "Reclaiming What is Lost as Performance
and Practice." In Proceedings of the Symposium on Laptop
Ensembles and Orchestras Conference 2012.
[4] Hege, A., 2014. Spirit in the Flesh: Essays on the
Relationship between the Body and Meaning in
Performance. [Doctoral Dissertation, Princeton University]
ProQuest Dissertations Publishing.
[5] Hege, A., Nouﬁ, C., Wang, G., & Georgieva, E. (2021).
"Instrument Design for The Furies: A LaptOpera." NIME
2021.
[6] Johnson, M., 2007. The Meaning of the Body: Aesthetics
of Human Understanding. The University of Chicago
Press.
[7] Smallwood, S., D. Trueman, P. R. Cook, and G. Wang.
2008. "Composing for Laptop Orchestra." Computer
Music Journal. 32(1):9-25.
[8] Trueman, D. 2007. “Why a Laptop Orchestra?” Organised
Sound. 12(2):171-179.
[9] Wang, G. 2018. Artful Design: Technology in Search of the
Sublime. Stanford University Press.
[10] Wang, G., N. Bryan, J. Oh, and R. Hamilton. 2009.
"Stanford Laptop Orchestra (SLOrk)." In Proceedings of
the International Computer Music Conference. Montreal.
[11] Wang, G., P. R. Cook, S. Salazar. 2015. "ChucK: A
Strongly-timed Computer Music Language." Computer
Music Journal. 39(4):10-29.