A Function-Oriented Interface for Music Education and
Musical Expressions: “the Sound Wheel”

Shoken Kaneko

∗

rinne.the.soundwheel@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
In this paper, a function-oriented musical interface, named
the sound wheel, is presented. This interface is designed
to manipulate musical functions like pitch class sets, tonal
centers and scale degrees, rather than the musical surface,
i.e. the individual notes with concrete note heights. The
sound wheel has an interface summarizing harmony the-
ory, and the playing actions have explicit correspondence
with musical functions. Easy usability is realized by semi-
automatizing the conversion process from musical functions
into the musical surface. Thus, the player can use this inter-
face with concentration on the harmonic structure, without
having his attention caught by manipulating the musical
surface. Subjective evaluation indicated the eectiveness of
this interface as a tool helpful for understanding the music
theory. Because of such features, this interface can be used
for education and interactive training of tonal music theory.
Keywords
Music education, Interactive tonal music generation
1. INTRODUCTION
In general, to master an instrument is not easy. It is thought
that elaborate practice in the early childhood is important
to get the ability for expert performance[1]. If the player is
not so well experienced with his instrument, writing music
with the instrument is also a tough work, since the player
will be busy with thinking how to move his ngers, before
thinking about the theoretical structure of the composition.
Especially, improvisation of music, where the ability of play-
ing and understanding of music theory is required simulta-
neously, is even more dicult. Such diculties of playing
instruments are obstacles for people who just want to com-
pose music, or for people who are trying to study music
theory without enough experience with an instrument.
In this paper, a function-oriented musical interface, which
does not require practice of existing instruments, is pre-
sented. This interface is an easy tool for education and
studying harmony theory of tonal music.
∗This work was pursued as a private research project by
the author, independently of any aliation. The author's
present aliation is Corporate Research and Development
Center, Yamaha Corporation.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’13, May 27 – 30, 2013, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea.
Copyright remains with the author(s).

2. EXISTING INTERFACES
Let us think about existing musical interfaces as tools for
music theory study. First, let us consider an universal poly-
phonic instrument widely used in music education: the pi-
ano. The interface of the piano is a keyboard, with one
concrete note height attached to each of the key. A big
merit of this design is the clear correspondence between the
playing actions and the note heights that will be produced.
However, this design could also be taken as problematic,
since the music theoretical functions of the played notes are
not explicit. Therefore, if the player wants to play a certain
chord with a certain function at a certain moment, he has to
think which notes are belonging to that chord, then he has
to think which keys are corresponding to those note heights,
and then he has to think which ngers to use, before press-
ing the keys. This process might be no problem at all for an
experienced player, but it is a burden for a beginner. One
reason of this essential diculty is the fact that the musical
function of a musical surface (a collection of concrete notes)
depends on the harmonic situation within a musical piece.
In this sense, the piano is an instrument with a surface-
oriented interface 1. Another problem of the interface of
the piano is that it does not treat the twelve pitch classes
of the equal temperament equally. The physical positions
of the twelve pitch classes are not the same. This results
in the dierent ngerings of the pitch class sets of dierent
keys, which is another obstacle for beginners.
Electronic musical instruments could be more suited for
music education purposes, because functions like sequencers
are available and could be used for playback support. For
example, the TENORI-ON[2] is a loop sequencer based syn-
thesizer, which can be operated relatively easy. In this in-
strument, the player puts notes to a looping sequence by
pushing buttons that are ordered as a matrix, to which
scale degrees are attached. This interface is easy to use,
because the note heights belonging to a selected scale, or
key, will be automatically chosen. However, tonal modula-
tion is dicult to perform with these kind of interface, be-
cause a function to change the key or the mode intuitively is
not present. Transposing functions are often implemented
in electronic instruments, but transposition (i.e. shift of
the tonal center) alone cannot solve this problem, because
transposition is only a specic form of tonal modulation.
Generally, tonal modulation can be a simultaneous change
of the tonal center and the scale.
Another example might be the MIDI Chord Helper[3],
which is a software-based instrument. Its interface has a
matrix of buttons, to which concrete chords are attached.
Therefore, one can play a chord with a single action. How-
ever, the concept of mode and tonal modulation is still not
explicit enough in this interface. The subject of input are
1E.g., a musical surface corresponding to a musical function
a dominant chord of C major could be G3，B3，D4，F4.

 2 0 2


Figure 1: The ow of musical information from the com-
poser's musical intention to sound signals. The composer
converts his musical intention to a musical representation
like musical scores. Then, the player interprets the infor-
mation of a note sequence from the score, and converts it to
playing actions of an instrument. The instrument generates
the sound signals depending on the playing actions.

concrete chords, and not the key or the mode itself.
An example of the ow, how musical information is con-
verted from musical intensions into sound signals, is shown
in Fig.1. As a composer, or as a player, who wants to con-
centrate on the harmonic theoretical structure of his piece,
the steps of converting musical functions into musical sur-
faces, and the steps of converting musical surfaces into play-
ing actions of the instrument, could be obstacles, especially
for beginners. Fig.1 shows the case where the composition
and the rendering of sound is not performed at the same
time, but in general, these two could be performed simulta-
neously, like as it is in improvisation of music. In that case,
the conversion of musical functions into musical surfaces and
the conversion of musical surfaces to playing actions have
to be performed simultaneously, and the diculty will be
increased. A function-oriented musical interface, that can
automatically convert musical functions into sound, will be
helpful to reduce the above mentioned obstacles.
3. THE SOUND WHEEL
3.1 The concept of the Sound Wheel
The sound wheel is characterized by the following features:
1. The subjects to manipulate are the musical functions
like pitch class sets, tonal centers and scale degrees,
rather than the musical surface.
2. By employing a COF (circle of fth[4])-type wheel
shaped controller for the mode input, the correspon-
dence with the harmony theory is visually evident.
Since the COF treats all twelve pitch classes equally,
modulation of the key can be performed easily.
3. The playing actions have simple correspondence with
the harmony theory. Chord progression within the
same key is performed by touching (or clicking) the
wheel, and modulation is performed by rotation of
the wheel.
4. It has an easy usability, realized by semi-automatizing
the conversion process from musical functions into the
musical surface.
Because of the above features, one can play this interface
with concentration on the harmonic structure, without hav-
ing one's attention caught by manipulating the musical sur-
face. The sound wheel is implemented as a computer pro-
gram using a touchscreen display. A picture of a playing
scene of the sound wheel is shown in Fig.2.

Figure 2: A playing scene of the sound wheel. The player
touches the wheel and the keyboard on the display.

Most of the existing musical interfaces are surface-oriented
interfaces, where the subject to manipulate is the concrete
note height. The sound wheel takes the musical functions
like pitch class sets, tonal centers and scale degrees as the
subject to manipulate. A pitch class set is a collection of
note heights that are used during a musical sequence, and a
scale degree is a number that indicates a certain note height
within a pitch class set. The pitch class sets employed in
the sound wheel are modes[5], which are combinations of a
tonic and a scale. A mode is a natural extension of the con-
cept of key. The key has only two classes of scales: major
and minor, but modes are not limited to these two scales. A
tonic is a concrete note height (not distinguished with the
tonal center in this paper), from which the scale starts,
and a scale is an ordered set of concrete note heights within
one octave. The domain of denition of scale degrees can be
extended to all integers including negative values, so that it
can indicate all concrete note heights belonging to a pitch
class set. Thus, a concrete note height can be written as a
function of a certain mode and a scale degree.
c = f(d, mt,s) (1)
where c is a concrete note height, d the scale degree, and
mt,s a mode with t and scale s. By choosing an appropriate
set of modes, all pitches of the equal temperament will be
an element of the sumset of the range of the function shown
in equation 1.
One notes that the scale degree itself does not indicate
any concrete note height. It indicates a concrete note height,
only when a mode is determined together with it. The
sound wheel acts as a converter from an abstract note, with
only a scale degree dened, to a concrete note, taking the
mode as the parameter.
3.2 Basic scales employed in the Sound Wheel
Seven heptatonic scales and ve pentatonics are chosen as
preset scales of the sound wheel. If one tries to divide the
twelve pitches within one octave into seven steps as equally
as possible, one gets seven heptatonic scales which are inver-
sions to each other. I will call these scales Gregorian scales
(taken from the well known Gregorian modes[5]). On the
other hand, if one tries to divide the twelve notes within
one octave into ve steps as equally as possible, one gets
ve pentatonic scales which are inversions to each other.
These seven Gregorian scales together with the ve pen-
tatonic scales are basic scales that cover a wide range of
traditional, classical and contemporary music. The seven
Gregorian scales are named like the following: Lydian, Io-

 2 0 3


Table 1: The concrete intervals in seminotes for each basic
scale employed in the sound wheel.
scale degree 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Ly 0 2 4 6 7 9 11
Io 0 2 4 5 7 9 11
Mi 0 2 4 5 7 9 10
Do 0 2 3 5 7 9 10
Ae 0 2 3 5 7 8 10
Ph 0 1 3 5 7 8 10
Lo 0 1 3 5 6 8 10
Io5 0 2 4 7 9 12 14
Mi5 0 2 5 7 9 12 14
Do5 0 2 5 7 10 12 14
Ae5 0 3 5 7 10 12 15
Ph5 0 3 5 8 10 12 15

nian, Mixolydian, Dorian, Aeorian, Phrygian, and Locrian
(shortened as Ly, Io, Mi, Do, Ae, P h, and Lo in the sound
wheel）. The scale Io is also known as the major scale,
and Ae is also known as the natural minor scale. Since the
ve pentatonic scales can be seen as subsets of Gregorian
scales, these scales are notated as Io5, Mi5, Do5, Ae5, and
Ph5 in the sound wheel. The scale Io5 is also known as
the major pentatonic scale, and Ae5 is also known as the
minor pentatonic scale. There are many variations of the
above mentioned scales like the harmonic minor scale or the
blue note scale. The reason for choosing the above basic
seven Gregorian scales and the ve pentatonic scales will be
described later. The concrete intervals of the above twelve
basic scales are listed in Table.1.
Now, note that the number of pitches within one octave:
12, the number of basic Gregorian scales: 7，and the num-
ber of basic pentatonic scales: 5, has the following relation:
12 = 7 + 5 (2)
3.3 Interfaces of the Sound Wheel
The characteristic mode controlling interface of the sound
wheel is shown in Fig.3．It consists of two coaxial indepen-
dently rotatable wheels. The colored and uncolored wheels
are the scale wheel and the tonic wheel, respectively.
Both wheels are divided into twelve sections. The twelve
pitch classes of the equal temperament are attached to each
section of the tonic wheel, so that the neighbouring pitch
classes are ve degrees, i.e. seven seminotes apart. This
conguration is well known as the circle of fth, and it is
widely used to understand the relation between keys.
Now let us think, how to arrange the seven basic Grego-
rian scales to the scale wheel around the tonics. One can
put the seven basic Gregorian scales to the scale wheel, so
that the seven modes, made from the facing tonics and Gre-
gorian scales 2, are generating the same pitch class set, i.e.
they are belonging to the same key. The reason of choos-
ing the basic scales as the preset scales of the sound wheel,
that are inversions to each other, was to make this possi-
ble. In the arrangement of Fig.3, the scales are put in the
order so that similar scales are close to each other. In addi-
tion, the major-type and minor-type scales are colored with
warm and cold colors, respectively. Therefore, it is easy to
recognize the harmonic function visually. In the same way,
the ve basic pentatonics can be arranged around the tonic
wheel, so that the ve modes, made from the facing tonics
and pentatonic scales 3, are generating the same pitch class
2In the case of Fig.3，those modes are: (F,Ly), (C,Io),
(G,Mi), (D,Do), (A,Ae), (E,Ph), (B,Lo).
3In the case of Fig.3，those modes are: (F♯,Io5), (C♯,Mi5),

Figure 3: Two types of the mode input interface of the sound
wheel. It is composed of the scale wheel which is painted
with dierent colors, and the uncolored tonic wheel. The
right one is a variation, in which two scale wheels and two
tonic wheels are provided, in order to have a better prospect
over modes belonging to the same key. In this gure, (C,Io)
is selected as the active mode.

set. Note that the relation of Eq.2 makes it possible to ar-
range the seven Gregorian scales and ve pentatonic scales
just tting into the twelve sections of the scale wheel.
A variation of the design is showed in the right side of
Fig.3, in which two coaxially aligned wheels are added to
the previous two wheels, so that the relative keys[5] are
sitting close together, i.e. so that Io is facing Ae. The
angle between the outer and the inner scale wheel, as well
as the angle between the outer and the inner tonic wheel,
is xed to 90 degrees. This realizes a conguration, where
the seven (or ve) modes generating the same pitch class
set are sitting close together, improving the prospect over
the modes with the same key.
An important feature of the sound wheel is the fact that,
rotation of one wheel relative to the facing wheel, corre-
sponds to tonal modulation. Rotation of the scale wheel
relative to the tonic wheel results in the change of the com-
bination of the scales and its facing tonics. In other words,
the pitch class set of the resulting collection of modes is
changed. This means nothing but tonal modulation. Es-
pecially, rotation of one unit (30 degrees) corresponds to
modulation to dominant or subdominant keys. Thus, the
more the wheel is rotated, the farther the key is modulated.
This simple correspondence between tonal modulation and
rotation of the wheels will help intuitive comprehension of
the concept of tonal modulation.
By touching (or clicking) one of the fan-shaped sections
of the wheels, the pair of the tonic and the facing scale at
that position will be selected as the active mode. Simulta-
neously, a chord, whose notes are a subset of the pitch class
set of the active mode, will be selected as the active chord.
By preset, this chord will be the tonic triad of the active
mode, i.e. the chord consisting of scale degrees one, three,
and ve on the active mode scale. The octave degree of free-
dom of the tonic note height is controlled by the touching
position. By touching the left half of the fan-shaped section,
the tonic note height on the lower direction will be chosen,
and by touching the right half, the opposite one. Thus,
chord progression within a same key can be performed by
simply touching the sections of the wheels.
As supplemental functions, the sound wheel has a chord
arpeggiator, a sequencer, a semi-automatic melody sequence
generator based on a probabilistic generation model[6], a
virtual keyboard with scale degrees attached to each key,
and a MIDI signal processor for signals from external MIDI
(G♯,Do5), (D♯,Ae5), (A♯,Ph5).

 2 0 4


devices, like keyboards. Individual notes can be played us-
ing the virtual keyboard or external MIDI keyboards. The
sequence generator generates sequences using notes within
the pitch class set of the active mode together with the in-
formation of the active chord, and this will help the player
to perceive the mode and its tonal center during playing.
Using these supplemental functions, one can play simple
pieces just by touching and rotating the wheels.
4. EVALUATION
The sound wheel was evaluated via a questionnaire. First,
eight adult subjects with experience of playing conventional
instruments at least two years were asked to evaluate the
instrument that they are most used to play, by judging a
score in ve steps: 1 (strongly disagree), 2 (disagree), 3
(neutral), 4 (agree), 5 (strongly agree), about the following
statements from S1 to S12.
• S1: The correspondence of the playing actions and
the generated sound is easy to comprehend.
• S2: It is fun playing.
• S3: The required playing actions are easy.
• S4: It is easy to handle as an instrument.
• S5: It is suited to play melodies.
• S6: It is suited to play chords.
• S7: I can play it well.
• S8: I can play with it as I desire.
• S9: One can improve the playing ability of it within
a short time of practice.
• S10: I want to play it further.
• S11: It is suited for music composition.
• S12: It helps understanding music theory.
Next, after the explanation of the usage of the sound
wheel, the subjects were asked to practice the sound wheel
as long as they wanted. Then, they were asked to evaluate
the sound wheel, in the same way like above. For practical
reasons, a mouse was used as the input device instead of
a touchscreen display. The hypothesis: the sound wheel
does not have dierence with conventional instruments,
was tested by the Student's t-test with signicance level
of 5%. The results of the evaluation are shown in Fig.4.
Negative signicant dierence was found in S5. This is rea-
sonable since the evaluation was done with a normal display
and a mouse, but together it implies the diculty of play-
ing melodies using scale degrees instead of concrete note
heights. On the other hand, positive signicant dierence
was found in S6, S11, and S12. Signicant dierence of S12
was still present with a test with signicance level of 1%.
This indicates that the sound wheel indeed was received
as helpful for understanding music theory. This result was
checked also by the Wilcoxon rank-sum test with signi-
cance level of 5%, in which positive signicant dierence
was again observed in S6 and S12, but not in S11. Fur-
ther evaluations with more test subjects will enhance the
precision of this result.
5. CONCLUSIONS
A function-oriented musical interface, named the sound wheel,
was presented. In this interface, the subjects to manipu-
late are the musical functions, like pitch class sets, tonal
centers and scale degrees, rather than the musical surface.
By employing a COF-type wheel shaped controller for the
mode input, the correspondence with the harmony theory
is visually evident. The playing actions have simple cor-
respondence with the harmony theory. Chord progression
within the same key is performed by touching (or clicking)
the wheel, and modulation is performed by rotation of the

Figure 4: The result of the evaluation. The blue and red
symbols represent the average score of each statement con-
cerning conventional instruments and the sound wheel, re-
spectively. The green symbols represent the t-values. Sig-
nicant dierence was observed in S5, S6, S11, and S12.

wheel. It has a easy usability, realized by semi-automatizing
the conversion process from musical functions into the musi-
cal surface. Because of such features, one can play this inter-
face with concentration on the harmonic structure, without
having the attention caught by manipulating the musical
surface. Subjective evaluation indicated the eectiveness of
this interface as a tool helpful for understanding the music
theory. Therefore, this interface can be used for education
and interactive training of tonal music theory.
As future issues, sophistication of the semi-automatic se-
quence generation will be expected. At the moment, con-
stant velocity and quantized timing is used for all generated
notes, but by employing performance rendering technolo-
gies[7], automatic composition[8, 9], together with improve-
ments of techniques to capture the player's musical inten-
sion, sequences with more human-like expressions might be
able to be generated.
6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
I thank Mr. Tatsuo Egami at Tokyo Central Patent Firm
for his kind support in patent applications.
7. REFERENCES
[1] K. A. Ericsson et al.: Psychological Review,
Vol.100(3), July (1993).
[2] Y. Nishibori and T. Iwai: Proceedings of the 2006
conference on New interfaces for musical expression
(2006).
[3] A. Kamide: MIDI Chord Helper，http://www.yk.rim.
or.jp/~kamide/music/chordhelper/index_e.html
(2004).
[4] M. Miller: The complete idiot's guide to music
theory, Alpha Books (2005).
[5] K. Wyatt and C. Schroeder: Pocket Music Theory: A
Comprehensive and Convenient Source for All
Musicians, Hal Leonard (2002).
[6] D. Temperley: Music and Probability, The MIT
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts (2007).
[7] J. Sundberg et al.: Computer Music Journal, Vol.7,
No.1, pp.37-43 (1983).
[8] S. Fukayama et al.: Orpheus: Automatic Composition
System Considering Prosody of Japanese Lyrics,
Entertainment Computing ICEC (2009).
[9] T. Tanaka et al.:
http://hil.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp/publications/download.
php?bib=Tanaka2010SMC07.pdf (2010).

 2 0 5