Exploring Diverse Forms of Bareëmins: A Multifaceted
Study on Painted Panels and Sculptures as The Site of
Performance, Instruments, and Scores
Sofy Yuditskaya
NYU/GSAS
sy737@nyu.edu

ABSTRACT
This paper delves into the realm of NIMES called Bareëmins, a
distinctive adaptation of the theremin implemented on the
Arduino platform, featuring artistically crafted capacitive
antennae. Drawing inspiration from the original theremin and
the extensive instrument collection of Leon Theremin,
Bareëmins represent a fusion of artistic expression and
technological innovation. The study explores the transition from
traditional theremins, commonly recreated in music
programming classes, to the visually engaging Bareëmin family.
In this evolution, the conventional antennae are replaced by
creatively envisioned antennae, becoming a defining feature
across varied shapes and sizes, categorized into handheld,
environmental, and painted score species.
Rooted in the artist's synesthetic perception, where sight and
sound converge, Bareëmins embody diegetic shapes and colors.
The antennae, made from conductive paint, copper tape, or
found materials, showcase a commitment to sustainability and
inclusivity. The paper provides instructions for crafting
Bareëmins using readily available materials, fostering an
environmentally conscious approach. By enhancing the artistic
appeal and making the construction accessible, Bareëmins
bridge the gap between visual artistry and musicality, offering a
unique and inclusive avenue for exploring the intersection of art
and technology in the realm of musical instrument design.
Author Keywords
NIME, proceedings, handmade, hardware, accessible
CCS Concepts
• Hardware • Human-centered computing → Accessibility;
Accessibility theory, concepts and paradigms; • Applied
Computing → Arts and humanities; Media arts;
1. INTRODUCTION
A Bareëmin, embodies a unique adaptation of the theremin
crafted on the Arduino platform featuring an artistically
constructed capacitive antenna. The Arduino runs a customized
sketch, incorporating the CapSense Library by Paul Badger.
The antennae of the original theremin was also a capacitive
sensor; this aspect of the design explores the original
affordances of one of the first electronic instruments.[1]
In many music programming classes students recreate a
theremin in Arduino with pitch and volume controlled by a light
sensor. This project is so popular it got incorporated into the
official Arduino Starter Kit in 2012.[2] In the Bareëmin family
this light sensor is replaced by various artistically envisioned
antenna. These visually and physically engaging antennae are
the defining feature of these NIMEs. Running the same
software, the Bareëmin family can be generally categorized into

three species: handheld, environmental, and painted score. This
project is directly inspired by the original theremin, but also
draws inspiration from the extensive array of instruments
crafted by Leon Thermen throughout his lifetime.
As a trained artist, I access musicality through visual media; my
creative work bridges the boundary between eye and ear.
Mirroring that, the shapes and colors of the Bareëmin are
diegetic. The antennae can be made of conductive paint
combined with non-conductive paint, copper tape, found metal,
or any other conductive material in the environment.
Common mark-making supplies, and Earth pigments distinct
from charcoal or graphite, can serve as effective "resist"
elements in the visual score/antennae, expanding the range of
available materials. These practices underscore the commitment
to making Bareëmins not only innovative and expressive but
also environmentally conscious and widely accessible.
The conductive paint formula exists as a high-end manufactured
item, but can be made cost effectively from common materials
found at the supermarket and art store. Bareëmins take an
eco-conscious approach by recycling charcoal to produce
carbon paint. However, irony lies in the sustainability challenge
faced in regions where open-fire cooking is not prevalent, (and
charcoal needs to be industrially manufactured) highlighting the
need for adaptable practices. The instructions for making a
Bareëmin found in this paper were designed with a mindful eye
towards utilising commonplace household items such as
charcoal and acacia powder.
You can see the instructions here
https://www.yuditskaya.com/music/nimey/#instructions

2. ARDUINO IMPLEMENTATION
WITH MINIMAL PERIPHERAL SETUP
Bareëmins, effectively translate the craft processes commonly
found in arts classrooms into the realm of technological artistry.
The introductory-level programming combined with the
incorporation of large, physical, visually impactful antennae
exemplifies a fusion of simplicity and innovative craftsmanship.
This design approach aligns with the “microcontrollers as
material” paradigm.[3] The synergy between the Arduino
platform and its C code, leveraging off-the-shelf components,
underscores the accessibility and user-friendly nature of the
Bareëmin's design. This amalgamation of artistic sensibilities
with technological simplicity not only facilitates ease of use for
creators but also opens up new avenues for artistic exploration
and expression.


The Arduino C code for the Bareëmins can be found here
https://github.com/timeFliesWhenYoureHavingFun/Baremin
At 38 lines (including comments) and one library, the code is
simple, and therefore a good object for analysis in theoretical
discussion or educational context. The use of a general purpose
library makes it a good example for an introduction to p-comp
(physical computing) class covering the general structure of
code bases and development environments. Beyond the
Arduionos, the hardware needed are two resistors, a speaker,
and some conductive material to make the antenna. The sound
production mechanism of Bareëmins relies on a 2" 8-ohm 5W
speaker, seamlessly integrated with the Arduino platform
without the need for additional amplification. This direct
connection to a PWM out pin and ground streamlines the
instrument's setup. Making Bareëmins is a low-cost, low-effort,
high-yield project.

There is an intentional aesthetic embedding of scores within the
instrument, forging a captivating fusion of notation, aesthetics,
and the instrument's form.

“Reading” the antennae as scores is one method of interacting
with the instrument. The various shapes of the antennae and
materials leverage different performance affordances for each
iteration. Complexity arises from the interplay of simple
materials and simple software.

3. THE BAREËMIN IS BUILDING ON
THE THEREMIN
Theremins were made in sculptural, and instrument form
factors; the instrument form is the classic two-antennae
theremin. The sculptural or environment form was called the
terpsitone. The terpsitone was a platform for a dancer/performer
to activate via movement. The dancer’s movements were picked
up by multiple antennae placed in and around the platform.[4]
No Bareëmin has a secondary antenna for volume, volume is
manipulated at the mixer level or with a guitar pedal. Only one
antenna is present is because multiple Bareëmins can be
combined, either multiple full antennae on one brain or multiple
Bareëmin units can be combined through their antennae, or
multiple brains can be attached to one antennae. Likewise the
players whose bodies affect the electromagnetic fields of the
antennae can combine by touching each other.

Figure. 1. The components of the system, including the phono.
Unit which is used for background effects. From Mason, C. P.
“Theremin “Terpsitone” A New Electronic Novelty” Radio
Craft, volume 8, number 5, 1936
3.1 Sculptural Bareëmins
Crystal Bareëmins introduce a novel dimension to musical
performance, featuring a meticulously folded paper crystal

adorned with a painted grid on the inside, while the exterior
remains unaltered paper. This unique design empowers
performers to manipulate the electromagnetic field of the
instrument without the need for direct physical or visual contact
with the antenna material. In the realm of creative expression,
my band, EM KVLT, consisting of Meg Schedel, Jess Rowland
and myself, draws inspiration from the summoning of the
Electromagnetic Goddess in every performance. The Crystal
Bareëmin, with its distinctive form, provides a captivating
opportunity to embed antenna within an object, offering a
tangible and immersive experience for both musicians and the
audience. This creative endeavor takes inspiration from the use
of crystals in contemporary new-age altars, adding a spiritual
and symbolic layer to the artistic process. Beyond our project,
paper crafts like Crystal Bareëmins have gained popularity
among makers for home use and boast a rich history in
classroom education. Notably, these creations find a home in
maker and tech art spaces,[7] aligning with the innovative
works of artists like Hannah Perner Wilson and others who have
explored the unique intersection of craftsmanship and
technology.
The adaptability of Bareëmins to unconventional surfaces
expands the possibilities for artistic and engineering exploration
and underscores the instrument's capacity to be infused
creatively by various facets of our material world. This
exploration into diverse surfaces not only enriches the visual
and tactile dimensions of the artworks but also showcases the
potential for innovative expression through a spectrum of
forms, which in turn determines the modes of interaction that
can be engaged by a Bareëmin performer.
To see a variety of surfaces explored go here and scroll down
https://www.yuditskaya.com/music/nimey/#sculls
To read about gold leaf Bareêmins and learn about the paint
making process please go here
https://www.yuditskaya.com/music/nimey/#goldLeaf
3.2 Environmental Bareëmins
An entire sculpture can be wired up, or made out of metal and
attached to the Arduino-Bareëmin brain to make it a receptive
antenna that surrounds the human body within. These structures
are made in the fashion of Thermin's terpsitone instrument.
Their structure is the same as sculptural Bareëmins, but scaled
up in size such that the performer is located inside the piece,
rather than holding and manipulating the structure in their hands
in order to play it.

There is only one terpsitone left in existence, and not too many
projects that are recreations or that build on the project. One
notable project is "A Dance in Tune” – an audio kinetic
performance for a modified terpsitone and light sensor arrays.
With movement by Lina Lauruvėnaitė terpsitone, light sensors,
lights and sounds by Adomas Palekas.
https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=3eUygQQsNZM

Projects like this are important to keep developing the
technological philosophy of the analog environmental
instrument. In today's surveillance technostate many spaces are
wired up to record, react, and collect data on the movements
and behaviours of human bodies with sensors, but few consider
the technological substrate as a structural building material that


provides instant biofeedback without quantifying and reporting
the bodies inside it to an outside database. As a sonification,
Environmental Bareëmins, the terpsitone, and instruments of
that nature hold a valuable place in the ecosystem of
technologically-based biofeedback spaces and environmental
musical instruments.
3.3 Painted Bareëmins: Illustrations and
Conductive Artistry
The Painted Score Bareëmin, a unique innovation within this
collection, showcases the versatility of conductive paint in both
visual representation and functional connectivity. This
groundbreaking approach allows the conductive paint used for
the Bareëmin antenna to serve dual roles: guiding the musician
through a visual score while simultaneously acting as the
physical link in the instrument's circuitry, responsible for
turning it on and off. The integration of paint introduces a realm
of artistic possibilities, enabling the incorporation of various
painterly techniques such as mixing, outlining, and
experimenting with acrylics, gouache, pens, inks, markers, and
other mixed media materials.
The non-conductive painted areas play a crucial role in defining
sections of the score, marking physical pauses, and housing
essential information commonly found in written and
pictographic communication. This integration of conductive and
non-conductive areas forms a unique symbiosis, transforming
the visual score into a written score and an integral part of the
instrument's functionality, influencing both its sound and
operation.
There are various adjacent concepts to embedded scores. For
example the tangible scores of Enriqué Thomas,[8] or the
software embedded score of Hans Christoph Steiner.[9] The
difference between the Bareëmin embedded scores and the
above examples is that in the Bareëmin case, the scores are an
electro-mechanical part of the instrument that makes hardware
connections to play the sound. In this sense they are perhaps
closest to Hans Christoph Steiner’s embedded software score in
that as the piece progresses the score is triggering the systems
within the composition that make the sound. Painted Bareëmin
scores contain symbolic communication in the tradition of
visual scores. The non-conductive sections of the score may
indicate movement, duration, etc as instructions.
EM KVLT's latest project is playing graphic scores that
function as instruments, and simultaneously embedding these
scores within acoustic stringed instruments. Our current
practice is inspired by circuit diagrams as scores such as
Gordon Mumma’s Mesa and Max Neuhaus’s Max-Feed and
Christina Kubisch’s Electrical Walks. Our performances are
distinct from Enrique Tomás’ inherent scores where it is the
performer’s role to reveal instances of the musical work
inherently integrated in the circuitry [10]. They are closer to the
idea of a composed instrument where the performer’s role [is]
to reveal instances of the musical work inherently integrated in
the circuitry [11]. We are revealing not only instances of the
musical work integrated into the circuity, we are also revealing
the acoustics of a space through the combination of
microphones, speakers and instruments. We perform the
inherent choreography of space and playing the score embedded
within.
These score/paintings balance the affordances of score,
instrument, and object in a single device. In our performance
we use three separate Arduino systems with a stack of

conductive paintings. The paintings then activate the circuitry,
somewhat like the Shawn Greenlee’s Augur system where he
uses the “conversion of previously composed graphics as
instructions for sound synthesis.”[13] However, here the
paintings themselves activate the circuitry, while the page
serves as a graphic score. Multiple Arduinos can be connected
to a single page, or a single performer can connect multiple
pages with a series of wires. Complicating matters, we also use
acoustic string instruments, such as pianos, harpsichords, harps,
and kotos, as both sounding sources and effects units by
attaching alligator clips to the metal strings. Each of the
Arduino systems has a small speaker, and each performer has a
small wireless microphone that sends an amplified signal to
larger speakers.
To view recordings of EM KVLT using Bareêmins go here
https://www.yuditskaya.com/music/nimey/#EMKVLT
To read about Copper Tape Bareêmin extension go here
https://www.yuditskaya.com/music/nimey/#copperTape

Figure. 2. The DodecaOTTO in Tamlab Linz augmented with
copper tape by the Feminist Hacking Class of 2023-2024 taught
by Meg Schedel, Jess Rowland, and Sofy Yuditskaya.
4. USE OF THE BAREËMIN FORM
FACTOR IN EDUCATION
The simplicity of the design allows for instruction at any level
ranging from a painting project only, where students create a
painted antenna and use shared Bareëmins to hook up to their
antennae; to a full programming and soldering workshop with
the Arduino to a sculpture project working with conductive
metal and welding. This scalability makes the Bareëmins a
versatile STEAM project.


Bareëmin making has been taught as a mixed graduate and
undergraduate workshop at the Indian Institute of Science, a
conference workshop at Harvard, and an independent arts
workshop at Walkin Studios.
In educational settings, where considerations of messiness or
complexity might arise, the straightforward application of
copper tape provides a pragmatic solution, ensuring an
accessible and streamlined crafting experience for students. The
mixed graduate and undergraduate workshop included painting
only, using graphite paint we created multiple visual scores in a
zine format, effectively creating a small scorebook that
becomes part of the instrument. In this workshop we focused on
the musicality of the forms and the documentation of the
creative process. The conference workshop at Harvard focused
on soldering, understanding hardware, and looking at the scores
from a materials studies perspective. The workshop for artists at
Walkin Studios cursorily walked through the hardware and
focused on making novel shapes and forms with the
scores/antenna ranging from 2D - 3D.
Table 1. An anonymized survey of workshop participants
follows below. This survey is using a Lickert scale with 5
being the most true and 1 being the least true. The
statements are ranked in order from most to least true
overall. Five participants’ scores are averaged:

I understand how an object can be a computational interface, a score and an instrument 5.0
I found making a score easy 4.8
I found augmenting the instrument with found items and tape compelling and straightforward 4.8
I found the play instructions easy to follow 4.8
I found the instrument easy to use/intuitive 4.8
I found the assembly process easy to follow 4.6
I found the interaction consistent/reliable 4.4
I enjoyed exploring the parameter space of this instrument 4.2
I found the interaction delightful 3.4
5. CONCLUSION
There is some precedent of instruments that accept embedded
scores, instruments from the dawn of the electronic music era
such as the Variophone, and newer pieces such as those by
Thomas and Steiner. Bareëmins push the paradigm in that the
score becomes an embedded part of the instrument’s circuitry,
whilst the antennae are interchangeable. Bareëmins add the
concept of embedded score in a hardware-based instrument to
ideas of tangible scores, software-based embedded scores, and
scores of others.
6. FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Future explorations will involve interconnected networks of
instruments such as in the recent “Feminist Hacking” workshop

lead by myself and Meg Schedel at Tamlab Linz, where we
adapted the OTTOsonics platform as the Bareëmin antenna, and
weaved painted, and tape scores into it, as well as other
instruments such as a Moog Mini Theremin, and Vlad Kramer’s
Soma Synth. Since all these instruments share behaviours in
common it is possible to weave them together into a greater
network of various sniffers that interact with each other in
conductive, capacitive, and transmissive ways, creating a space
for the human form to play within.
7. REFERENCES
[1] Glinsky, Albert. Theremin: ether music and espionage.
University of Illinois Press, 2000.
[2] Fitzgerald, Scott, et al. “06 Light Theremin.” THE
ARDUINO PROJECTS BOOK, Officine Arduino Torino,
Torino, Italy, 2012, pp. 70–77.
[3] Mellis, D. A., Jacoby, S., Buechley, L., Perner-Wilson, H.,
& Qi, J. (2013, February). Microcontrollers as material:
crafting circuits with paper, conductive ink, electronic
components, and an "untoolkit". In Proceedings of the 7th
International Conference on Tangible, Embedded and
Embodied Interaction pp. 83-90.
[4] Mason, C. P. “Theremin “Terpsitone” A New Electronic
Novelty” Radio Craft, volume 8, number 5, 1936
[5] Glinsky, Albert. Theremin: ether music and espionage.
University of Illinois Press, 2000.
[6] Mason, C. P. “Theremin “Terpsitone” A New Electronic
Novelty” Radio Craft, volume 8, number 5, 1936
[7] Xiao, Tian. “1 Empowering Craftsmanship in Makerspaces
Managers’ Perception and Enabling of Craftsmanship in
Utrecht’s Creative Cluster Makers van Merwede.”
Erasmus University Rotterdam Erasmus School of History,
Culture and Communication, 12AD.
[8] Tomás, Enrique, and Martin Kaltenbrunner. "Tangible
Scores: Shaping the Inherent Instrument Score." NIME.
2014.
[9] Steiner, Hans Christoph. Solitude, Hans Christoph Steiner,
22 Jan. 2010, at.or.at/hans/solitude/.
[10] E. Tomás, “Musical Instruments As Scores: A Hybrid
Approach”, in Proceedings of the International Conference
on Technologies for Music Notation and Representation,
2016.
[11] R. Schnell, M. Battier, ”Introducing composed
instruments, technical and musicological implications”,
Proceedings of the 2002 conference on New interfaces for
musical expression, 2002.
[12] Greenlee, Shawn E, "Erratic interpretation: drawn sound
in augur." Brown University, 2008.