Modal Kombat: Competition and Choreography in
Synesthetic Musical Performance
[The First Ever Instrument-Controlled Video Game Battle]
David Hindman
∗
New Y ork University, ITP
†
721 Broadway, 4th Floor
New Y ork, New Y ork
david.hindman@aya.yale.edu
ABSTRACT
Public competition has been a part of the human experience
for at least all of recorded history. The same is true for mu-
sic. Modal Kombat is a live guitar competition channeled
through the video game Mortal Kombat. The performance
work builds on the idea ofdueling banjos, one of the few ex-
amples of public musical competition. Modal Kombat takes
this concept one step further by allowing a virtual mytho-
logical warrior to embody musical gestures. The result is a
musical competition that utilizes advanced technology and
popular media to exemplify the human passion for the spec-
tacle sport.
This paper describes the technological and musical chal-
lenges that face performers, composers, and programmers
when producing performance works that incorporate the
control of pre-recorded graphical animations with audio and
MIDI. Topics covered will include the musical instrument
as an interface, choreography and competition, visual the-
atrics, performance ﬂow, and compositional structures that
allow for asynchronous rhythmic patterns inherent to and
resultant from game controller input. In addition to its the-
oretical inquiry, the paper will discuss the practical artistic
and technical needs required to successfully create a pub-
lic instrument-controlled video game competition/concert,
through documentation of Modal Kombat, the ﬁrst ever in-
strument controlled video game battle.
Keywords
Video Games, Guitar, Interface, Instrument, Performance,
∗Composition and Performance of Modal Kombat in collab-
oration with Evan Drummond of the Eastman School of Mu-
sic
†Interactive Telecommunications Program
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME 06, June 4-8Paris, France
Copyright 2006 Copyright remains with the author(s).
Video Game Battle, Music Games, Sonic Games, Control-
ling Video Games With Sound, Modal Kombat, Mortal Kom-
bat, Competition, Choerography, Human-Computer Inter-
action.
1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 1: The Sonictroller (www.sonictroller.com) ,
by David Hindman and Spencer Kiser, is a system
that allows existing video games to be controlled by
traditional, full-range musical instruments. Modal
Kombat (www.modalkombat.com) builds on this sys-
tem, extending its application in to the live perfor-
mance setting as a hybrid musical performance and
public video game battle.
Musical video game interfaces have existed for some time,
but have not reached their full potential because they are
game-speciﬁc and lack the versatility and tonal range of tra-
ditional musical instruments. With few exceptions, exist-
ing music gaming interfaces are nothing but toys and could
never be used for music production apart from the single
video game they were designed to control.1 Real musical
instruments have no doubt been overlooked as interfaces in
the gaming industry because the market for such interfaces
(skilled musicians) is much smaller than that of unskilled
or hopeful instrumentalists. Also, interfacing a real musi-
cal instrument with a video game is far more complex than
simply engineering a simpliﬁed instrument-like interface to
be distributed with an accompanying game. This is why
the most successful musical interfaces so far have relied on
simple musical input, like the rhythmic interface for Nin-
tendo’sDonkey Konga, and single line melodic recognition
1Karaoke Revolution, by Harmonix, is an exception, it relies
on the human voice for input. The interface for Nintendo’s
Donkey Konga also can be used as an acoustic instrument.
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
296
Figure 2: Modal Kombat in live performance. Two
classical MIDI guitars control video game characters
in the popular video game Mortal Kombat. The
result is a hybrid musical concert and public video
game competition.
or trigger recognition in Harnomix’ Karaoke Revolution or
Guitar Hero. As a result, practicing musicians have had
to take step backward to participate in the musical gaming
process. For a solution to this problem, I have created a
system calledThe Sonictroller, a device which allows tradi-
tional, full-range musical instruments to control sprites in a
wide range of console video games. I was motivated by the
following questions: Why not have the option of playing a
video game with a real electric guitar or bass? Or piano?
Or drums? If anything, this option would engage current
instrumentalists, and more importantly, it may create new
ones. Furthermore, why limit a musician to a particular
video game?
Figure 3: Shown above is the congo drum interface
for Nintendo’sDonkey Konga. It is the closest match
to an real musical instrument gaming interface, as
the device produces acoustic sound in additon trig-
gering electronic events. The musical input is simple
momentary controls in the form of beats, the game
accepts no harmonic or melodic input.
Now, with the ability of concert-quality instruments to
control video game sprites, we are witnessing the conver-
gence of two previously separate forms of entertainment:
the musical concert and the public video game competition.
This paper focuses on the new performance genre that The
Sonictroller has allowed to emerge, and describes the musi-
cal and technical considerations required to produce a work
in this genre, building from the personal experience of cre-
ating Modal Kombat.
2. BUTTONS AND HANDLES
The content in this section is largely inﬂuenced by William
Verplank, through a series of lectures at the Physical Inter-
action Design Workshop for Music at CCRMA 2004.2
Verplank describes how human-computer interfaces can
be described as either buttons or handles. Buttons are
momentary controls, switches, a brief change from one state
to the next, a plucked string, a drum beat. Handles are
always updating, continuously sending information, a long
vocal melisma, a bowed violin. Musical sound is nothing but
information; it can be listened to by the human ear for the
purpose of pleasure, or it can be listened to by computers
for the purpose of control. For example, a guitar can not
only produce beautiful music for the human audience, it can
also be a control panel, an array of 114+ discrete switches.
A French Horn could be a mouse or joystick, volume on the
x-axis and pitch on the y-axis.
Controlling video games sprites with musical gestures re-
lies heavily on the concept of the musical instrument as valid
human-computer Interface. When controlling the visual ges-
tures of video game characters, I have found the knowledge
of fundamentals of human-computer interaction to be in-
valuable in understanding how the musical gesture maps to
the virtual physical gesture. At the heart of this lies the two
main components of human-computer interaction: momen-
tary and continuos controllers.
Figure 4: Wind Instruments, like the trumpet, are
capable of acting as handles, continuous control de-
vices because of their ability to output a constant
stream of information.
Figure 5: Plucked or percussive instruments, like
the MIDI piano or guitar shown above, are capable
of acting asbuttons, momentary control devices, be-
cause of their ability to trigger instantaneous, short-
lived data. Note: Many instruments, such as wind
or bowed instruments, can act as buttons or handles.
3. SHALL WE DANCE
The original goal behind the creation of the The Sonic-
troller was to create situations in which musical performers
could compete through the control of video game characters.
The most surprising by-product of this invention was the
2CCRMA: Center for Computer Research in Music and
Acoustics. Physical Interaction Design workshop for music,
July 2004.
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
297
discovery that the graphical animations of virtual charac-
ters could be re-purposed to make them dance, rather than
ﬁght, advance, shoot, conquer, race, etc. While the pallet
of moves in this case is limited by the programmers inten-
tions, there is no reason why a game character’s moves can
not be recycled speciﬁcally for the purposes of testing small
or large-scale dance choreography. In this speciﬁc case, the
single notes cause both characters to duck, so along with
the audible staggering of pitches we see a visual staggering
of characters kneeling and standing. The end result looks
very much like the characters are dancing alongwith rather
than because of the music.
3.1 Virtual Choreography
Movement I ofModal Kombat, entitledRain Dance, makes
use of sonically-driven virtual choreography through control-
ling the character namedRain. The peice begins with two
guitars alternating single, staggered pitches, shown in Fig-
ure 6 and Figure 7. Each of these single notes triggers a
single mommentary action of a corresponding video game
character.
Figure 6: Above, the score for Movement I ofModal
Kombat is shown. To start, staggered single notes
between the two guitars trigger a choreographed se-
quence. Each character ducks on their respective
beat, resulting in a dance-like eﬀect.
4. COMPOSITION
While an unexpected outcome of controlling video games
with instruments has been the eﬀectiveness of the chore-
ographed virtual dance, the main goal for this research was
motivated by the idea of musical competition reﬂected in
a visual feedback scenario. The challenge of creating a
competition-based musical performance is mainly devising a
compositional structure that allows for asynchronous rhyth-
mic patterns inherent to and resultant from game controller
input.
4.1 Harmonic Structure in the Musically Con-
trolled Video Game Competition
Once the initial mechanism for mapping musical gestures
to game characeters is in place, a greater challenge arises.
The challenge is creating listenable music out of random
streams of input. Since video game competition is by na-
ture unplanned, the music in Modal Kombat is largely har-
monic contextual, a series of tone areas that work well as
Figure 7: Shown above is the visual accompaniment
to measures 1-4 of the score shown in Figure 6. As
we can see, each character ducks when a single note
is struck, resulting in a choreographed section re-
sembling a tribal dance. This can viewed online at
http://www.modalkombat.com/trailer.mov
a foundation for improvisation. Once a harmonic ground is
established, parts of it can be looped- recorded live, and
then improvised over. The improvisation of guitar solos
over a harmonic ground drives the competition aspect of the
performance. This way, the performance can be unplanned
and diﬀerent each time, two fundamental components of the
video game competition. While random cacophony is nice
at times, the challenge of this work is to create listenable
music while still allowing the inevitable madness native to a
public video game battle. The next section describes various
mechanisms for establishing harmonic foundations on which
to base improvised game play.
4.2 Technical Mechanisms for Maintaining Har-
monic Continuity
There exist a number of diﬀerent mechanisms for loop-
ing harmonic passages for the purposes of contextual im-
provisation. Hardware devices such as the Lexicon Jamman
or Gibson Echoplex are popular in the looping community.
Modal Kombatemploys a custom performance patch written
in Max/Msp that records live passages and then loops them
under improvised solos. The patch, entitledLiveLooper is
controlled with a MIDI footpedal and allows up to seven live
overdubbs. Built-in to the patch include digital delay and
separate solo and looping volume controls.
5. VISUAL THEATRICS: USING OPEN GL
TO REMIX LIGHT AND ORIENTATION
Once a harmonic context is established for improvisation
and a seamless program is implemented, we can add vi-
sual theatrics to the sonically-controlled video game bat-
tle. Cycling ’74’s Jitter library for Max/Msp provides an
excellent way of adding extra visual dimensions to exist-
ing game graphics. Open GL gives us three-dimensional
world in which we can render the two-dimensional graphics
of older console video games. Using the OpenGL environ-
ment in Jitter allows built-in lighting and camera eﬀects at
minimal cost to processing speed. The following paragraphs
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
298
discuss various OpenGL-based theatrical lighting and cam-
era eﬀects that can be controlled with sound, to enhance the
visual experience of existing video games.
Figure 8: OpenGL allows 3-dimensional theatrical
lighting eﬀects to enhance the 2-dimensional space
of the game Mortal Kombat. The lighting features
in OpenGL allow for diﬀerent instruments to gener-
ate diﬀerent sonically mapped color explosions. In
this ﬁgure, the volume from Guitar 1 generates red
explosions of light.
5.1 Lights
Jitter’s OpenGL functionality includes built-in lighting
parameters for RGB color including light position, diﬀusion,
color, and intensity. Movement II ofModal Kombat is based
on sonically controlled theatrical lighting and camera eﬀects
made possible by Jitter’s OpenGL. One obvious but eﬀec-
tive mapping of audio in this movement is sonic amplitude
to lighting intensity. As Figure 8 illustrates, it is possible
to focus light on certain characters to create the illusion of
the sprites performing under theatrical spotlights on a stage.
Mapping the sonic amplitude to lighting intensity allows for
eﬀective explosions of focused light, that follow the many
discrete levels of audio volume.
Equally interesting lighting eﬀects include speciﬁc color
mappings. In Modal Kombat, volume of each guitar gen-
erates certain colors: Guitar One generates red light while
Guitar Two makes blue light. This is a simple but mean-
ingful use of color to distinguish one competitor from the
other, in the same way that teams in sporting events must
where noticeably diﬀerent colored uniforms.
5.2 Camera
Lighting is one feature of OpenGL that maps well from
sound. Another component that we can use for theatrical
eﬀects is camera position. Some eﬀects include setting the
camera to zoom in on key harmonic ﬁgures or creating au-
tomated zooms to emphasize particular musical moments.
Figure 9 shows a portion of an automated zoom placed at
the end of Movement II ofModal Kombat. Automated zooms
are useful for creating eﬀects concerning the orientation of
the two-dimensional screen. For example, ﬁgure 9 shows a
the OpenGL window in the max patch for Modal Kombat,
with the video plane tilted and camera at an altered z- axis,
yielding the impression of the screen ﬂying through the air.
Note that the game charactrers are still fully functional- we
can interface sound to all elements of screen orientation as
well as to the actual content dislayed in the original game.
Figure 9: Camera positions can also be automated,
to create the eﬀect like the one shown above. The
2-dimensional plane ﬂies through the 3-dimensional
space, an eﬀect inspired by the glass prison in the
movie Superman 2.
6. CONCLUSIONS
The production of Modal Kombat has required an un-
derstanding of the musical instrument as a control device,
a mechanism for this interface, thought-out compositional
structures, well-planned performance transitions and remixed
visual presentations. Certainly a video-game based musical
production need not demonstrate all of the above qualities,
but the success ofModal Kombat lies not simply in the abil-
ity to control video games with musical instruments but in
the ability to use this technology to create large, seamless,
well-planned performances. Modal Kombathas given careful
consideration not only to just the technology that forms the
foundation for its existence but to the musical language and
presentation of this new genre of multimedia performance.
This paper, in addition to serving as written documenta-
tion of the existing workModal Kombat should also provide
an overall outline of artistic and technical considerations for
anyone choosing produce a work in this genre. Game Over.
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank the following: Tom Igoe, Spencer
Kiser, Chris Carrington, Jeﬀ Gray, Mary and Jeﬀ Hindman.
8. REFERENCES
[1] Physical Computing, by Dan O’Sullivan and Tom Igoe
[2] CCRMA Physical Interaction Design Workshop, Sum-
mer 2004, Lectures by William Verplank
[3] Midway Games, Inc
[4] Nintendo Co., Ltd.
[5] Harmonix Games
[6] Cycling ’74, http://www.cycling74.com/
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
299