Threading the Sound: The Carpet Tufting Gun as an 
Electroacoustic Performance Interface
Joseph Burgess 
University of the Sunshine Coast 
joseph.burgess@research.usc.edu.au 
 
Dr. Toby Gifford 
University of the Sunshine Coast  
tgifford@usc.edu.au
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper explores the carpet tufting gun as a novel 
electroacoustic performance interface. Leveraging its distinctive 
acoustic properties and electromechanical kinetics, the tufting 
gun presents a range of physical affordances that can be 
creatively repurposed for musical expression. While prior 
intersections between textile production processes and musical 
practices exist, the tufting gun remains largely underexplored as 
a tool for structured musical composition. This work reimagines 
the gun’s mechanical gestures and performative affordances, 
transforming its utilitarian motions into expressive sonic 
gestures. By positioning the t ufting gun as both an acoustic 
source and an interactive performance interface, this project 
works at the intersection of fibre craft and experimental sound 
art, where both historico -cultural context of textile making, and 
the ergonomics of the gun, present musical affordances. 
 
Author Keywords 
carpet, tufting, electroacoustic, interfaces 
 
1. The Tufting Gun 
The carpet tufting gun is a late-industrial invention from Dalton, 
Georgia, USA, which originated from the bedspread “cottage” 
industry in the postbellum south [1]. In the broader story of 
textile industrialisation, tufting offers an interesting counterpoint 
to the dominant paradigm of automation, offering aspects of 
mechanisation but retaining an emphasis on manual operation 
and craftsmanship [2]. The physical configuration of the tufting 
gun affords various natural gestures, while the inherent 
constraints of the tufting process directly inform its interface 
design.  
 The tufting gun operates through a complex sequence of 
actions driven by a motor. The motor powers a set of cams, which 
in turn drive a coarse needle and a reciprocating scissor 
mechanism for cut -pile carpet or a “U” -shaped needle for 
producing loop -pile carpet. These components advance as the 
user compresses the trigger, enabling precise control over the 
tufting process. A potentiometer facilitates ‘tuning’ the motor to 
different pitches. The sonic dimension of the motor and 
interactivity of the tufting process create musical affordances. 
 
2. Historical Entanglement 
Textile production, music, and technology are historically 
entangled: “textiles themselves are very literally the software 
linings of all technology” [3]. One example is Persian weaving 
songs; a venerable practice in which digital patterns of warp and 
weft are encoded in vocal phrases sung as a mnemonic during 
weaving [4], demonstrating a relationship between textiles, 
music and the origins of digital computation.  
 As another example; in the 18th century, Basile Bouchon, the 
son of a Lyonnais organ builder, invented a method to control a 
loom using perforated paper tape, inspired by the programmable 
music automatons used to control carillon bells [5]. Over the next 
75 years, a series of advancements in weaving technology 
culminated in the Jacquard loom, a foundational innovation that 
influenced the development of modern computer architecture; 
specifically Charles Babbage’s Analytical Engine, highlighting 
an underexpl ored intersection between the histories of textile 
production and computer music.  
 Our exploration of the tufting gun as a musical interface pays 
homage to this rich historical context, conditioning our aesthetic 
choices such as the incorporation of vocal samples, and embrace 
of Ada Lovelace’s speculations about the potential of the 
Analytic Engine for computer music: "supposing, for instance, 
that the fundamental relations of pitched sounds in the science of 
harmony and of musical composition were susceptible of such 
expression and adaptations, the engine might compose elaborate 
and sci entific pieces of music of any degree of complexity or 
extent" [6]. 
 
Figure 1. Ak-1 tufting gun 
3. Performative Carpet Making 
An example of our reimagined tufting gun can be seen here: 
https://tinyurl.com/CarpetEntanglementSample. The remainder 
of this paper discusses design considerations for this interface; 
musical affordances, embodiment, and mapping strategies. 
3.1 Tufting Affordances 
The textile creation process has a long cultural history of 
engagement with materiality, yielding a set of conventions to 
draw upon in the performative act of carpet making. In 
identifying the affordances of the tufting gun as a musical 
instrument, both cultural and mechanical considerations can play 
a role. Van Dijk and Rietveld [7] suggest that affordances can 
operate on multiple scales: they may be ‘small -scale’, inviting 
confined actions with immediate feedback, or ‘large -scale’, 

unfolding over extended time spans as part of a more complex 
project. The tufting process itself is inherently longform and 
durational, and so congruent with this conception of 
affordances—spanning both micro and macro levels. 
 When considering the tufting gun’s affordances as a musical 
instrument, we examined its material and physical properties 
alongside its cultural context. Considering the intertwined nature 
of technological development and craft, there is congruence with 
what Malafouris [8] describes as Material Engagement Theory 
(MET), which argues that cognition is a dynamic process co -
constituted by the brain, body, and material environment. 
Alongside the labor-intensive nature of textile production, there 
is a history of  entanglement between textile technology and 
musical praxis that can provide aesthetic context. Adopting this 
perspective, the tufting gun’s musical affordances emerge from 
the interplay between its mechanical design and its position in 
broader historico-cultural contexts. While these are not physical 
affordances, they provide musical affordances; they shape the 
intentional relationship between the musical subject (the user) 
and the object (the tufting gun), thereby influencing what 
physical affordances are  perceived and acted upon. Musical 
affordances can be considered “propert[ies] of the intentional 
relationship between musical subjects and objects.” [9] 
3.2 Sequentiality of Labour 
The action possibilities of tufting are intrinsically related to the 
labour of the carpet making process. The sequentiality of events 
involved in this labour provide a script of actions which are both 
functional and expressive in advancing the carpet. The process 
alternates between strenuous full body labour and dexterous fine 
motor control. The constraints of scripting these sequenced 
events are not rigid and can support improvisation. The elongated 
act of threading the tufting needle punctuated by bursts of 
rhythmic tufting come together in a choreographed sequence of 
performative states.  
 The primary activity of tufting channels energy of the upper 
body into directing the tufting needle. In the transitional periods 
between bursts of tufting, tasks include trimming with scissors, 
untangling the yarn and repositioning the tufting setup. The 
natural flow of carpet production yields performance guidelines 
which play an influential role in the arc of the performance. 
3.3 Embodiment in Tufting 
The body is central to carpet -making and the tufting gun as a 
tangible interface mediates between the maker’s intentions and 
materiality. The tools become an extension of the body, enabling 
a direct and tactile connection between physicality and artistic 
expression. “ In terms of [the] embodiment relationship, the 
physical nature of the tufting gun requires us to hold it with both 
hands and to control its movement by adjusting our posture. After 
constant practice, the tufting gun is gradually integrated into our 
bodily experience, in what Heidegger describes as the ‘ready-to-
hand’ state. At this point, our physical sensations extend to the 
surface of the gun, feeling the yarn through vibration and 
resistance as it penetrates the fabric” [2]. The ‘ready -to-hand’ 
state positions the tufting gun as an embodiment relation which 
“implies the incorporation of technology into our perceptual -
body experience, such as crutches, glasses, etc., where 
technology becomes an extension of the body” [2]. 
4. Interface and Mapping Strategies 
The bodily actions and sensorial feedback involved in tufting are 
opportunities for expression which can be harnessed in a 
performance setting. Mounting a piezo sensor to the motor 
housing provides an interface between the performer and 
software, harnessin g the kinetic potential of the gun for 
processing with real time audio and audio to MIDI processing. 
The primary components of this processing are envelope 
followers tracking input amplitude and audio -to-MIDI 
Max4Live devices. The primary voices are: vocal  chops, an 
electronic kick drum, and an electronic hi-hat. 
 These percussive sources operate in a one -gesture-one-sound 
mode [10] emphasising the immediacy of the performance, with 
envelope followers modulating the sounds to provide more 
temporally extended gestural interaction. Further audio 
processing of the pie zo input provides the basis for mapping 
on/off states within the broader system.  
 In preliminary experiments a lapel microphone mounted to the 
gun amplified the acoustic sounds of cutting with scissors and  
various subtle actions involved in preparing the tufting setup. 
Through processing these sounds the tufting activity becomes an 
electroacoustic landscape where the large -scale carpet scissors 
are the primary instrument.  
 The third mapping point involves mounting piezo sensors to 
the carpet-backing material. These audio inputs are routed to a 
physically modelled ‘sympathetic string’ using the Corpus effect 
in Ableton Live. When activated these sound sources create a 
binding drone which bridges between the alternating states of the 
tufting performance. The intention of this mapping is to reference 
a common design motif where one “soft” string is mounted to 
one “hard” frame; a construction style common to lyres and 
looms.  
5. Conclusion 
This paper reimagines the carpet tufting gun as a performance 
interface, merging textile production with experimental sound 
art. Repurposing the gun’s mechanical gestures and acoustics, its 
utilitarian functions are transformed into sites for musical 
expression. Through the integration of piezo sensors and audio 
processing, the tufting gun becomes a speculative instrument 
bridging physical labor with real -time sonic creation situated in 
the historical interplay of textiles, technology, and music. 
6. Ethical Standards 
No ethical approval was required for this study. 
7. REFERENCES 
[1] V. Pratt. How Dalton, Georgia, Built a Textile Empire on a 
Myth. (Master's thesis, University of West Georgia), 2020 
[2] J. Zhou & D. Zhang. Stimulating Everyday Creativity: 
Mediating Role of New Tools in DIY Craft. Ergonomics 
In Design, 77, (2023), 383-393. 
[3] S. Plant. Zeros and ones: Digital women and the new 
technoculture (Vol. 4), London, 1997 
[4] A. Tuck. Singing the Rug: Patterned Textiles and the 
Origins of Indo-European Metrical Poetry. American 
Journal of Archeology, 110(4), (2023), 539–550. 
[5] T. Koetsier. On the prehistory of programmable machines: 
Musical automata, looms, calculators. Mechanism and 
Machine Theory, 36(5), (2001), 589–603. 
[6] L. Menabrea & A. Lovelace. Sketch of the analytical 
engine invented by Charles Babbage. Bibliotheque 
Universelle de Geneve, 82. (1842). 
[7] L.Van Dijk & E. Rietveld, E. Situated imagination. 
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, (2020), 1-23. 
[8] L. Malafouris. How things shape the mind: A theory of 
material engagement. MIT press, (2013) 
[9] D. Menin & A. Schiavio. Rethinking musical affordances. 
Avant 3(22), (2012), 202-215. 
[10] D. Wessel. Instruments That Learn, Refined Controllers, 
and Source Model Loudspeakers. Computer Music 
Journal, 15(4), (1991), 82-86.