Introducing L2Ork: Linux Laptop Orchestra 
 
Ivica Ico Bukvic 
Virginia Tech 
Department of Music 
DISIS 
Blacksburg, VA (USA) 
+001 540/231-6139 
ico@vt.edu 
 
Thomas Martin 
Virginia Tech 
Elec & Comp 
Engineering 
Blacksbug, VA (USA) 
+001 540/231-1739 
tlmartin@vt.edu 
 
Eric Standley 
Virginia Tech 
School of Visual Arts 
Blacksburg, VA (USA) 
+001 540/231-3110 
ericst@vt.edu 
 
Michael Matthews 
Virginia Tech 
Department of Music 
DISIS 
Blacksburg, VA (USA) 
matthem5@vt.edu 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Virginia Tech Department of Music’s Digital Interactive Sound 
& Intermedia Studio  in collaboration with the College of 
Engineering and School of Visual  Arts presents the latest 
addition to the *Ork family, the Linux Laptop Orchestra. Apart 
from maintaining compatibility w ith its precursors and sources 
of inspiration, Princeton’s PLOrk, and Stanford’s SLOrk, 
L2Ork’s particular focus is on delivering unprecedented 
affordability without s acrificing quality, as well as flexibility 
necessary to encourage a more widespread adoption and 
standardization of the laptop orchestra ensemble. The newfound 
strengths of L2Ork’s design have resulted in opportunities in K-
12 education with a particular focus on cross-pollinating STEM 
and Arts, as well as research of an innovative content delivery 
system that can seamlessly engage students regardless of their 
educational background. In th is document we discuss key 
components of the L2Ork initiative, their benefits, and offer 
resources necessary for the creation of other Linux-based 
*Orks. 
Keywords 
laptop orchestra, L2Ork, Linux 
1. BACKGROUND 
Although computer-based experi mental ensembles are nothing 
new, arguably the first ensemble that has consistently exhibited 
properties of a traditional orchestra in terms of its spatial 
potential, lack of dependence upon the house PA, persistence, 
and scope is Princeton’s laptop orchestra or PLOrk [10]. 
Founded in the fall 2005, PLOrk builds upon research in the use 
of spherical and hemispherica l speakers that has freed its 
infrastructure from audio systems incapable of portraying 
spatial nuances found in a traditional orchestra. PLOrk was 
soon followed by Stanford’s SLOrk, founded by Ge Wang, 
Princeton graduate [12]. Both *Orks have received 
unprecedented media attention and continue to thrive. 
Since, a number of institutions across the world have started 
similar initiatives with a go al of producing a laptop-based 
orchestra as a more standardized ensemble. Reasons for starting 
such an ensemble are both compelling and numerous and have 
been described in great detail in Dan Trueman’s “Why a Laptop 
Orchestra?” [9]. 
2. INTRODUCING L2Ork 
Virginia Tech DISIS [11] serves as the hub for the international 
Linuxaudio.org consortium [4]. In part inspired by the 
successes of PLOrk and SLOrk and in part encouraged by the 
rapidly developing Linux hardware and software support, in the 
fall 2008 DISIS partnered with Vi rginia Tech’s College of 
Engineering to explore the ensuing synergy and form the first 
*Ork based on Linux. Consequently, we sought a way to cut 
costs without sacrificing sound quality and in turn utilize 
newfound design to promote growth, encourage development of 
additional orchestras that would maintain compatibility with the 
existing *Ork base, and perhaps most importantly facilitate 
adoption in the K-12 education sector. 
     
  
Figure 1. L2Ork ensemble (fall 2009). 
Over the past years, Linux has matured into a formidable 
general purpose operating system. Yet arguing its out-of-box 
readiness for a specialized use such as a laptop orchestra would 
be deceiving at best. Therefore, very early on we came to the 
conclusion that to ensure optimal experience we needed to 
provide ensemble members not only with the necessary 
supporting hardware (speakers, sound card, etc.), but also the 
laptop itself, running an optimized version of Linux that 
streamlines much of the operations necessary for its integration 
into the L2Ork ecosystem. Th is way we also circumvent 
situations where preinstalled software on a student’s laptop 
could cause unwanted deterioration in performance. 
It was becoming obvious that for L2Ork to become a reality we 
needed a large network of on- and off-campus Stakeholders as 
well as corporate support. Our pr oject, however, coincided with 
what may be remembered as the onset of one of the greatest 
recessions in recent US history, thus putting a considerable 
strain on our funding options. 
2.1 SUPPORT NETWORK 
Perhaps the most useful aspect of L2Ork’s brief history to those 
seeking to start a similar ensemble is the development of a 
support network. This step took place throughout the spring 
2009 semester during which we ma naged to bring on board s 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copi es of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME2010, 15-18th June 2010, Sydney, Australia 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
170
number of on-campus initiatives. Apart from our partnership 
with the Linuxaudio.org consorti um, the project also secured 
three corporate sponsors: Mobile division of the MSI Computer, 
Roland Corporation, and Sweetwater Inc. who have provided us 
with supporting hardware. By the end of the spring, we secured 
the necessary funding and have also brought Prof. Eric Standley 
on board to assist us in crafting speaker enclosures. 
2.2 UNDERGRADUATE RESEARCH 
During summer of 2009 our team was complemented by nine 
undergraduate students, including two volunteers, five full-time, 
and two part-time. Two Virginia Tech students and one 
incoming student from Rochester University were sponsored 
through the National Science Foundation’s Research 
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program. Michael 
Matthews, a double-major in music and computer science, was 
one of the REU students and has continued to work on L2Ork 
since. The summer research team’s main focus was on the 
design, development, and testin g of optimal hardware for a 15-
member ensemble, as well as software and OS optimization. As 
a result, we built 16 speakers, configured 17 notebooks, and 
developed necessary software to allow Pure-Data to seamlessly 
interface with our input devi ce of choice—the Nintendo 
Wiimote. 
2.3 SUB-$800/SEAT SETUP 
The result of a 45-day summer research project is the current 
setup whose total cost per seat is below $800. The setup 
includes MSI Wind U-100 notebook,  hemispherical speaker, 
subwoofer (shared with up to 5 other musicians) external USB 
soundcard, Nintendo Wiimote and Nunchuk, cables and 
accessories, and all supporting software. Speaker design has 
taken by far the largest amount of time allocated for this 
project, in part due to lack of  adequate soldering experience 
among student researchers. Once students attained a level of 
familiarity, we were able to produce up to four speakers per 
day. For a detailed overview of hardware and software setup, 
please consult the L2Ork website (http://l2ork.music.vt.edu). 
2.3.1 INPUT DEVICES 
One notable aspect of L2Ork th at differentiates it from the 
existing laptop orchestras is standardization of robust and 
affordable input device, name ly the Nintendo Wiimote and 
Nunchuk [11]. Initially, this choice was to ensure compatibility 
with existing *Orks whose Mac-based hardware offers built-in 
accelerometers. Since, we’ve grown to prefer this choice over 
other alternatives due to its affordability, versatility, rugged 
design, and consequent ability to explore a full range of gesture 
and motion in performance. This choice has in part also driven 
the development of L2Ork’s performance aesthetics that 
emphasizes physical presence, ge sture, choreography, and even 
theatre. While an argument can  be made for both minimal on-
stage laptop music performance practice (e.g. a laptop 
performer on stage facing audi ence with key strokes on the 
laptop keyboard being the only indication of their involvement 
in the music-making process and therefore shifting the drama 
entirely into the aural domain) [8] and physical performance 
devised through a tight integr ation between technology (e.g. 
input devices) and performers (e.g. dancers) [1], the L2Ork 
aesthetic has undoubtedly leaned in the direction of the latter, in 
part because the laptop orchestra borrows so much from the 
traditional orchestra in which physical drama and coordination 
between various performers ha s become an inseparable 
component of the overall mu sical experience. Another 
advantage of Wiimotes is ability to use them with either hand. 
As a result every L2Ork composition written for Wiimotes 
offers a simple way to alternate hand dominance. 
2.3.1.1 HAPTIC FEEDBACK 
Another compelling reason for using Wiimotes is their ability to 
convey haptic feedback during performance. We found this 
form of communication to be instrumental in providing efficient 
cues while producing no observable distraction artifacts from 
the audience’s perspective. 
2.4 *Ork COMPATIBILITY 
As we look forward to exchanging repertoire with PLOrk and 
SLOrk, we cannot fail to notice inconsistencies that have found 
way into our design despite our best efforts at maintaining 
backwards compatibility with our precursors. Perhaps, due to 
sheer nature of a laptop, as well as preexisting inconsistencies 
(e.g. speaker channel mapping), it appears that absolute 
compatibility between different *Orks may be impossible. 
Indeed, even for those who may wish to adopt our Linux-based 
approach, chances are that the notebooks and supporting 
hardware our setup relies upon will very soon become obsolete. 
Yet it is because of this modularity and the free open-source 
(FOSS) nature of the supporting software that the developing 
laptop orchestra repertoire will be capable of surviving such 
historical transitions as well as cross-pollination among the 
growing international network of *Orks. 
One of L2Orks’s most noticeable deviations from the existing 
*Ork designs is its use of Linux. Yet, as dramatic as this change 
may appear, given that most of the existing *Ork infrastructure 
is FOSS-based (e.g. ChucK [13] and Supercollider [5], both of 
which run on multiple platforms including Linux) this choice 
has resulted in far fewer problems than anticipated. One notable 
exception is Max/MSP [7] which has been supplanted by Pure-
Data [6]. 
L2Ork’s approach to the role of a conductor is perhaps more 
open-ended than that of PLOrk and SLOrk. As part of L2Ork’s 
debut, all pieces included on the program explored 
amalgamation of a performer and conductor. Undoubtedly, 
whatever little nuances may have remained in the physical 
domain (e.g. ensemble-wide cues), have retained their 
importance as well as visibility through gesture and eye contact, 
and yet have done so without significantly adding to the 
overhead nor detracting from the visual presentation. 
Consequently, we envision he avier reliance upon networked 
communication among performers to convey necessary 
information in as efficient format possible, thus exploring a 
wide range of possibilities, from a conductor-less ensemble to 
an environment where every performer also partakes in a role of 
a conductor. Naturally, should a need arise based on a work’s 
architecture and/or composer’s  instructions, L2Ork should be 
more than capable of exploring a more traditional approach to a 
dedicated ensemble conductor. 
2.5 STAGE SETUP 
The current L2Ork setup consists of a semi-circle with the open 
side facing the audience with soloist(s) in the center (Figure 2). 
Soloists are amplified through hemispherical speakers as 
needed (e.g. a narrator). As L2Ork continues to grow, we 
anticipate having to revisit this  arrangement to make better use 
of the available space. As is the case with other aspects of the 
ensemble, we fully expect that this arrangement may end up 
being piece-specific and that we may have to carefully consider 
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
171
striking a balance between com position-driven needs and setup 
overhead. 
 
Figure 2. L2Ork debut configuration. 
3. L2Ork CURRICULUM 
L2Ork pilot curriculum was introduced in the fall of 2009 in a 
form of two complementing courses: a 3-credit-hour lecture and 
a 1-credit-hour music ensemble. The ensemble was open to all 
Virginia Tech students regardless of their musical background 
and major, while the lecture class was available only to those 
who completed the prerequisite Computer Music Composition 
& Multimedia Design 2-semester course that deals mainly with 
learning Max/MSP/Jitter. The latter is also available to all 
Virginia Tech students, with preference given to music 
technology majors. All lecture participants were also required to 
be a part of the performing ensemble. 
L2Ork, as other *Orks offers a uniquely level playing field 
when it comes to specific prerequisites therefore encouraging 
engagement that defies tr aditional academic boundaries 
between different disciplines. While students with a solid 
computer background generally fare better simply due to their 
level of comfort with computers,  we found this advantage to be 
small enough not the play a major role in the overall ecosystem. 
This potentially tremendous advantage also introduces a 
considerable overhead. Namely, students with such diverse 
backgrounds and potentially having little or no prior music 
training require unconventional and often unique means of 
delivering score information. So far, we found numerical 
displays coupled with timers, visual cues, and concise textual 
instructions to work best, reaffirming the RTMix-like  approach 
to coordinating interactive performances [2]. Pd has proven an 
ideal platform for delivering such visual content 
4. DEBUT 
Despite the growing body of *Ork documentation, the fall 
semester turned out to be a truly experimental undertaking. 
Perhaps it is because of the en suing communal discovery that 
the ensemble instilled a strong sense of a stakeholder among 
students. Throughout the semester we experimented with 
various instrument and input de vice designs, a process that 
required lecture participants to take on often concurrently many 
different professional roles, including that of an engineer, 
computer scientist, interface bui lder, composer, and performer. 
Our December 4, 2009 “Sneak Preview” debut featured 
approximately 30 minutes of music originally written for the 
ensemble, including two works by Bukvic and one by music 
technology major David Mudre. The debut was preceded by a 
lunchtime technology demonstration showcase. 
Despite its relatively short duration, the event literally packed 
the venue with audience members who were eager to get their 
hands on the instruments followi ng the performance. The debut 
has also elicited unexpected am ounts of attention from regional 
and national media and has been featured in a number of 
international online news outlets. In its end-of-year review, 
Create Digital Music has cited L2Ork as part of “CDM’s 
Biggest Music Tech Stories of 2009.” [5] In the following 
section we will briefly discuss specific approaches utilized by 
the compositions written for L2Ork. 
4.1 “CITADEL” 
On the surface, Citadel may appear as the most conservative 
piece on the program, using a traditional soprano line in 
conjunction with the L2Ork ensemble. Vocal accompaniment 
relies upon an array of identical monaural and primarily pitch-
driven instruments to produce lush string-like accompaniment. 
The underlying system reveals a number of challenges which 
were specifically addressed in this first piece written for L2Ork: 
exploring appropriate performance aesthetics, communicating 
the score to the ensemble, ensemble coordination, and reliance 
upon the aforesaid hybrid role of a conductor/performer. 
Originally referred to as “Exercise 4,” this piece has in many 
ways driven the development of basic tools and 
intercommunication protocols. As  a result, the final version 
calls for the use of a Wiimote as an “infinite bow,” mimicking 
motion of a traditional bow in a more free-form gesture. 
Considering that the motion is no t constrained by the physical 
contact to a sound-making device (e.g. string), performers are 
capable of utilizing a wide array of motions to ensure seamless 
continuity of the sound. None theless, it became quickly 
apparent that a common gesture aesthetic was necessary to 
generate a compelling visual experience. In this piece, the 
Nunchuk was used to modulate sound properties, including 
pitch, low-pass filtering, vocoder, and to control delays. 
4.2 “HALF-LIFE” 
The other Wiimote-based work approaches the use of a 
controller as a multidirectional mallet, triggering events of 
various lengths and envelopes. This role is complemented by 
the “glitching” algorithm typical of the contemporary beat-
based electronic music scene. The work, for narrator and 
L2Ork, draws inspiration from the famous 2004 blog by Elena 
Filatova depicting a haunting journey through Chernobyl. Most 
sound sources are based on concrete sounds whose collage and 
juxtaposition with improvisatory “glitching” patterns is perhaps 
reminiscent of a jazz ensemble setup, affording each of the 
L2Ork members a solo section. Unlike “Citadel”, where the 
conductor controlled the pace of th e work, in this case at the 
beginning of the piece every notebook was synced to the master 
timer after which they delivered time-sensitive cues in a form of 
visual stimuli and concise textual descriptions. 
4.3 “DUSK” 
The first L2Ork composition written by a student drops 
Wiimote use in favor of a conventional laptop keyboard. In 
order to avoid potential aesthetic pitfalls associated with 
keyboard-based performance, the piece calls for sweeping hand 
motion (e.g. keys A through H) that trigger an array of 
prefabricated audio samples and offer a theatre of clearly 
observable gestures. The economy of aural material and relative 
sparseness of the texture allows for intricate exploration of 
L2Ork’s spatial potential. The conductor’s role in this piece was 
shared among all ensemble members—some sections required 
the composer to provide critical cues while others resulted in 
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
172
cascading relegation of responsibility as performers awaited 
cues from each other in specific predetermined order. 
5. EMERGING AESTHETICS 
Undoubtedly, one of the cornerstones of laptop orchestra 
aesthetics is that there very well may never be a single preferred 
aesthetic to uphold above everythi ng else. Yet, what we have 
learned from our fall endeavor is that Wiimotes indeed possess 
a tremendous potential in delivering compelling theatre while 
offering unprecedented flexibility at a competitive price. We 
have also observed a growi ng reliance upon physical 
presentation and theatre, regardless of the input device. Another 
component of our presentation we found compelling was 
positioning notebooks on music stands as if to acknowledge that 
these are not only our instruments but also our scores. It is not 
entirely unlikely that in the future iterations of L2Ork we may 
continue to steer in the direction of minimizing technology’s 
physical footprint and shift even more attention towards human 
presence. 
6. LOOKING AHEAD 
Since the fall debut featuring 9 performers (including ensemble 
director), the ensemble has grown to 18+ members. Currently 
L2Ork has no specific target size and, infrastructure permitting, 
encourages further growth. 
As we begin shifting towards discrete treatment of the 
hemispherical speaker’s output  channels, there will be 
undoubtedly a need to move to a more expensive soundcard 
which will in turn result in high er costs. We however envision 
this kind of spatial treatment to be best served in a more 
intimate environment involving fewer performers and therefore 
see the monaural system conti nuing to maintain its relevance 
within the context of L2Ork as a growing ensemble. 
Another component of particular interest to the L2Ork team is 
branching out into the multimedia domain. After all, laptops can 
do many different things and even though L2Ork will always 
strive to retain what has made it such a uniquely exciting 
endeavor by intertwining hum an performance and technology 
through a quintessential form of real-time collaboration typical 
of a traditional orchestra,  having several performers 
participating as real-time collaborative sculptors of a 3D shape 
whose composition both affects and reacts to sound produced 
by the remainder by the orchestra and variations thereof (e.g. 
involving dance, theatre, poetry, video, etc.) are particularly 
exciting to the L2Ork team. This is undoubtedly one of the 
many directions we look forward to embarking in the coming 
years. 
6.1 K-12 EDUCATION 
Perhaps one of the most compelling research angles made 
possible through L2Ork’s cost-efficient design is its potential 
impact on K-12 education with particular focus on cross-
pollination of STEM and Arts. Arts, and particularly music, 
offer a uniquely efficient way of providing near instantaneous 
feedback to those interested in  exploring Math and Computer 
Science concepts. This feedback loop is particularly apparent in 
*Ork models, with the cost remaining the only formidable 
limitation preventing it from tighter integration into the K-12 
curriculum. Considering this concept is still in its early stages, 
we will reserve discussing its design and potential impact for 
another time. 
7. STARTING A LINUX-BASED *Ork 
In hope to encourage adoption of L2Ork’s approach to the *Ork 
ensemble, we’ve generated a growing body of documentation, 
including YouTube video “instruc tables” discussing the design 
and development of the speakers and other infrastructure, 
equipment list with estimated cost, and other supporting 
documentation. Additional Linux re sources are available on the 
L2Ork website, including a complete Linux disk image with all 
the necessary software preinstalled as well as pd patches, 
abstractions, externals, and enhancements. For additional 
information visit http://l2ork.music.vt.edu. 
8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We would like to hereby thank all our Stakeholders, particularly 
VT’s ISCE, ICTAS, and CLAHS for their generous financial 
support of L2Ork, our external sponsors, students researchers 
and l2ork ensemble members for making this project a reality. 
9. REFERENCES 
[1] Bahn, C., Hahn, T. and Trueman, D. Physicality and 
feedback: a focus on the body in the performance of 
electronic music. In Proceedings of the International 
Computer Music Conference, Firenze, Italy, 2001, 44–51. 
[2] Bukvic, I. RTMix - Towards a Standardised Interactive 
Electroacoustic Art Performance Interface. Organized 
Sound, 7, 3(2002), 275-286. 
[3] Create Digital Music » CDM’s Biggest Music Tech Stories 
of 2009, http://createdigitalmusic.com/2009/12/31/cdms-
biggest-music-tech-stories-of-2009/. Last accessed Feb. 
2010. 
[4] Linuxaudio.org, http://linuxaudio.org. Last accessed Feb. 
2010. 
[5] McCartney, J. Rethinking the Computer Music 
Programming Language: SuperCollider. Computer Music 
Journa, 26, 4(2002), 61-68. 
[6] Puckette, M. Pure Data: Another Integrated Computer 
Music Environment. Second Intercollege Computer Music 
Concerts, Tachikawa, Japan, 1996. 
[7] Puckette, M., and Zicarelli, D. Max/MSP. Cycling 
74/IRCAM, version 5.1, 1990-2010. 
[8] Stuart, C. The Object of Performance: Aural 
Performativity in Contemporary Laptop Music. 
Contemporary Music Review, 22, 4(2003), 59-6. 
[9] Trueman, D. Why a Laptop Orchestra?, Organised Sound 
12, 2(2007), 171–179. 
[10] Trueman, D., Cook, P., Smallwood, S., and Wang, G. 
PLOrk: Princeton Laptop Orchestra, Year 1. In 
Proceedings of the International Computer Music 
Conference, New Orleans, U.S., November 2006. 
[11] Virginia Tech Department of Music DISIS - Digital 
Interactive Sound and Intermedia Studio, 
http://disis.music.vt.edu. Last accessed Feb. 2010. 
[12] Wang, G., Bryan, N., Oh, J., and Hamilton, R. Stanford 
Laptop Orchestra (SLOrk). In Proceedings of the 2009 
International Computer Music Conference, Montreal, 
Canada, 2009. 
[13] Wang G. and Cook, P. ChucK: A Concurrent, On-the-fly 
Audio Programming Language. In Proceedings of 
International Computer Music Conference, Singapore, 
2003, 219-226.
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
173