Two Shared Rapid Turn Taking Sound Interfaces for 
Novices 
 
 
Anne-Marie Skriver Hansen 
PhD student, Architecture, Design 
and Media Technology 
Aalborg University, Denmark 
Niels Jernes Vej 14, A5-206 
DK-9220 Aalborg Ø 
Email: amhansen@create.aau.dk 
 
Hans Jørgen Andersen 
Associate Professor, Arcitecture, 
Design and Media Technology  
Aalborg University, Denmark 
Niels Jernes Vej 14, 3-111 
DK-9220 Aalborg Ø 
Email: hja@create.aau.dk  
 
Pirkko Raudaskoski 
Associate Professor, Communication 
Aalborg University, Denmark 
Krogstræde 3, 5- 223 
DK-9220 Aalborg Ø 
Email: pirkko@hum.aau.dk 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper presents the results of user interaction with two 
explorative music environments (sound system A and B) that 
were inspired from the Banda Linda music tradition in two 
different ways. The sound systems adapted to how a team of 
two players improvised and made a melody together in an 
interleaved fashion: Systems A and B used a fuzzy logic 
algorithm and pattern recognition to respond with modifications 
of a background rhythms. In an experiment with a pen tablet 
interface as the music instrument, users aged 10-13 were to tap 
tones and continue each other’s melody. The sound systems 
rewarded users sonically, if they managed to add tones to their 
mutual melody in a rapid turn taking manner with rhythmical 
patterns. Videos of experiment sessions show that user teams 
contributed to a melody in ways that resemble conversation. 
Interaction data show that each sound system made player 
teams play in different ways, but players in general had a hard 
time adjusting to a non-Western music tradition. The paper 
concludes with a comparison and evaluation of the two sound 
systems. Finally it proposes a new approach to the design of 
collaborative and shared music environments that is based on 
”listening applications”.  
 
Keywords 
Music improvisation, novices, social learning, interaction 
studies, interaction design. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Collaborative music interfaces have formed a special topic in 
the research into new interfaces for musical expression, as well 
as part of an ongoing development of mainstream computer 
games and popular music performance instruments [5][7][9]. 
This paper contributes to research into collaborative music 
improvisation interfaces for novices: [2][3][4][10][11]. The 
mentioned research introduces ways in which groups of people 
can express themselves musically in a social setting. They 
explore ways in which a digital sound system can mediate 
mutual user action captured by a shared physical interface and 
map parameters of physical expression to musical expression.  
When designing the experiments presented in this paper we 
were inspired by a specific musical style that links two or more 
musicians in a music performance and improvisation. The 
music tradition used is that of the Banda Linda horn orchestras, 
where each musician contributes with one to two tones in an 
interleaved fashion with other members of an ensemble [1]. 
This kind of musical expression requires that each musician is 
highly aware of the others while playing. Our challenge was to 
design a music interface that would allow novices (non-
musicians) to express themselves while obtaining awareness 
towards the other user’s actions. 
We designed two different kinds of sound systems, system A 
and B that provided users with two different ways of taking 
turns adding to a shared melody. In addition to this, the two 
sound systems used two different methods of real-time 
measurement of mutual user action: Systems A used a fuzzy 
logic algorithm to detect turn taking tendencies. System B used 
pattern recognition as a way to identify specific turn taking 
relationships. The real-time “results” of the two different 
measurement methods were mapped to a background rhythm 
that adapted to rhythmical aspects of the two users’ shared 
melody: The background rhythm was changed through “ sonic 
rewards” that consisted of modifications and ”add-ons” to a 
ground rhythm. 
The objective of the study was to understand how users, or 
players, as we would like to call them, activated tones 
according to a changing background rhythm. The hypothesis 
was that players would hear that the background rhythm 
changed according to their play, and that they in turn would 
adjust their play in order to modify the background rhythm. 
Results show that in both systems there were a few signs that 
players collaborated about changing the shared melody in order 
to obtain sonic rewards. In most teams, however, players 
seemed to hear that their play had an effect on the background 
rhythm, but they were not aware of what to do in order to make 
specific changes to the background rhythm.  
The main finding of this study was that in the design of “active 
music listening” applications [6] for novices, it is essential to 
include any user’s natural ways of expression when trying to 
match them with any type of musical framework, especially 
when it comes to the practice of free improvisation. Based on 
our experiences presented in this paper, we suggest to design 
”listening interfaces” that focus on the kind of musical 
expression that novice players immediately engage in when 
using a particular physical interface with a corresponding 
shared electronic music instrument. 
2. A SHARED INTERFACE ADAPTING 
TO RHYTHMICAL RELATIONSHIPS 
Firstly, the sound systems A and B were based on the principles 
of Banda Linda horn orchestras in two different ways. In sound 
system A, each player could play a “phrase” of pitches that 
would form part of a melody. In sound system B, each player 
could only play one pitch per “phrase”, and therefore only 
contribute with one single note at a time.  Secondly, the designs 
were inspired by Pachet’s interactive music instrument called 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.  
NIME’12, May 21-23, 2012, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.  
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
”the Continuator”, where a single player takes turns playing 
with a keyboard. The keyboard listens to a player who plays 
notes and the keyboard responds after a while with a melody 
that consists of modified forms of the melodic material [9]. In 
sound system A and B “sonic rewards” happened based on a 
selection of characteristic rhythmical relationships found in the 
timing of turn activations and turn lengths in the players’ 
melody. We used the term sonic reward, because we believe d 
that rhythmical ”effects” would work as sonic reward system 
similar to a visual point system and encourage players to take 
turns in a varied rhythmical fashion. The two sound systems did 
not have any visual interface. Players were to play the pen 
tablets as music instruments and listen to the sonic result of 
their play. 
Five teams tried sound system A  (team 1 -5a) and six teams 
tried sound system B (team1-6b). Players participated in fifteen 
minute long experiment sessions. First each sound system was 
demonstrated to the player teams, after which the teams played 
together for five minutes (see figure 1). 
 
Figure 1. Diagram over experiment setup. Two pen tablets 
were connected to a laptop that recorded and stored all 
interaction data relevant to software events into data files 
[A]. A camera video filmed and stored documentation of 
two players’ collaboration into a video database [B]. A 
speaker placed behind each player played individual tone 
sounds and the background rhythm. 
A pen tablet was used as a ”music instrument” . This interface 
has previously been used as a music instrument in [12]. It 
turned out that this interface had a significant effect on the 
musical outcome. 
2.1 Using a three-step design process 
For the design of the tw o sound systems we used a three -step 
design process  (see table 1). In both systems players were 
sonically rewarded according to significant rhythmical 
relationships that they engaged in on the fly. It is importa nt to 
point out that there are many forms of “significant” rhythmical 
relationships and that we focu sed on only a few (see tables 2 -
4). Also, we point out that  the rewarding systems only had 
short-term memory of one or two bars (one or two cycles of the 
ground rhythm, corresponding to a time frame of roughly 2 
seconds). In both systems the pen tablet was divided into two 
rows of eight keys or pitch fields. The two rows of eight pitches 
belonged in the G-major scale and were one octave apart with 
the “high” pitches in the upper row and “low” pitches in the 
lower row. Each player  would have to  take turns by playing 
parts of a melody and play a sort of sonic “exquisite corpse”. 
Both sound systems understood a  melody part as one “ turn 
activation”: Something that happened  when a player touched 
the tablet with his/her pen. If a player tapped a se cond time 
with his/her pen, the player  would not get any sound until the 
other player had activated a tone. 
Table 1. Three step design process 
Design of sonic expression – the individual electronic 
music instruments. 
Design of an analysis system that listened to the turn taking 
rhythm of two players. 
Design of a sonic reward system that changed a ground 
rhythm and accompanied the ground rhythm with drum 
thrills.  
 
Sound systems A and B differed in t he following way: If a 
player in sound system A touched the tablet and moved the pen 
across the tablet, the player could play several pitches within 
the same turn activation. In sound system B pen movement did 
not cause any pitch changes. Each player only had one pitch 
available per turn activation, so the player would have to lift the 
pen and put it in a new pitch field in order to activate a new 
pitch.  
The two sound systems produced a rhythmical accompaniment 
to the melody that two players made. This rhy thmical 
accompaniment consisted of a ”ground rhythm” that repeated 
itself every bar. In addition to the ground rhythm short drum 
thrills and melody snippets were added. System A and B shared 
part of the turn taking rhythm interpretation algorithms . The 
following diagram (see table 2) displays the mappings between 
turn taking  interpretation algorithms and the ground rhythm 
modifications. Every time players performed one of the 
following co-actions, the ground rhythm was immediately 
modified.  
Table 2. How player action influenced the ground rhythm. 
Cause Effect 
a) activating tones at the 
same time (tapping) 
mirror the next part (2/4 
beats) of the ground rhythm 
and a drum thrill 
b) ending tone at the same 
time (lifting pen) 
repeat the next part (2/4 
beats) of the ground rhythm 
and a drum thrill 
c) short* break between turn 
activations  (*up to 300 ms) 
add a beat after ’now’ 
- use last heard drum sound 
d) activating tones in time 
with the 4/4 pulse beat 
offset the next part (2/4 
beats) of the ground rhythm 
e) more than 4 pitch shifts 
per bar (rhythm cycle) 
delete next beat after ’now’ 
- this caused a break 
f) if the time between turn 
activations has been regular 
over the last three tones 
increase or decrease the pace 
of the ground rhythm 
between 90 to 140 beats per 
minute. 
 
System A and B differed in the way they analyzed the turn 
activation rhythm of the two players: Sound system A used 
fuzzy logic algorithms to look for temporal tendencies in turn 
activations and turn lengths. If s elected tendencies were 
detected they activated different drum thrills or ”effects”, as the 
players liked to call them (see table 3). They reacted upon turn 
activations within the last one -two bars of the accompanying 
ground rhythm. Sound system B used a library of rhythmical 
patterns to compare to the rhythm of the players’ turn 
activations (see table 4). When players activated tones in a 
rhythm that matched one of the rhythm patterns in the library, 
they would activate a corresponding drum thrill or a short 
melody snippet. The library contained simple rhythmical 
patterns where most beats where positioned on the main 4/4 
rhythm beats.  
Table 3. How player action influenced the ground rhythm. 
Cause Effect 
a) activating tones at the 
same time (tapping) 
mirror the next part (2/4 
beats) of the ground rhythm 
and a drum thrill 
b) ending tone at the same 
time (lifting pen) 
repeat the next part (2/4 
beats) of the ground rhythm 
and a drum thrill 
c) short* break between turn 
activations  (*up to 300 ms) 
add a beat after ’now’ 
- use last heard drum sound 
d) activating tones in time 
with the 4/4 pulse beat 
offset the next part (2/4 
beats) of the ground rhythm 
e) more than 4 pitch shifts 
per bar (rhythm cycle) 
delete next beat after ’now’ 
- this caused a break 
f) if the time between turn 
activations has been regular 
over the last three tones 
increase or decrease the pace 
of the ground rhythm 
between 90 to 140 beats per 
minute. 
 
Table 4. Sound system A. The fuzzy logic algorithm that 
found temporal tendencies in turn activations among 
players. 
Analysis principle Current implementation 
a) is there a majority of 
short tones? (every bar)  
play thrill a if more than 
75% of all tones within last 
bar were short. 
b) are pause and tone 
durations of similar lengths? 
(every bar)  
Play thrill b if one tone and 
the following pause were of 
similar length*.  
c) do players overlap each 
other? (ever bar) 
play thrill c if players 
overlap each other more than 
once. 
d) amount of short breaks 
(every 2nd bar) 
play thrills d1 and d2, if the 
amount of short breaks were 
>11<15 and >16 
respectively. 
e) similarity (in percentage) 
of rhythmical turn activation 
between last two bars. 
play thrill e if the similarity 
is more than 90 %. 
f) majority of long tones 
(every 2nd bar) 
If four long* tones are 
registered, play thrill f 
g) short tone, long tone 
pattern (every 2nd bar) 
play thrill g if a short* and a 
long* tone followed each 
other more than once. 
h) short pause, long pause 
pattern (every 2nd bar) 
play thrill h if a short* and a 
long* pause followed each 
other more than once. 
* Note: We used three tone and pause length thresholds: 
 “short” = 1-2/16, “medium” = 3-8/16, “long” = 9-16/16 
 
Table 5. Sound system B. Two examples of rhythm patterns 
from the library. 
1 & 2 & 3 & 4 & 
X  X  X    
 
1 & 2 & 3 & 4 & 
X    X X X  
 
3. INTERACTION DATA RESULTS 
To sum up, the two sound systems were designed to challenge 
players to take turns making a melody . The rhythm of their 
turns would modify a background rhythm and drum thrills and 
melody snippets  would be added to the ground rhythm . 
Through visual inspection of graphs that showed time between 
turn activations we noticed the following: a) periods in which 
player teams engaged in “rapid turn taking” that changed the 
background rhythm a nd b) temporal changes  in turn taking: 
which kinds of rhythmical effects were activated in the 
background rhythm. 
3.1 Periods of Rapid Turn Taking 
If players were to affect the background rhythm, they would 
have to take turns within the last two bars of the ba ckground 
rhythm. Roughly speaking, players had to take turns within two 
seconds. Interaction data of turn lengths show that only in small 
sections did player teams manage to take turns rapidly and get 
sonic rewards. In sound system A most teams had brief sessions 
of rapid turn taking throughout their play sessions. Here one of 
the players would introduce a short phrase, but this did not 
make the other player engage in rapid turn taking. This 
indicates that player teams were not able to engage in the kind 
of rapid turn taking that would modify the ground rhythm . In 
sound system B the rapid turn taking sessions were a bit longer, 
compared to system A, yet not long enough that rapid turn 
taking could be defined as the main play style. However, in 3  
out of 6 system B play sessions the players’ turns were all 
around 2 seconds – at the limit of what we defined as “rapid 
turn taking”. 
3.2 Temporal Changes in Turn Taking 
In sound system A, players had more irregular play and long 
breaks between turn act ivations. This could indicate that 
players tried to vary their rhythm and obtain different 
rhythmical effects.  In sound system B player teams were 
continuously active: fewer and smaller breaks than in sound 
system A. In the videos player teams seemed to be less aware 
that the rhythm of activated tones affected the background 
rhythm. 
4. VIDEO ANALYSIS 
This section describes how a player team activated tones 
according to the background rhythm when using the two sound 
systems. 
4.1 Notes about the Drawing Interface 
The fact that players used a pen tablet interface influenced their 
play: The drawing -like interface encouraged players to make 
continuous lines of melodies, instead of tapping rhythms. In 
sound system A a turn would often stretch across several cycles 
of the rhythm. The fact  that players could play phrases of 
melodies based on pitch changes (without lifting their pens 
from the tablet) made it possible to play an entire melody 
within one turn activation. It was clear that each player felt that 
s/he only had “used their turn” when they had played an entire 
melody phrase (see appendix, video1) . Players made a rhythm 
based on pitch changes and not pen lifts (see appendix,  video 
2). Because players made phrases that contained multiple 
pitches, they did not explore different turn taking rhythms, and 
they did not learn which kinds of turn taking rhythms  caused 
which ”effects”. To some players it seemed like the 
accompanying rhythm was too much of a ”background” 
component. Players mostly seemed to notice long drum thrills, 
not so much the changes that were made to the ground rhythm 
itself. When drum thrills appeared, some players would turn 
their heads and look at the computer screen. The screen did not 
give any indication of points, but in team 2a players interpreted 
the screen so th at there , to them , would be an indication of 
points when they heard a drum thrill (see appendix, video 3). 
While trying sound system A, players ”drew” or ”wrote” 
melodies by spelling words and drawing shapes. In team 2a  
players used drawing rhythms as a me thod to get drum thrills: 
They made sure that they timed their drawings of lines 
correctly (see appendix,  video 4).  In sound system B the 
possibility of changing pitch while moving the pen  did not 
exist. It was clear on the videos that players were frustra ted 
with only having one pitch per turn. They kept drawing with 
their pens across the tablet to change pitch (see appendix, video 
5). System B seemed to be counter -intuitive to the use of a 
drawing board where a lot can be accomplished in one stroke. 
In team 4b players tried different tone combinations by playing 
simultaneously in different fields (see appendix, video 6). 
4.2 When Rapid Turn Taking Happened 
As seen in interaction data , team 5b managed to have a few 
sessions with rapid turn taking . The first time th e player team 
engaged in rapid turn taking, they were encouraged by the 
experiment instructor to “play fast after each other”. The way 
they played was a bit mechanical: Each player activated tones 
at the same pace. This caused a lot of drum thrills to happen, 
and both team members listened carefully. However, at the end 
of the play session, it did not seem clear to them which turn 
taking rhythms caused which “effects” to happen (see 
appendix, video 7). The second time team 5b engaged in rapid 
turn taking, one of the team members suggested that they would 
play “fast” again. This required concentration and planning: 
The player who suggested to play fast was placed so that he 
faced the other player, and he verbally suggested which kind of 
rhythm they should pla y. He also instructed the other player to 
lift his pen, so that he did not make a tone that was too long. 
5. DISCUSSION 
In summary a team of players were challenged to continue each 
other’s melody by taking turns adding tones to the melody. The 
rhythm of turn activations would modify a background rhythm 
and/or different drum thrills  and melody snippets  were added. 
In both sound systems each player’s turn lasted about 2 seconds 
or more. This shows that it was difficult for players to negotiate 
a rhythm of turns tone by tone amongst each other. In sound 
system A the rhythm of pitch changes overwrote the rhythm of 
turn activations. Most player teams did not change the rhythm 
of the turn activations in order to modify the background 
rhythm. When teams were aware that they changed the 
background rhythm they thought that their changes were caused 
by what/how they drew, and not by the rhythm of their pen 
taps. The idea of taking turns making a rhythm in an 
interleaved manner was too challenging for players who were 
non-musicians. Team 5, who managed to modify the 
background rhythm, had to plan co -play to a very high degree.  
For future studies we propose to design and use of  “listening 
components” that register play tendencies in different types of 
shared electronic music instruments. Based on real-time results 
from such listening components, shared music instruments that 
adapt to typical play tendencies found in “novice play ” can be 
developed. 
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Our thanks to students and music teachers in two ground 
schools in Aalborg, Denmark for your participation and ideas. 
7. REFERENCES 
[1] Arom, S. African Polyphony and Polyrhythm – Musical 
Structure and Methodology. Published in French by 
SELAF. Translated by Thom, M, Tuckett B. and Boyd, R, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, UK, 1991. 
[2] Blaine T. and Forlines, C. JAM-O-WORLD: Evolution of 
the Jam-O-Drum Multi-player Musical Controller into the 
Jam-O-Whirl Gaming Interface. In Proceedings of New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME’02) (Dublin, 
Ireland, May 24-26, 2002). ACM Press 2002, 1-6. 
[3] Blaine, T. and Fels, S. Contexts of Collaborative Musical 
Experiences’. In Proceedings of New Interfaces of Musical 
Expression (NIME’03) (Montreal, Canada, May 22-24  
2003). ACM Press 2003, 129-134. 
[4] Cappelen, B. and Andersson, A.P. Expanding the Role of 
the Instrument. In Proceedings of New Interfaces for 
Musical Exploration (NIME’11) (Oslo, Norway, May 30- 
June1, 2011). ACM Press 2011, 511-514. 
[5] Jordà, S., Geiger, G., Alonso, M., Kaltenbrunner, M. The 
reacTable: Exploring the Synergy between Live Music 
Performance and Tabletop Tangible Interfaces. In 
Proceedings of Tangible Embedded and Embodied 
Interaction (TEI’07) (Baton Rouge, Louisiana, USA, 
February 15-17, 2007) ACM Press, 2007, 139-146. 
[6] Leman, M. Embodied Music Cognition and Mediation 
Technology. MIT Press. Massechussets Institute of 
Technology, 2008.  
[7] Nishibori, Y. Iwai, T. Tenori-On. In Proceedings of New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME’06) (Paris, 
France, June 4-8, 2006). ACM Press, 2006, 172-175. 
[8] Pachet, F. On the Design of a Musical Flow Machine. In A 
Learning Zone of One’s Own, Tokoro and Steels Eds, IOS 
Press, 2004.  
[9] Swift, B., Gardner, H., Riddell, A. Engagement Networks 
in Social Music-making. In proceedings of OZCHI 2010 
(OZCHI’10) (Brisbane, Australia, November 22-26, 
2010), 104-111. 
[10] Weinberg, G., The Beatbug – Evolution of a Musical 
Controller. Francis & Tailor, Routledge, Digital Creativity 
19:1 (Mar. 2008), 3-18. 
[11] Weinberg, G. Interconnected Musical Networks: Toward a 
Theoretical Framework. Computer Music Journal, vol. 29, 
No. 2 (Jun. 2005), 23-29. 
[12] Zbyszyński, M. et al. Ten Years of Tablet Musical 
Interfaces at CNMAT. In Proceedings of New Interfaces 
of Musical Expression (NIME’07) (New York, New York, 
USA, June 6-10). ACM Press, 2007, 100-105. 
8. Appendix 
Please use the password amsh2012jan in order to see the 
following videos:                                                    
Video 1: http://vimeo.com/32434250                                                                                                   
Video 2: http://vimeo.com/32433791                                                                                                     
Video 3: http://vimeo.com/32436711                                                                                                                                               
Video 4: http://vimeo.com/32437870                                                                                                                                                   
Video 5: http://vimeo.com/32438459                                                                                                                                                   
Video 6: http://vimeo.com/32439358 
Video 7: http://vimeo.com/36071240