Examining the Spectator Experience
A. Cavan Fyans, Michael Gurevich, Paul Stapleton
Sonic Arts Research Centre
Queen’s University Belfast
BT7 1NN, UK
{afyans01, m.gurevich, p.stapleton}@qub.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
Drawing on a model of spectator understanding of error in
performance in the literature, we document a qualitative
experiment that explores the relationships between domain
knowledge, mental models, intention and error recognition
by spectators of performances with electronic instruments.
Participants saw two performances with contrasting instru-
ments, with controls on their mental model and understand-
ing of intention. Based on data from a subsequent struc-
tured interview, we identify themes in participants’ judge-
ments and understanding of performance and explanations
of their spectator experience. These reveal both elements
of similarity and diﬀerence between the two performances,
instruments and between domain knowledge groups. From
these, we suggest and discuss implications for the design of
novel performative interactions with technology.
Keywords
Spectator, error, mental model, intention, qualitative
1. INTRODUCTION
This paper presents a qualitative study that explores the
relationship between elements of a model of spectator un-
derstanding of error in performance [3]. This model was
developed as a part of a larger project studying the role
of the spectator in the greater ecology of performance with
electronic instruments. The model details how a specta-
tor forms an understanding of error between a performer
and an interactive electronic system during performative
interactions. The model was further discussed in the spe-
ciﬁc context of NIME [4], in relationship to central issues
of the ﬁeld such as transparency, mapping and skill. It
was proposed that rather than transparency, a more useful
method for examining the understanding of interaction is
to investigate the spectator’s mental model. Furthermore,
the spectator’s mental model, understanding of intention
and understanding of error in performance were presented
as primary factors in assessments of skill and success [4].
In the following sections a qualitative experiment protocol
is detailed, results are presented and conclusions are drawn
from the data. There were two primary hypotheses in the
experiment: 1) Participants with a more accurate mental
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME2010, 15-18th June 2010,Sydney, Australia
Copyright 2010, Copyright remains with the author(s).
model of the performative interaction will have a more accu-
rate understanding of error in performance. 2) Participants
with a more accurate understanding of the performer’s in-
tention will display a more accurate understanding of error
in performance.
2. METHOD
2.1 Participants
Twenty-seven participants were selected: 23 males and 4
females with an age range of 19-35 years. Because the ex-
periment used a between-subjects design, participants were
chosen with a wide range of knowledge in areas we expected
would aﬀect their understanding of interaction and perfor-
mance. This ensured that the eﬀects of participants’ do-
main knowledge could be tested alongside the other ele-
ments of the model. We considered three areas that con-
stitute domain knowledge:Acoustic music and perfor-
mance (non-instrumental musical training, acoustic instru-
ments played, length of time played and expertise, non-
musical performance training, attendance of live acoustic
music),electronic/computer music and electronic in-
struments (training in computer music and electronic in-
struments, electronic instruments played, length of time
played and expertise, knowledge of electronic instruments,
attendance of live electronic music) andinteractive elec-
tronic devices, engineering, design and HCI(train-
ing in engineering and design, expertise in interactive de-
vices, use of interactive devices, facility with new interactive
electronic devices). Participants’ experience ranged from
no knowledge in any form of music or electronic devices
through undergraduate music students to PhD researchers
in interaction design and new electronic instruments.
An online questionnaire was developed to assess each po-
tential participant’s levels of domain knowledge in these ar-
eas. The questionnaire primarily utilised clearly deﬁned
Guttman scales according to which participants self-assessed
their degrees of knowledge or experience. This quantitative
data was further supported by questions requiring the par-
ticipants to qualify their previous answers. To assess each
participant’s level of domain knowledge, all of the quan-
tiﬁable data points in each of the three knowledge areas
were summed, yielding three scores per participant. These
scores ranged from 4 to 24. Each participant’s overall do-
main knowledge score was calculated as a weighted average
of these three scores, with the score for electronic/computer
music and electronic instruments double-weighted, as it was
deemed to be the central knowledge area. Participants do-
main knowledge scores were between 5 and 32. Participants
were then divided into three equal groups of equal size; the
nine lowest scores in one, the nine highest in another and
the remaining nine in the third. These were low, high and
medium domain knowledge groups respectively.
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
451
Figure 1: The Tilt-Synth
2.2 Controls
The experiment was centered around two video perfor-
mances. Video 1, a solo Theremin performance of a 2
minute composition in Rondo form, featured three repeti-
tions of a theme interspersed with two contrasting impro-
visations. This was performed by a musician with training
and experience in guitar, electric bass and percussion. The
performer had no previous experience with the Theremin.
Performing with the instrument for the ﬁrst time, he recorded
the video performance after approximately thirty minutes of
practice. This performance’s primary purpose was to isolate
the eﬀects of the participants’ understanding of intention.
The Theremin was selected in order to ensure all partici-
pants had a highly accurate mental model of the performa-
tive interaction. The Theremin would be well known to par-
ticipants with higher levels of domain knowledge. It is also
an instrument in which the translation of performer-gesture
to sound is self-evident, enabling participants who had no
mental model of the Theremin to quickly form an accurate
mental model. To ensure all participants’ mental models
were accurate, the performer prefaced the performance with
a short demonstration of the Theremin, explaining the in-
teraction and demonstrating the ranges and limits of the
controls. In order to control participants’ understanding
of intention, the performer also recorded two introductions
that would also precede the performance: One explaining
the structure of the piece he was about to perform and the
second incorrectly explaining the structure of piece he was
about to perform.
Video 2 was primarily used to isolate the eﬀects of the
accuracy of the participants’ mental model of the perfor-
mative interaction. To ensure that no one had pre-existing
knowledge of the instrument, a novel electronic instrument,
the Tilt-Synth (Figure 1), was developed especially for the
experiment. The instrument was designed to combine large,
obvious, physical gestures with ﬁne-grained controls. Sim-
ilarly, it utilised both simple one-to-one gesture-to-sound
translations and mode switching to more complex ones. The
Tilt-Synth was additionally designed such that its operation
occupies the majority of the performer’s attention. This
promoted the communication of intentionality in all of the
performer’s manual actions and minimised the ambiguity of
address [2]. The Tilt-Synth is a standalone unit consisting
of a small (25cm long x 7cm dia) cylindrical tube with tac-
tile discrete controls located near the ends of the unit, a two
axis accelerometer in the centre and the loudspeaker inside
one end. The sensors are monitored by an Arduino Nano 1
micro-controller, which is also responsible for synthesis of
two square wave tones. The discrete excitation gesture is
controlled with a switch operated by one hand placed on one
end of the tube and continuous parametric modiﬁcation ges-
tures with the other. Two sliders near the excitation end of
the instrument continuously control amplitude modulation.
Two additional discrete, tactile switches located near the
speaker end of the instrument toggle the synthesis mode be-
tween distinct pitches and pseudo-noise generation. In pitch
1Arduino Nano micro-controller - http://www.arduino.cc
mode, the pitch of each oscillator is controlled by the tilt an-
gle of the instrument on two axes providing gestural spatial
control. In noise mode, the same gestures control the noise
bandwidths. The Tilt-Synth performer was selected due to
experience performing with similar electronic instruments.
The performer has a PhD in composition with experience
playing guitar, cello, piano and sensor-based electronic mu-
sic systems. He had roughly two hours of practice with the
Tilt-Synth before the performance was recorded.
Similar to Video 1, the performance consisted of a 2-
minute composition in Rondo form with three repetitions of
a theme separated by two contrasting improvisations. Al-
though the performances in both videos followed the same
general form, the content of the themes and character of
the improvisations were quite diﬀerent (only two partici-
pants commented on any perceived similarity between the
compositions). The performer in Video 2 also recorded two
introductions to the performance. One accurately demon-
strated the Tilt-Synth’s ranges of controls, gesture-to-sound
mappings and technical design. The second explained the
instrument incorrectly. These two prefaces to the perfor-
mance were used to control the accuracy of participants’
mental models.
Participants were divided into three groups of 9 partici-
pants. Each consisting of 3 low, 3 mid & 3 high domain
knowledge scores. Groups were allocated videos as fol-
lows: Group A:Theremin demonstration, Theremin per-
formance, Tilt-Synth performance. Group B: Theremin
demonstration, correct Theremin piece explanation, There-
min performance, correct Tilt-Synth demonstration, Tilt-
Synth Performance. Group C: Theremin demonstration,
incorrect Theremin piece explanation, Theremin performance,
incorrect Tilt-Synth demonstration, Tilt-Synth Performance.
2.3 Data collection & Analysis
Prior to the experiment, participants were given no in-
formation on the focus of the study or the direction of
the structured interviews. This ensured that attention and
perception were not aﬀected during the experiment. Each
participant was presented with the video introductions and
performances speciﬁc to their group and only shown each
video once. In the subsequent structured interview, the
experimenter directed discussions around the following key
points in relation to both performances, using a series of
prepared questions and directed discussions: Emotional re-
sponse, performer skill, expectation, mental models of the
performative interactions, understanding of the performer’s
intentions, understanding of the result, understanding of
error in performance, domain knowledge.
Each interview was videotaped for further analysis. Tran-
scripts were prepared, annotated and indexed to the video
using Transana.2 Participants’ accuracy of mental model
and understanding of intention were coded on a scale be-
tween 0 (low) and 5 (high). Scores were assigned indepen-
dently by the experimenters based on qualitative assess-
ments of the participants’ responses to speciﬁc questions
and spontaneous comments during the interview. The inde-
pendent scores agreed in roughly 75% of cases. The discrep-
ancies were resolved through discussion among the study
authors and further analysis of the transcripts.
3. OBSERV ATIONS
Figure 2shows the mean accuracy scores of each group’s
mental models of the two instruments and also their under-
standing of the performers intention for both performances.
The mean values match our expectations from the video in-
2Transana - http://www.transana.org/
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
452
Figure 2: Accuracy of Mental Model & Intention
troductions used to control participants’ mental models and
understanding of intention. However, with the exception of
the Theremin mental models, the 95% conﬁdence intervals
for these results between groups A, B and C overlapped. For
the majority of cases this is due to individual data points
outlying in the relatively small sample of 9 participants.
3.1 Error
Only two participants identiﬁed errors in the Tilt-Synth
performance, both of which were also noted as errors by
the performer. Of the two, one described the error both in
terms of the musical context and the physical actions they
understood to be mapped to the sonic outcome:“... pitch
that was oﬀ at the end. I think it [the Tilt-Synth] was twisted
around this way too much.”The other described it in terms
of the performer’s musical intentions, but was unsure if it
was an error,“If the [theme] he was using as the reoccurring
motif was his intentions...it felt like that fell oﬀ in the end
and became less important. It’s not like it wasn’t there, it
just seemed to wander more towards the end.”
A much larger number of participants (n=9) were able
to correctly identify one or more errors in the Theremin
performance. Of these, seven highlighted a moment where
the performer’s hand accidentally struck the pitch antenna.
Other errors tended to be described in musical terms; failure
to reproduce pitch and rhythmic structures in repeated pas-
sages. Among these, one indicated that physical cues were
as important in revealing errors as musical ones:“There
may have been a few times he went back and slightly missed
the pitch and you can see him go back and kind of correct
it.”In fact, physical cues were identiﬁed as important by
ﬁve of the participants who didn’t identify errors in either
performance. According to one,“you couldn’t really tell
by his facial expressions.” Another thought that the per-
former may have made errors, but was able to “cover it
up.” Another participant initially thought he had seen an
error, based on physical cues, but was subsequently unable
to locate it even after reviewing the video: “I do think there
was [an error], but I can’t remember what it was. At one
point something happened that he was taken aback by or it
didn’t seem to ﬁt, but I can’t remember what it was.”
The diﬀerence in overall averages of mental model accu-
racy and of understanding of intention between the Theremin
and the Tilt-Synth suggests an explanation for the discrep-
ancy in the ability of spectators to identify errors between
the two performances.Figure 2 shows that mean mental
model score for the Theremin performance was 4.3, indi-
cating that overall, participants had a much stronger un-
derstanding of how the instrument worked, than the Tilt-
Synth, for which the mean score was just 1.6.Figure 3in-
Figure 3: Accuracy Scores Per Group
dicates that mental models were uniformly accurate across
groups for the Theremin; the variance among all partici-
pants was only 0.38. The mental models for the Tilt-Synth
had higher variance (1.37), this was expected according to
the experiment design. There were so few errors identiﬁed
with respect to the Tilt-Synth that correlations to mental
model accuracy wouldn’t be especially meaningful. How-
ever, we can say that on the whole, the inability to identify
errors absent an accurate mental model was signiﬁcant. As
with the mental model, the mean score for understanding of
intention was higher for the Theremin (1.8), relative to the
Tilt-Synth (0.9). These data suggest that an accurate un-
derstanding of intention also facilitates the ability to iden-
tify errors. Of the participants who did identify errors in the
Theremin performance, 7 of 9 were in the highest domain
knowledge group, indicating that domain knowledge is also
an important factor in understanding of error. Although
the number of errors identiﬁed by participants was lower
than expected, this data largely conﬁrms our hypotheses as
to the inﬂuence of domain knowledge, mental model and
understanding of intention on error understanding.
The data was re-examined for indications of why there
was widespread inability to identify errors. Four impor-
tant themes emerged. The ﬁrst relates speciﬁcally to the
previous observation about understanding of intention. For
the Tilt-Synth performance, 9 participants discussed their
non-identiﬁcation of error in terms of intention or expecta-
tion. Four of these mentioned a lack of understanding of
what the performer was trying to do, or of what to expect
from the performance. One noted, “I didn’t think there were
many mistakes. It’s hard to tell what’s intentional and what
isn’t.” Interestingly, this participant went on to say that in
this circumstance, he relied on gestural cues: “Looking at
the body language there wasn’t anything like ‘oh I goofed.’”
This participant also had one of the lowest scores for mental
model accuracy for this instrument.
Five other participants thought there were no errors be-
cause the performer had achieved his intentions, however
most also seemed to rely on gestural cues to formulate
this assessment. One characteristic comment was, “There
was no sign at all that he made a mistake and he looked
like he did what he set out to do.”Several participants
described a sense of conﬁdence that arose from the per-
former’s perceived expertise, which was also communicated
physically. After ﬁnding no errors, one of these participants
said,“There was something about his quality of playing that
he knew what the instrument did. Even though I don’t un-
derstand fully what the instrument was doing, I could see
his control of the instrument was precise, he wasn’t like ‘oh
what does this do?’ You can see that in the person’s body
when they don’t really know what to do. I could see he knew
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
453
what to do with it. There was a physical conﬁdence.”
Several participants (Theremin n=4; Tilt-Synth n=6) sug-
gested that the reason they could not recognise errors in per-
formance was because it was impossible for the performer to
make an error. This was due to a perceived improvisatory
nature of the performance, in spite of its well-deﬁned form.
One commented on a perceived lack of predeﬁned structure
in the Theremin performance:“When you talk about impro-
vised performance there’s no mistakes, only good decisions
and bad decisions.”Another participant said, “No, I don’t
think it was a composed piece of music, I think they were
making it up as they went along, so it’s hard to make mis-
takes.” These notions focused both on a lack of discernible
structure but also assumptions of ‘these instruments’ being
speciﬁcally designed for improvisation. Although the per-
ceived improvisatory nature of the performance was partly
accurate, the performer clearly stated he had made mistakes
during both the composed theme and the improvisation.
Similarly, during discussions of error in the Tilt-Synth
performance, participants explained their inability to ﬁnd
errors due to a perceived inability for the performer to make
errors. Participants explained this as a result of the per-
ceived indeterminate nature of the Tilt-Synth. Many par-
ticipants (n=6) thought that the instrument had inbuilt
randomness or that it may suddenly and drastically change
the sound being produced. They perceived that the per-
former therefore could not make a mistake, as sonic ‘errors’
were part of the instrument. One noted, “He is playing a lot
with the randomness of it, within that randomness it’s not
really right or wrong, its just things happening. Some things
happened, which could be seen as mistakes, but are part of
the instrument.” Another said, “I assume it’s more impro-
visatory, that it’s not so much a mistake, it’s kind of open
to the fact that the soundscape could change drastically.”
4. EV ALUATION OF METHODOLOGY
The methods used to control the participants’ under-
standing of the performer’s intention produced mixed re-
sults. Figure 2shows the control of the participants’ men-
tal model of the Theremin was accurate. However, our
ability to control accuracy of participants’ understanding
of intention was limited. Participants in Group B would
have ideally demonstrated a more accurate understanding
of intention given the performer’s explanation of the piece.
However, participants’ accuracy scores in Group B were dis-
tributed evenly from 1 to 5. Likewise, participants in Group
C were expected to have lower scores in accuracy of under-
standing of intention, as they were given an incorrect ex-
planation of the piece. Group C did show mostly low scores
but the diﬀerence from Group B was not signiﬁcant.
We suggest that the limited ability to control the partici-
pants’ understanding of intention is related to assumptions
of electronic music and improvisation. Seventeen partici-
pants perceived the Tilt-Synth performance to be entirely
improvised, in spite of the composition containing a clear
repeated theme. The basis for the method of controlling
participant’s understanding of intention was derived from
literature on perception of action and intention. It is ac-
cepted that the understanding of speciﬁc action sequences
is driven by the understanding of greater structures of inten-
tion [1]. In explaining the intentions behind the Theremin
performance in musical terms, participants without musical
domain knowledge were unable to relate the greater struc-
ture to sequences of intentional actions, one stated,“He
was doing two improvisations, I assume what he was calling
improvisations were like a type of rhythm or something he
was doing.”
5. IMPLICATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The results indicate that spectators who are unable to
form an accurate understanding of a performative interac-
tion rely on facial expression and gestural information in or-
der to make judgements of performance errors. The results
also show a strong trend towards assumed connections be-
tween electronic instruments, improvised performance and
‘error-free’ instruments, even displayed by participants with
higher levels of domain knowledge. We suggest that the in-
terface or instrument with which the performer is interact-
ing could make errors in performance more explicit in order
to improve spectator’s understanding. However, this infor-
mation should be implicit within the system [7], in much
the same manner that facial and bodily gestures are an im-
plicit feature of performance. This presents a challenge in
designing systems that ‘reveal’ error but without explicitly
directing spectators’ attention toward it.
In this study, we gathered data on emotional responses to
the performances. From them, one important observation
has emerged that relates strongly to the data presented in
this paper. Several participants (Theremin n=3; Tilt-Synth
n=4) voluntarily highlighted the fact that they enjoyed the
performances more because the performer explained the in-
strument ﬁrst. They commented that it helped them un-
derstand the interaction and performance. This can be di-
rectly related to research showing that positively valenced
emotional responses result from fulﬁlment of correct expec-
tations [6]. As it is not always viable to explain a novel
performance system to a spectator in advance, this suggests
that the degree to which a spectator gains an understanding
of new interactions needs to be addressed through interac-
tion design. We anecdotally associate this with an observed
practice in live coding, where performers provide a ‘running
commentary’ of their actions in typed comments in order to
facilitate the understanding of spectators not familiar with
the programming language. However with physical inter-
actions, we do not always have the luxury of making this
communication explicit. We therefore need to identify ways
of facilitating similar understanding through the substance
of the interaction, which includes the design of an instru-
ment, composition and performance. This further relates
to Gurevich, Stapleton and Bennett’s [5] emphasis on dis-
cernment of structure in new interactions.
6. REFERENCES
[1] D. A. Baldwin and J. A. Baird. Discerning intentions
in dynamic human action. Trends Cogn. Sci.,
5(4):171–178, 2001.
[2] V. Bellotti, M. Back, and W. K. Edwards. Making
sense of sensing systems: ﬁve questions for designers
and researchers. In Proc. CHI, pages 415–422, 2002.
[3] A. C. Fyans, M. Gurevich, and P. Stapleton. Spectator
understanding of error in performance. In CHI
Extended Abstracts, 2009.
[4] A. C. Fyans, M. Gurevich, and P. Stapleton. Where
did it all go wrong? A model of error from the
spectator’s perspective. InProc. of the Conf. on New
Instruments for Musical Expression (NIME), 2009.
[5] M. Gurevich, P. Stapleton, and P. Bennett. Designing
for style in new musical interactions. In Proc. of the
Conf. on New Instruments for Musical Expression
(NIME), 2008.
[6] D. Huron. Sweet Anticipation: Music and the
Psychology of Expectation. The MIT Press, 2006.
[7] A. Schmidt. Implicit human computer interaction
through context. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing,
4(2):191–199, 2000.
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
454