The Slide-A-Phone: A Tactile Accessible Musical 
Instrument 
 
 
Andrew McMillan 
Te Whare o ngā Pūkōrero Pūoro 
Waipapa Taumata Rau 
Aotearoa (New Zealand) 
drewmcm@blackbridge.co.nz 
 
Fabio Morreale 
Te Whare o ngā Pūkōrero Pūoro 
Waipapa Taumata Rau 
Aotearoa (New Zealand) 
f.morreale@auckland.ac.nz 
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper details the design and development of the Slide -A-
Phone, an Accessible Musical Instrument (AMI). The first 
author's spinal cord injury in 2004 hindered their ability to play 
traditional instruments, which motivated the development of the 
Slide-A-Phone. The Slide -A-Phone utilises tactile interfaces 
coupled with analogue and digital sensors to replicate the 
playability and expressive control of a saxophone, the instrument 
the first author used to play before the incident. The design 
process incorporated phenomenological perspectives and a blend 
of design methodologies, with the specific goal of fostering a 
robust musician-instrument relationship. We report insights into 
how personal experiences shape design and functionality , and 
the importance of accessible instruments in enabling creative 
practice and performance for individuals with limited 
functionality. We also describe the design and technical 
implementation of the Slide -A-Phone to evaluate the 
instrument's effectiveness and reflect on its potential to enhance 
musical engagement, social connections, cultural participation, 
and professional development. 
 
Author Keywords 
AMIs, Inclusive design, autobiographical design 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
In this paper , we report the first author’s lived experience as a 
disabled musician and the attempt to recuperate their lost 
relationship with a musical instrument. The recuperation started 
with a reflective process while revisiting recordings from 2002 
to 2004, captured during weekly studio sessions of improvised 
music with fellow musicians. These recordings document a 
period before a spinal cord injury (SCI) in 2004 resulted in 
paralysis from t he chest down, significantly impairing 
movement and motor fun ction. This loss severely limited my 1 
ability to play musical instruments as I once had, particularly 
affecting my hand movement and overall access to traditional 
instruments. In response to these challenges, I initially explored 
commercially available instruments and digital musical 
interfaces. While these explorations enabled some level of 
music-making and performance, they did not provide the same 
degree of creative freedom as previously experienced. This 
frustration catalysed the design of a bespoke Accessible Musical 
Instrument (AMI) with a tactile interface , driven by  a desire to 
regain the agency, control, speed, and accuracy I once had when 
playing the saxophone. 
The motivation to access better agency with an instrument  
led me to investigate how available technologies and resources 
 
1. The first-person singular is used throughout this article to refer 
to the first author’s design and creative practice associated 
with this project. This perspective aligns with 
could be leveraged to develop a custom instrument tailored to 
my physical capabilities. The design concept presented in this 
paper emerged from inquiries into how an instrument could 
foster a strong musician -instrument relationship  through 
emulating pre-disability experiences, ensuring both usability and 
long-term engagement. Establishing this relationship has been 
critical, as it directly influences the effectiveness and 
sustainability of an instrument in practice [14, 18, 20, 23]. 
 The resulting ADMI is the Slide-A-Phone, which combines the 
actions of a slide whistle or trombone with tactile interfaces that 
interact with analogue and digital sensors, outputting positional, 
touch, and breath pressure data in real time . Inspired by  my 
experience as a saxophon ist, I aimed to replicate the control of 
notes and tones through vertical movements, activating high and 
low tones. Due to my level of SCI, I cannot use tone holes or 
keypads, which require fine motor function.  
 To emulate , to some degree , the playing experience of the 
saxophone, the design aimed to incorporate  similar 
characteristics and functions . These characteristics include 
shortening and lengthening a tube for pitch, controlling 
articulation, dynamics and tonal texture with breath and 
embouchure, and changing register with an independent key or 
button. Previous experiences performing with a slide whistle 
informed the concept of using a slide action for shortening and 
lengthening a tube. This became the central element of the design 
concept.  
 This paper offer s the following contributions to NIME and 
AMI literature. First, by extending current knowledge  around 
forming a design concept  through understanding  musician-
instrument relationships from the phenomenological perspective 
of a disabled musician's lived experience  [9, 13, 18, 30] . We 
share insights into developing ways of constructing meaningful 
input from a musician's experience, which informed and shaped 
the design and functionality of the  object. Second, the 
introduction of a unique combination of methodologies into the 
design process adds to the  existing frameworks for AMI and 
ADMI design [6, 12, 16, 19, 28] . We illustrate  how the 
combination of design methodologies was integrated and 
coordinated throughout the development of the Slide -A-Phone. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In the next section, 
we review the related literature on AMI and provide an overview 
of the methodologies. Sections 3 and 4 report the design process 
of the Slide-A-Phone and its technical implementation. Then, we 
evaluate its effectiveness against the research question and 
reflect on our results against current knowledge in AMI. 
autoethnographically documenting the lived experience  
throughout the design process. 

2. ACCESSIBLE INSTRUMENTS 
Accessible Musical Instruments offer opportunities for people 
with limited range or functionality, and/or cognitive diversity to 
develop creative practice and perform music to a level that might 
otherwise not be possible. The Rhodes electric piano [5] and 
Roland Kirk’s adapted saxophones [27], previously discussed  
[19] illustrate the tradition of innovation and adaptation in AMI 
design. Recent developments have integrated digital components 
into AMI, creating a new category of Accessible Digital musical 
instruments, or ADMI [6, 7] . Notable examples include 
introducing bespoke elements such as an adapted rotary knob cap 
[13], the ‘Bishop Boom Box’ - a physically accessible drum 
machine [16], and ‘Strummi’,  a guitar -like  ADMI [10]. In 
recent years , exploration of integrating haptic components to 
provide musicians with tactile feedback has been aimed at 
enhancing and expanding digital interfaces. This approach seeks 
to foster a more intimate and reciprocal relationship between a 
musician and their instrument or tool [2, 15, 24] 
 Additionally, a ccess to musical instruments  requires 
meaningful participation in music-making through opportunities 
for collaboration and performance. Engaging in musical 
activities has been widely associated with enhanced well -being, 
fostering social connections, cultural engagement, and 
educational and professional development  [4, 25] . Expanding 
these opportunities through accessible instruments is essential 
for musicians seeking to develop their creative practices in 
community and professional settings, particularly across diverse 
disciplines. Organisations such as the One Hand Music 
Instruments Trust (OHMI)2, Drake Music 3, Open Up Music 4, 
and Maupura Music Studios 5 have made significant strides in 
addressing accessibility to instruments and opportunities for 
collaboration and performance. Despite the existence of 
resources provided by organi sations, accessing practical 
guidance and establishing connections remains a challenge for 
many individuals and their support networks [29]. Combinations 
of innovative design approaches and community -driven 
initiatives are crucial to overcoming these barriers and fostering 
inclusivity in musical participation. 
3. METHODOLOGY 
I conceived , designed, and developed the Slide-A-Phone 
predominantly using an auto-ethnographic process and 
autobiographic design methods [21, 22]. However, because of 
my disability, I needed assistance to undertake tasks that were 
impossible for me to complete. I specifically needed help with 
construction, soldering and  the physical set-up of components 
and the prototype throughout testing and creative practice . 
Although there has been limited conceptual and design input 
from the assistant, we have had discussions where technical or 
construction issues have arisen. This collaborative approach is a 
common design practice in Accessible Musical Instrument 
(AMI) and Adaptive Digital Musical Instrument ( ADMI) 
development, often called a participatory design framework [16, 
26]. The ecologies that can be associated with human interaction 
with designing and evaluating ADMI throughout participatory 
methods are discussed by Lucas et al.,  [12, 13]. 
 Drawing from my experiences as a musician before and after 
being disabled, I incorporated reflective practice, action research 
[17], and the theatre of practice model [1] to explore design 
concepts and develop the prototype based on constructive critical 
feedback on performance and progress. The theatre of practice is 
a model for understanding experiential learning and context 
 
2 https://www.ohmi.org.uk/instruments.html  
3 https://www.drakemusic.org/   
4 https://www.openupmusic.org/  
through reflection in the creative process. The models’ visual 
reference represents how creativity evolves in a theatre where 
people, environments, materials, and tools interact. It shows how 
experiences form development from the past to the present, and 
into future projects. Another way to view experiential learning 
in design as it progresses is to consider the instrument as a 
technological probe [8, 9, 11] . Through the iterative use of  the 
prototype, issues were addressed, improvements were made, and 
achievements were integrated into the design. 
 The initial concept and subsequent design were guided by data 
and analysis obtained through standard and extended 
Occupational Therapy (OT) methods. Standard OT methods can 
be beneficial when assessing how mobility and functionality 
might match goals, cultural settings, and technologies in home, 
recreational, and work environments [3]. By integrating 
information from standard OT  sessions with a qualified 
Occupational Therapist, with our extended/adapted OT methods, 
I was able to develop a better understanding of how my 
movement range and functionality could shape the design  
concept [19]. Augmenting, extending, or adapting OT methods 
allowed me to consider a range of materials, electronic analogue 
and digital  sensors and technologies that could interact as 
elements within the instruments' design and construction. This 
approach aligns with disability-led and partnered methods of 
design, specifically, ability-based design practice [28]. 
4. DESIGN PROCESS 
4.1 Analysis of recordings 
The design concept emerged through reflecting on my 
performance experiences and recordings pre- and post-disability. 
I analysed  three albums of  recordings (two recordings from 
weekly studio sessions, and one a live performance recording) 
from before my disability, using them to examine my technique, 
creativity, and proficiency on the saxophone . These 
performances, originally 20 to 40 minutes long, were edited into 
5 to 20 -minute segments for each album at the time  they were 
recorded. The recordings also prompted phenomenological 
reflections on my relationship with the instrument. Listening 
evoked memories of setting up the saxophone  - its tactile feel, 
the energy required to play, its responsiveness, a nd how I 
engaged and interacted  creatively with others. Journaling these 
reflections allowed me to compare recent experiences and post-
disability recordings of playing an adapted guitar, a laptop-based 
DMI, voice, percussion, and slide whistle. Both sets of 
recordings were captured in free improvisation creative  
collaboration settings. 
Using archival recordings for technical and comparative 
analysis, phenomenological  reflection, and autoethnographic 
enquiry assisted in identifying key technical aspects, expressive 
qualities, and values to integrate into the instrument’s design. 
4.2 Findings of the recordings analysis 
The analysis of the recordings revealed that pre-accident, I could 
express ideas and develop material using composed and 
improvised melodies, extended techniques, and sonic elements  
relatively unimpeded by physical restrictions. While able-bodied 
musicians may also encounter physical limitations and must 
navigate the affordances of their instruments, these challenges 
are considerably more pronounced for disabled musicians, given 
that standard instruments are designed with able-bodied users in 
mind. Free improvisation was a key part of my creative practice, 
requiring the ability to  create material and interact with others 
spontaneously. Key observations from comparisons between 
5 https://www.mapurastudios.org.nz/programmes/mapura-
music/  
pre- and post-disability included tactile feel, haptic control, and 
the physical and technical abilities enabling accuracy, speed, and 
expansion of ideas. I also examined differences in the connection 
between cognitive processes, embodiment, and physical-musical 
output. Documenting these  technical attributes clarified what I 
felt was essential for a rewarding musician -instrument 
relationship and informed a table of observations that guided the 
design process. 
Table 1. Technical and Experiential Qualities and Values 
Field Description 
Skills Required Accuracy 
Speed (between cognitive reaction, 
creativity, and action) 
Physical access and engagement 
Fluidity 
Flow 
Ability to create a range of pitch sets 
and tonal palettes 
Connection and 
Communication 
Access to the entire range of the 
instrument enables 
Unimpeded link between ideas and 
musical realisation 
Ability to react to ecological and 
environmental influences 
Navigation of negation of specificities 
(characteristics of the instrument or 
situation) 
4.3 Integration with OT sessions 
Whilst assessing the qualities and values,  I also gathered data 
from standard OT sessions with an Occupational Therapist and 
extended OT methods I had developed [19] . The analysis of this 
data informed a better understanding of my unique limitations of 
movement and functionality. Combining knowledge gained 
from the movement/function analysis with the reflections of my 
playing experiences helped develop the concept behind the 
bespoke prototype. I was able to consider what shape the design 
might take, how it could function, the types of materials for its 
construction, and the range of sensors and interfaces that could 
work to integrate these elements.  Though the interface aims  to 
provide the user with the ability to play with accuracy and speed, 
the structure of the instrument needs to be simple enough for any 
support person to easily assist with set up for practice and 
performance. It is also important to  consider how the  
instrument's ergonomics support playable actions that will not 
invoke fatigue . Information gathered from the range of 
movement was crucial in determining the dimensions of the 
initial design and how physical interfaces and sensors could be 
positioned.  
4.4 Design requirements 
The Slide-A-Phone was designed to incorporate tactile or haptic 
interfaces that respond in real time to digital or analogue sensors 
that translate movements into sonic output .  The concept  
developed into a functional instrument design inspired by my 
experience with a slide whistle post -accident. The slide 
mechanism highlighted how the vertical movements required to 
play foster a sense of agency with the instrument . To emulate 
other functional characteristics of a saxophone, the instrument 
required a mechanism to control ADSR envelopes via a breath 
controller for tonal dynamics and a sensor to facilitate register 
changes.  
Another requirement was to mount i nterface components to 
ensure physical accessibility and ease of play. Given the iterative 
prototyping process, widely available, cost -effective, off -the-
shelf materials were used to enable rapid construction, testing, 
and part replacement. Additionally, a simple mounting system 
was necessary to assist with setup. These considerations led to  
adopting the following design specifications: 1) using a slider 
controller, a breath controller, and a touch sensor ; 2) ensuring 
ergonomic practicality, ease of setup, and using off-the-shelf 
materials. 
 The design process was a  collaborative effort  between an 
assistant and me, guided by drawings I provided to communicate 
my envisioned design. We tested physical prototypes  at each 
stage, engaging in discussions to identify issues and explore 
potential improvements. As the project evolved, so did our 
understanding of our respective roles. The assistant contributed 
expertise in electronics, particularly in guitars and synthesisers, 
while I applied my knowledge of sensor technologies within 
Digital Musical Instruments (DMI). 
 Although I led the design process through drawings and 
functional planning, the assistant provided valuable input during 
prototype construction, offering feedback that informed design 
refinements. The physical prototype was developed over several 
months through collaborative construction and testing sessions, 
interspersed with periods where I independently redesigned 
elements based on autobiographical reflection. I assessed 
challenges and opportunities  during these intervals , 
incorporating additional featu res. With each sensor or 
component added, I played the instrument to evaluate its 
responsiveness, identify limitations, and uncover new 
possibilities for improvement at each stage. 
5. TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS 
5.1 Materials and Construction 
The possibility of using readily available off-the-shelf materials 
and technologies ma de constructing the design and integrating 
parts and technologies simple and time-efficient. The initial 
prototype was built using cardboard tubes to ensure simple 
testing of the coupling between physical interfaces and sensor 
technologies. Once satisfied with this coupling, we moved to use 
a more robust material - PVC plastic pipe - as this was still easy 
to construct with  and add objects and sensors to, but provided 
more stability and rigidity. One  of the most challenging aspects 
was to develop bracket attachments to connect the instrument to 
the wheelchair. The initial baseplate that connects the project 
box to the camera bracket was constructed of plywood. 
However, this setup proved too flimsy, so an aluminium ad-hoc 
version was developed and engineered to increase the stability. 
 
Figure 1. Camera Bracket Single Point Fixture From 
Wheelchair to Baseplate 
5.2 Interface and Sensor Integration 
The instrument incorporates multiple gestural interfaces and 
sensors integrated with MaxMSP via Arduino. Key components 
and their functions include: 
 

Pitch Slider and Ultrasonic Sensor : A 1 cm wooden dowel 
inserted into the instrument's slide mechanism controls the inner 
tube. An ultrasonic sensor positioned at the tube's base measures 
the slide position (distance) and sends this data to MaxMSP for 
pitch control. Initial experiments used a breadboard with an 
Arduino Uno, later replaced by a printed circuit board (PCB) 
mounted above the Arduino and housed in a project box attached 
to the instrument. 
Pressure Sensor and Melodica Mouthpiece : A pressure 
sensor, connected to a plastic tube repurposed from a catheter 
bag, registers breath output. This setup, paired with a melodica 
mouthpiece, connects the instrument to the specific needs of my 
disability. The sensor controls note initiation, dynam ics, and 
sustain, allowing expressive breath-based interaction. 
Register Key and Membrane Potentiometer : Initially, a 38 
mm square force sensor was installed as a register key for pitch 
modulation, akin to a saxophone's register key. Due to activation 
challenges, it was replaced by a 200 mm soft pot membrane 
potentiometer. This larger surface area enables prec ise control 
and allows multiple points to trigger different transpositions or 
register shifts. 
Master Volume Fader : An analogue slide potentiometer, 
mounted on the front of the project box, serves as a master 
volume control. Positioned within my range of movement, it 
allows for adjustments to overall output during practice or 
performance. 
 
Structural Elements and Accessibility Features: The system 
includes a custom aluminium base plate and a camera bracket 
to attach the instrument securely to my wheelchair. 
Components such as the project box, Arduino Uno, ultrasonic 
sensor, pressure sensor, membrane potentiometer, and analogue 
fader are integrated seamlessly for stability and ease of use. 
 
 
Figure 2. Coupling of Sensors and Functions 
Sensor data is transmitted through a serial USB connection to a 
computer, enabling real -time interaction. The pairing of 
interfaces (e.g., pitch slider with ultrasonic sensor, pressure 
sensor with breath input) ensures the instrument is responsive 
and tailored to my physical abilities, enhancing playability and 
expression. The coupling and mapping from the interface 
through the sensor, and ultimately to a computer , is shown in 
Figure 2. The MaxMSP patch provides a choice of multiple scale 
sets for the slide to activate. There is also the option of FM or 
Additive Synthesis, the ability to adjust how the register ribbon 
can fun ction, and a visual reference for notes being played. 
Figure 3 shows a design concept detailing the placement of the 
interfaces and sensors onto the instrument. 
6. REFLECTION AND EVALUATION 
After developing the Slide-A-Phone, I spent two to three one-
hour sessions per week  over three weeks performing with the 
instrument and reflecting on its qualities against the findings of 
the analysis of my saxophone recordings. I would p lay scales, 
note patterns  or pitch sets, simple tunes, and improvise freely 
unaccompanied and accompanied by my assistant or ‘Band in a 
Box’.  Although early in developing skill sets for this instrument, 
observations of its playability  are positive and encouraging. 
Even from the early stages of prototype development, the Slide-
A-Phone enabled me to play and repeat phrases in a way that had 
not been possible since my accident. If I got a note wrong, I could 
find the right position to replay it correctly, highlighting how the 
instrument's auditory feedback instructed the slide's position . 
With practice, there were noticeable improvements in playing 
simple scales or melodies. 
 
 
Figure 3. Diagram of the Placement of Interfaces on the 
Slide-A-Phone 
I formally evaluated the Slide-A-Phone by testing the extent to 
which I could play in time with a regular tempo of 88 bpm with 
the software "Band in a Box," which provides sequenced backing 
tracks for practising melodies and improvisation. I also practised 
with my assistant, accompanying me on a Casio keyboard, using 

the rhythm machine.  Revisiting "Band in a Box," a tool I used 
during my early years at Jazz School, offered a meaningful 
reference for progress as a disabled musician using the Slide-A-
Phone. While I have managed to play a few melodies  such as 
‘Night and Day’ Strangers in the Night’ , and ‘Fly Me  to the 
Moon’ at a slow tempo  (88 bpm) , the instrument's structural 
instability currently affects my ability to transition smoothly 
between notes, requiring further refinement. Figure 4 was taken 
during a session where I played Cole Porter’s ‘Night and Day’ 
over the band in a box backing6.  This shows the three interfaces: 
the left -hand controls pitch, the right -hand controls  register, 
whilst my breath through the mouthpiece controls articulation , 
dynamics, and tonal texture. 
A notable experience was performing with the New Zealand 
music art group "From Scratch" during their 50th -anniversary 
celebration. This event marked the debut of the Slide -A-Phone 
in a live setting, with the piece featuring rhythms from metal bars 
tuned to  the F Lydian scale —one of the scale sets in the 
MaxMSP patch. I improvised freely with their rhythms and 
tones, developing material as the performance progressed. It is 
worth mentioning that I consider myself a beginner playing the 
prototype, tasking myself with working on playing through 
simple scales and patterns. These tasks are achievable but require 
some effort and concentration at this stage. However, I feel the 
speed, accuracy, and flow  of playing scales and exercises 
successfully will become easier with practice as my agency with 
the instrument improves.  
7. DISCUSSION 
This study provides new insights into ADMI design through the 
specific methodologies employed and the integration of diverse 
design practices. First, a particular contribution is made through 
sharing how pre-accident experiences and recordings can inform 
new designs. Emphasising the role of critical and systematic 
analysis of pre -disability performance recordings as a design 
probe, assisted with understanding the expressive and technical 
qualities central to the musician -instrument relationship [8, 19, 
23]. Incorporating these elements through an autoethnographic 
approach informs an autobiographic design perspective, offering 
a novel methodology centring the musician’s lived experience in 
ADMI development. By emulating and reinterpreting pre -
disability musical techniques, this approach facilitates continuity 
when addressing challenges in post -disability musical 
expression while introducing a framework for integrating 
reflective analysis into the design process. 
 Second, we noticed that involving an assistant in the co-design 
process added a layer of practical insight and collaboration. This 
participatory approach , integrated with autobiographic design, 
resulted in a concept driven by personal initiative while 
incorporating external contextual input throughout the 
development process. [1, 26] .  Combining the autobiographic 
and collaborative design methods demonstrates the importance 
of lived experience and iterative feedback in instrument design 
in creating not just a functional instrument, but one with 
emotional resonance [12, 13, 16] . Drawing from standard and 
self-developed extended Occupational Therapy practices 
provided unique perspectives on accessibility. This project 
demonstrates the value of applying this approach  - developed 
from earlier work - to the design framework. [3, 19]. 
 This study demonstrates how integrating analysis, reflective 
practice, and diverse design methods can guide the development 
of ADMIs with haptic or tactile interfaces, fostering intuitive 
control, expressive performance, and creative agency. 
 
6 Night and Day with Band in a Box @ 88 bpm  
By sharing this methodology and its outcomes, this research 
offers a transferable model for designers and researchers aiming 
to create instruments that prioritise the needs and experiences of 
musicians with diverse abilities. 
 
 
 
Figure 4 Playing the Slide-A-Phone 
8. CONCLUSION 
This article outlined the development of the Slide -A-Phone, a 
bespoke AMI. The instrument originated from reflections on past 
audio recordings and evolved through an autoethnographic, 
collaborative, and ability -based design approach into a 
functional prototype. The design process was informed by an 
analysis of movements and functions, using data gathered from 
standard and extended occupational therapy methods to create a 
user-centric instrument.  The prototype successfully emulated 
pre-disability playability by integrating haptic  and tactile 
connectivity, allowing the user to perform simple musical tasks 
and exercises that had been inaccessible since becoming 
disabled.  
The Slide -A-Phone is expanding my ability  to collaborate 
and create music beyond experimental soundscapes, fostering 
diverse and nuanced musical expression while opening new 
opportunities for musical exploration. Future iterations will 
focus on improving playability and addressing current 
challenges, such as stability issues related to the single mounting 
point. However, even in this early stage,  the first authors' 
experience has been positive, particularly regarding the 
instrument’s connectivity and playability.  The following stages 
will also inc lude other disabled and non -disabled musicians 
playing the Slide -A-Phone to share their insights for future 
development. 

9. ETHICAL STANDARDS 
The authors do not identify any other conflicts of interest, or any 
other ethical issues identified in relation to this work.  The 
assistant mentioned in this article was funded through Disability 
Services University of Auckland, Te Whare o ngā Pūkōrero Pūoro 
Waipapa Taumata Rau Aotearoa (New Zealand). Generative AI tools 
were only used to check grammar and for linguistic refinement. 
10. REFERENCES 
[1] R. Blythe and L. van Schaik. What If Design Practice 
Matters? In Design Research in Architecture. Routledge, 
1991, 53-69. 
[2] A. Bukkapatnam, P. Depalle, and M. Wanderley. Defining 
a vibrotactile toolkit for digital musical instruments: 
characterizing voice coil actuators, effects of loading, and 
equalization of the frequency response – IDMIL. Journal on 
Multimodal User Interfaces 14, 2020, 285-301. 
[3] J. Creek and M. Allen. History and early development of 
occupational therapy. In Theorising Occupational Therapy 
Practice in Diverse Settings. Routledge, 2022. 
[4] K. Douglas. Without Music, Life Would Be A Mistake. In 
The impact of Music Listening and Playing on Hedonic and 
Eudaimonic Wellbeing, 2019, 126-155. 
[5] M.E. Barona. The Fender Rhodes. SoundGirls.org, 2014. 
[6] E. Frid. Accessible Digital Musical Instruments - A Survey 
of Inclusive Instruments Presented at the NIME, SMC and 
ICMC Conferences. Technical Report, 2018. 
[7] E. Frid. Accessible Digital Musical Instruments —A 
Review of Musical Interfaces in Inclusive Music Practice. 
Multimodal Technologies and Interaction 3, 3, 2019, 57. 
[8] W. Gaver, A. Dunne, and E. Pacenti. Design: Cultural 
Probes. Interactions 6, 1999, 21-29. 
[9] J. Harrison, A. Chamberlain, and A.P. McPherson. 
Accessible Instruments in the Wild: Engaging with a 
Community of Learning -Disabled Musicians. In 
Proceedings of CHI EA '19. ACM Press, New York, NY, 
2019, 1-6. 
[10] J. Harrison, R. Jack, F. Morreale, and A. McPherson. When 
is a Guitar not a Guitar? Cultural Form, Input Modality and 
Expertise. Technical Report, 2018. 
[11] R. Jack, J. Harrison, and A. McPherson. Digital Musical 
Instruments as Research Products. In Proceedings of NIME 
'20. Birmingham, UK, 2020, 446-451. 
[12] A. Lucas, J. Harrison, F. Schroeder, and M. Ortiz. Cross -
Pollinating Ecological Perspectives in ADMI Design and 
Evaluation. In Proceedings of the International Conference 
on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 2021. 
[13] A. Lucas, M. Ortiz, and F. Schroeder. Bespoke Design for 
Inclusive Music: The Challenges of Evaluation. In 
Proceedings of NIME '19, 2019, 1-6. 
[14] A. Lucas, M. Ortiz, and F. Schroeder. The Longevity of 
Bespoke, Accessible Music Technology: A Case for 
Community. In Proceedings of NIME '20, 2020, 243-248. 
[15] M.T. Marshall and M.M. Wanderley. Vibrotactile feedback 
in digital musical instruments. In Proceedings of NIME '06. 
IRCAM, Paris, 2006, 226-229. 
[16] L. May, L. McLeod, and M. Mulshine. Bishop BoomBox: 
A Physically Accessible Drum Machine. In Proceedings of 
NIME '24, 2024, 33-39. 
[17] P. McIntosh. Action Research and Reflective Practice: 
Creative and Visual Methods to Facilitate Reflection and 
Learning. Routledge, London, 2010. 
[18] A. McMillan and F. Morreale. Designing accessible 
musical instruments by addressing musician -instrument 
relationships. Frontiers in Computer Science 5, 2023. 
[19] A. McMillan and F Morreale. Occupational Therapy 
Methods in the Design of Accessible Musical Instruments.  
In Proceedings of NIME ’24, 2024. 339–345. 
[20] F. Morreale and A. McPherson. Design for Longevity: 
Ongoing Use of Instruments from NIME 2010 -14. In 
Proceedings of NIME '17, 2017. 
[21]  C. Neustaedter and P. Sengers. Autobiographical design in 
HCI research: designing and learning through use -it-
yourself. In Proceedings of DIS '12. ACM Press, New 
York, NY, 2012, 514-523. 
[22] C. Neustaedter and P. Sengers. Autobiographical design: 
what you can learn from designing for yourself. Interactions 
19, 6, 2012, 28-33. 
[23] L. Nijs, M. Lesaffre, and M. Leman. The musical instrument 
as a natural extension of the musician. In Music and 
Human-Computer Interaction, 2013, 467-484. 
[24] J. Rovan and V. Hayward. Typology of tactile sounds and 
their synthesis in gesture-driven computer music. Trends in 
gestural control of music, 2000, 297-320. 
[25] E.A. Stark, P. Vuust, and M.L. Kringelbach. Music, dance, 
and other art forms: New insights into the links between 
hedonia (pleasure) and eudaimonia (well -being). In 
Progress in Brain Research. Elsevier, 2018, 129-152. 
[26] K. Wilkie, S. Holland, and P. Mulholland. Towards a 
Participatory Approach for Interaction Design Based on 
Conceptual Metaphor Theory: A Case Study from Music 
Interaction. In Music and Human -Computer Interaction. 
Springer, London, 2013, 259-270. 
[27]  J.S. Wilson. Rahsaan Kirk Comes Back Strong. The New 
York Times, 1976. 
[28] J.O. Wobbrock, K.Z. Gajos, S.K. Kane, and G.C. 
Vanderheiden. Ability -based design. Communications of 
the ACM 61, 6, 2018, 62-71. 
[29] K.H. Woldendorp and W. van Gils. One -Handed 
Musicians—More Than a Gimmick. Medical Problems of 
Performing Artists 27, 4, 2012, 231-237. 
[30] E. Zayas -Garin and A. McPherson. Dialogic Design of 
Accessible Digital Musical Instruments: Investigating 
Performer Experience. In Proceedings of NIME '22, 2022.
 