An Open Source Interface based on Biological Neural
Net
works for Interactive Music Performance
Hernán Kerlleñevich
LAPSo
Universidad Nacional de
Quilmes,
Buenos Aires, Argentina
hk@lapso.org
Manuel C. Eguía
LAPSo
Universidad Nacional de
Quilmes,
Buenos Aires, Argentina
me@lapso.org
Pablo E. Riera
LAPSo
Universidad Nacional de
Quilmes,
Buenos Aires, Argentina
me@lapso.org
ABSTRACT
We propose and discuss an open source real-time inter-
face that focuses in the vast potential for interactive sound
art creation emerging from biological neural networks, as
paradigmatic complex systems for musical exploration. In
particular, we focus on networks that are responsible for the
generation of rhythmic patterns.The interface relies upon
the idea of relating metaphorically neural behaviors to elec-
tronic and acoustic instruments notes, by means of ﬂexible
mapping strategies. The user can intuitively design net-
work conﬁgurations by dynamically creating neurons and
conﬁguring their inter-connectivity. The core of the system
is based in events emerging from his network design, which
functions in a similar way to what happens in real small
neural networks. Having multiple signal and data inputs
and outputs, as well as standard communications protocols
such as MIDI, OSC and TCP/IP, it becomes and unique
tool for composers and performers, suitable for diﬀerent per-
formance scenarios, like live electronics, sound installations
and telematic concerts.
Keywords
rhythm generation, biological neural networks, complex pat-
terns, musical interface, network performance
1. INTRODUCTION
The brain is the most complex organ in nature, and it stands
among all living tissues by its time-organized action [1].
The collective behavior of millions of interconnected neu-
rons conforms organized and stratiﬁed rhythm systems that
interact with each other. These interactive rhythm layers
can reveal network architectures and also produce patterns
which are not understandable from the individual behavior
of a each neuron, whose action can be explained by bio-
physical and biochemical processes. Even in its minimal
expression, simple neural systems as invertebrate ganglia
[5] or central pattern generators (CPGs) in the spinal chord
[7] are complex systems that can exhibit nonlinear behav-
ior, emergent properties, and the combination of regular
activity and unpredictability in the long run.
In this work we employ simple, yet dynamically rich, neu-
ral systems to develop new interfaces for generative music
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME'11, 30 May–1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
composition and performance. Interfaces based on these
properties can go far beyond the usual ones, since they are
able to generate structured chains of events that can inter-
act, not only with the performer, but also with each other.
Even with little or no external input control, this kind of sys-
tems displays a robust variety of stable and unstable time
structures. With ﬂexible mapping strategies their use for
musical expression has virtually no limit.
We developed a biological neural network interface that
is able to generate patterns of diverse degree of complexity,
and that can be extended to multiple coordinated centers,
as in rhythm networks in the brain. The interface is named
SANTIAGO, after the renowned Spanish physiologist San-
tiago Ramon y Cajal. It consists of a modular patch devel-
oped in PD, including a core for biological neural network
simulations and diverse input/output modules that can be
mapped to the desired musical parameters, as pitch, timbre,
beat, etc.
There were many previous eﬀorts employing other com-
plex systems as new ﬂexible interfaces, including Markov
chains, cellular automata, L-systems, chaotic oscillators,
generative grammar, and genetic algorithms, among oth-
ers, and some of them are available nowadays as tools for
music creation 1. However, applications for music composi-
tion and performance based on the dynamics of biological
neural networks2 are less explored. A former eﬀort that
explores biological inspired networks for granular synthesis
is reported in [6]. Our development though is focused on
a diﬀerent time scale, corresponding to rhythm and note
generation.
In a previous work [4] we presented Santiago at an early
stage of development and gave details about the biological
models and their implementation. This article addresses
what we consider as relevant interface and performance is-
sues and shows several examples of simple networks giv-
ing rise to complex rhythmic outputs. The presentation
is structured as follows: in section 2 we give a theoretical
background for the interface, in section 3 we develop the in-
terface design, section 4 is about possible performance sce-
narios, section 5 discusses our preliminary analysis of the
interface and in section 6 we conclude with some remarks
and ideas for further development.
2. BACKGROUND
Neural networks are composed by computational units (neu-
rons) linked by synapses. Depending on how these units
are modelled we can have more simpliﬁed and unrealistic
artiﬁcial neural networks (where the complexity resides in
1For a list see e.g. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Generative_music
2A brief distinction between this type and Artiﬁcial Neural
Networks can be found in section 2 (Background)
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
331
Figure 1: Santiago’s data and signal ﬂow across its modular stru cture. Signal and data inputs may be
processed to extract desired features and scale their values whithin ranges chosen by the user. Then, the
data streams or events are fed into the system core, consisting of a neuron panel with completely conﬁgurable
units and a connectivity matrix, where the network is created and designed. The generated data can be
mapped to soniﬁcation parameters of ad-hoc synths and sound-ﬁle players routed to a multichannel audio
system (if available) as well as sent via MIDI and OSC outputs. Event and Spike visualization tools are also
available, for a clear visual feedback of the network activity.
the connectivity pattern only), or biologically inspired net-
works, where the intrinsic dynamics of the neurons are taken
into account. In this last case, the activity of the units is
given by a sequence of electrical pulses (spikes), that can be
modiﬁed via the synapses, either by excitatory or inhibitory
action of other neurons. We take this second approach, us-
ing a variety of neuron models displaying diﬀerent intrinsic
behaviors and responses to stimulation (see ﬁg. 3).
Much of the dynamical richness of the interface comes
precisely from the choice of the mathematical neuron model
for the network core. The model was proposed by E. Izhike-
vich [3], and is described by a system of two diﬀerential
equations (Eqs. 1a and 1b) and one resetting rule (Eq 1c):
dv
dt = 0 . 04v2 + 5v + 140 − u + I(t) + Isyn + ξ(t) (1a)
du
dt = a(bv − u) (1 b)
ifv ≥ 30 mV, then
{
v ←− c
u ←− u + d (1c)
The voltage membrane of the neuron v and a recovery
variable u are the dynamical variables. Four dimensionless
parameters ( a, b, c, d) and one input current I(t) determine
the type of behavior exhibited by the model. The neuron
receives synaptic inputs from other neurons throughIsyn.
A stochastic component or noise current ξ(t) can also be
added. The spike mechanism works by resetting the vari-
ables v and u when the voltage reaches some ﬁxed value.
Despite its simplicity, this system can replicate the dynam-
ical behavior of most neuron types. Subtle changes in the
four parameters or the input current values of the neuron
model can give rise to very diﬀerent rhythmic behaviours.
Neuron units are connected unidirectionally to other neu-
rons through synapses, that could be either excitatory or
inhibitory. If two neurons are connected via an excitatory
(inhibitory) synapse, the spike events in the signal-passing
neuron are transformed to positive (negative) synaptic cur-
rent pulses, with a characteristic exponential decay. These
pulses are delayed and added to the total synaptic current
of the target neuron (Isyn).
It is interesting to note, that with these units it is possible
to build small networks that can give rise to complex pat-
terns of spikes, even using very few neurons (as few as two,
see ﬁgure 4). These patterns (that can be observed in real
brains via multi-electrode recordings) include neural beats,
synchronization, and periodic or almost recurrent behavior
in diﬀerent time scales. A particular case of this last case
are rhythmic networks, that are often encountered in the
animal realm as pacemakers and central pattern generators
(CPG). Activities such as walking, running, jumping, swim-
ming, breathing and chewing are thought to be regulated
by a CPG.
The main characteristics of CPGs rhythms are coordi-
nation, variety, sensory feedback and adaptability to the
environment. For example: the chirping of a cricket is pe-
riodic most of the time but also has corrections in time,
the locomotion of horses exhibits only speciﬁc gaits: walk-
ing, trotting, canter and galloping, having patterns of four,
three or two beats per cycle. Human rhythm production,
even when mediated by more sophisticated and distributed
neural processes, probably also relies on neural oscillators
interacting and resonating with rhythmic stimuli [2]. We
take inspiration from these biological rhythmic networks for
building the core of the SANTIAGO interface, capable of
producing complex and adaptable rhythmic patterns.
3. SANTIAGO'S INTERFACE
3.1 Architecture
Santiago’s interface is built upon a modular structure, ex-
hibited in ﬁgure 1. Both back and front-ends are built in
PureData as a set of hierarchical organized abstractions al-
lowing, through dynamic patching, the rapid creation, in-
terconnection and elimination of units.
A wide range of inputs may be handled according to the
user’s needs, and routed to virtually any parameter of the
network; for this reason Santiago is also suitable for its
use with performance controllers and software environments
with whom the users may already have some practice or de-
veloped performance skills. Continuous data can be scaled
to best ﬁt the biological units, and can be mapped to input
currents of the neurons or synaptic weights of the network.
Event data can be used to excite or inhibit a neuron with a
current pulse and can also change the neuron ﬁring mode,
or type (see ﬁg. 3).
The network is the core of the system, as it generates the
complex behavior in time; its outputs are spikes (events)
and ﬁring rates (continuous) from all neurons. Those out-
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
332
puts can be sent to diverse internal soniﬁcation and visu-
ali
zation modules or, via OSC, MIDI and proper outputs,
to other devices such as external samplers and synthesizers,
sequencers or even actuators and audiovisual engines. The
ﬁring rates are particularly useful since they can control
many parameters at once (for instance, amplitude, pitch,
duration, etc.) even using diﬀerent mapping curves for each
parameter.
3.2 Design and user experience
When the users load Santiago, the main panel shows up 2,
presenting a visual interface designed to provide a rapid in-
tuition of the environments functionality. When clicked, the
labeled buttons grouped accordingly open the correspond-
ing panels, while giving the user a visual feedback by chang-
ing their colors from default grey to default or customizable
colors.
The GUI is intended to be simple, intuitive, versatile and
highly conﬁgurable. Many design decisions have been taken
in the pursuit of a consistent usable interface. Depicted
in the panels shown for the ﬁrst example in the following
section, many of these decisions are:
•Each neuron is identiﬁed with a reference block at
the left of the NEURONS, NETWORK and EVENT
VIEW panels, containing its identiﬁcation number and,
in the ﬁrst two panels, a type status button from which
the user can set the neuron to E or I for Excitatory or
Inhibitory type.
•The identiﬁcation number background blinks with a
conﬁgurable color, by default black, every time the
neuron generates a spike, therefore providing instant
visual feedback of its activity. For no activity, the
default color is grey.
•Sizes of NEURONS, NETWORK and EVENT VIEW
modules are consistent to each other, so aligning those
panels is a comfortable way to design and visualize
neural activity and interconnection.
•The interface colors allow the user to quickly grasp its
functioning principles, even having the possibility to
set them individually and save them into GUI presets.
For instance, if a neuron has an excitatory behavior,
the type button in its reference block will have the
same color than all its synaptic connections in the
NETWORK panel.
•Every panel includes a global module conﬁguration
located at the top, by default with a pale green back-
ground, from which the user may quickly conﬁgure
several modules at once, or large amounts of values in
parallel, using the keyboard or mouse.
•The modules oﬀer a consistent preset loading and sav-
ing submodule, that allows handling up to 10 presets
each, and inﬁnite presets banks.
Currently, the connectivity matrix found in the NET-
WORK panel, shows a random button that sets diﬀerent
values for each synapse weight and turns neurons into E or
I types, thus inviting the users to explore the possibilities
of that parameter space with a single click. Beyond this ex-
plorations, if the user is in the search of precise results, we
encourage conscious design of the networks. In the next sec-
tion we show some examples of outputs generated by simple
designed networks.
3.3 Generating rhythms
The NEURONS module implements the model described
by Eqs. (1.a - 1.c), and allows the user to control the
four parameters and the inputs. For the sake of simplicity
six prototypical neuron types are also available as presets:
Regular Spiking (RS), Intrinsically Bursting (IB), Chatter-
ing (CH), Low Threshold (LT), Fast Spiking (FS) and Res-
onator (RZ). Representative patterns of spikes for three of
these presets are displayed in Fig. 3. As with the rest of the
modules, the user is invited to explore the parameter space,
design his own conﬁgurations and save them into personal
presets.
The NETWORK module allows the user to establish the
synapses, or connections between neurons, selecting the in-
tensity and the delay of inhibitory or excitatory action. In
general terms, a stronger synapse intensity will produce a
quicker excitatory or inhibitory action upon the neurons
that receive the current pulse, and a weaker value will pro-
duce a more delayed action upon the activity of the network.
Also lower currents above the ﬁring threshold of the neurons
tend to exhibit a clearer, more regular and spaced rhyth-
mic activity than higher currents, more suitable for granular
synthesis or more statistically perceived occurrences of the
events.
In order to illustrate how the neural network core of SAN-
TIAGO can generate a wide diversity of rhythmic patterns
using few units we choose three examples that are both bi-
ologically inspired and musically interesting.
Our ﬁrst example comprises only two neurons and is a
good illustration of how the intrinsic dynamics of each units
can interact in its simplest expression: a pair of excitatory
and inhibitory neurons.
In Fig 4 we show how to construct this simple network
and visualize its output. The NEURONS panel (A) show
the list of numbered neurons. For each units it is possible
to adjust the DC current, and neuron type using the indi-
vidual parameters or the presets. The NETWORK panel
(B) displays the connectivity matrix of the neural network.
This allows to adjust the synaptic weights, and allows a
quick view to the inhibitory (red) or excitatory (blue) con-
dition of the neurons. The EVENT VIEW panel (C) show
the events in real time.
In this case, the ﬁrst neuron ( N1) is a inhibitory LT, which
normally has a regular spiking pattern. The second neuron
(N2) is an excitatory CH with a strong input current. When
N2 ﬁres a discharge it excites N1 and eventually a spike
occurs in the this neuron, that in turn inhibits N2, inter-
rupting the discharge pattern. A pattern of three spikes of
N2 and one spike of N1 in response is clearly recurrent, but
the exact relative timing of the events is not the same, and
also long burst ofN2 activity alternates with this pattern.
Slight changes in N2 DC current provokes drastic changes
in this rhythmic pattern.
Our second example illustrates synchronization. Three
inhibitory neurons (LT) in a ring ( N1 inhibits N2 and N2
inhibits N3, which in turn inhibits N1) stimulated by a DC
current are a paradigmatic example of rhythmic behavior.
The three units alternate their spikes in a cycle, and never
two spikes occur simultaneously due to the inhibition. The
relative phase of the spikes within the pattern depends on
the initial state. In our example a fourth slow CH excita-
tory neuron force the three units to ﬁre in phase, overcom-
ing inhibition. When the burst of the CH neuron ends the
inhibitory ring starts its cycle again, but with diﬀerent rela-
tive phases. An EVENT VIEW of this network is displayed
in Fig. 5.
Our last example (Fig . 6) is built with four neurons: N1
is the only one with DC input current, and excitates N2
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
333
Figure 2: Main panel of Santiago. An intuitive GUI for accessing the system’s features and panels. Dynamic
patching allows creating and erasing panel modules by simply clicking the (+) or (-) black backgrounded
buttons. This occurs interdependently for NEURONS, NETWORK, EVENT VIEW and SPIKE VIEW
minimal units, which are created an labeled automatically for further use; and independently for each
internal soniﬁcation module. The patch underlying programming is accessible at the right and is available
for customization, as well as GUI colors. At the bottom-right corner, there is a link to the project’s website,
containing examples, documentation, news and updated versions of the interface.
Figure 3: The ﬁgure depicts the visualization output of the SPIK E VIEW, for three prototypical behaviors
of the neuron model of choice. Regular Spiking (RS), Intrinsecally Bursting (IB), Chattering (CH). Below
each trace a vertical bar indicates the occurrence of a spike, as in the EVENT VIEW panel.
and N4 with a synapse weight of 43. N2 is also excitatory
and has a synapse weight of 33 with N3, which inhibits N4
with a synapse weight of 33. It is interesting to notice the
variety of rhythm patterns, polyrhythms and time signature
changes that occur only by changing the input DC currents
for N1 while mantaining the exact same network conﬁgura-
tion. Network outputs for input DC current values for N1 of
7, 11, 14 and 19 are depicted y A, B, C and D respectively.
4. PERFORMANCE SCENARIOS
Santiago can assume diﬀerent roles in composition processes
and performance scenarios, ranging from an interactive tool
for the generation of materials usable in deferred time com-
positions -for electronic and acoustic instruments-, to a real-
time complete performance suite. In any case, since the cre-
ation of units for each module is highly simpliﬁed avoiding
time consuming manual patching, the user focuses only in
artistic and not programming issues, designing the network
behavior and soniﬁcating it almost instantaneously. One of
the most powerful features in Santiago, specially for its real-
time usage in a live performance, is the fact that the user
can change all the parameters on-the-ﬂy, without restart-
ing the simulation. Also a very practical preset manage-
ment has been implemented at diﬀerent levels of hierarchy.
Not only presets can be handled for individual modules and
general modules, but also global scenes can be saved and
loaded. This permits multiple parameters for all panels to
be modiﬁed at once, just by pressing a button. Finally, the
user can input an interpolation time between loaded presets,
producing unexpected transitions between expected states.
Depending on the artistic requirements and, of course, the
available equipment, a single computer may be suﬃcient for
every performance aspect. When more processing power is
needed, the artist can make use the OSC input/output capa-
bilities and work with multiple computers running Santiago
in a LAN, each one for a diﬀerent function. For instance,
one handling the input data processing and running the sys-
tem core, and another one for soniﬁcation and visualization.
In this sense, multi-user collaborative performance in-place
with single or multiple computers is, of course, also an op-
tion. OSC communication also opens the ﬁeld for telematic
performances with Santiago. For example, the neurons of a
big network could be distributed on several machines. Here,
also the variable of net delay times is introduced into the
system.
5. CONCLUSIONS
We present a novel approach for biological interactive sys-
tems based on realistic neural models with special focus
on rhythm and generative music. This environment was
designed for real time performance in a single or multiple
computers. Also, the whole software implementation struc-
ture is modular, allowing easy mapping of external signals to
internal parameters and internal signals to media outputs.
It consist in a core, where the dynamical system operates,
and a collection of modules for standard audio and data
operations that interact with the core.
While mapping strategies are still in development, the
core is fully functional and allows a wide range of rhythms
and textures. In future versions the biological core will
have a plasticity module to include dynamic changes in the
synaptic weights depending on some learning rule.
The visualization is still in development and in the future
will include a visual interface to set up the network and
neurons geometrically. As for the visual outputs, the event
view will be extended to include more visual attributes as
for example, intensity or pitch. This will be useful for inter-
action with instrument players as a real time score output.
In the soniﬁcation direction, a spatialization tool will be
included in concordance with spatial positions of the neu-
rons in the visual input.
For more references and audible examples go to http:
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
334
Figure 4: NEURONS panel (A), NETWORK panel (B) and EVENT VIEW (C ) of a simple two-neuron
example built in SANTIAGO. The excitatory-inhibitory pair produces a non-recurrent pattern of dishcarges.
Figure 5: A simple CPG built with four neurons. A group of three ne urons that inhibit one neighbor and
one excitatory neuron that synchronizes them. An alternating cycle begins in the inhibitory ring, after each
synchronization, that evolves into a regular inter-event time.
//lapso.org/santiago
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was done with partial support from CONICET.
7. REFERENCES
[1] G. Buzs´ aki. Rhythms of the Brain. Oxford University
Press, USA, 2006.
[2] J. Grahn and M. Brett. Rhythm and beat perception
in motor areas of the brain. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 19(5):893–906, 2007.
[3] E. Izhikevich. Simple model of spiking neurons. Neural
Networks, IEEE Transactions on, 14(6):1569–1572,
2003.
[4] H. Kerllenevich, P. Riera, and M. Eguia. SANTIAGO -
A Real-time Biological Neural Network Environment
for Generative Music Creation. EvoApplications 2011,
Part II, LNCS, 6625:344–353, 2010.
[5] E. Marder and D. Bucher. Understanding circuit
dynamics using the stomatogastric nervous system of
lobsters and crabs.Annual review of physiology, 69:291,
2007.
[6] E. Miranda and J. Matthias. Granular sampling using a
pulse-coupled network of spiking neurons. Applications
on Evolutionary Computing, pages 539–544, 2005.
[7] G. Shepherd. The synaptic organization of the brain.
Oxford University Press, USA, 2004.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
335
Figure 6: In A, a network output is shown for an Input current for N1 = 7 . The result for N1, N2 and N3, is
a 5/8 pattern, in which N1 goes in eights, N2 repeats a pattern of 4 eights + 1 silence, and N3 stresses 2+3
groups. N4 alternates statistically 3 eights + 1 silence and 2 eights + silence
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
336