The Mobile Device Marching Band 
 
Jeff Snyder 
Princeton University 
  Princeton, NJ 
josnyder@princeton.edu 
 
 
 
 
Avneesh Sarwate 
Princeton University 
  Princeton, NJ 
asarwate@princeton.edu 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
In this paper, we present the “Mobile Device Marching Band” 
(MDMB) as a new mode of musical performance with mobile 
computing devices. We define an MDMB to be, at its most general, 
any ensemble utilizing mobile computation that can travel as it 
performs, with the performance being independent of its location. 
We will discuss the affordances and limitations of mobile -based 
instrument design and performance, specifically within the context of 
a “moving” ensemble. We will also discuss the use of a Mobile 
Device Marching Band as an educational tool. Finally,  we will 
explore our implementation of an MDMB, an electronic Brazilian 
percussion ensemble. 
 
Keywords 
Mobile, iOS, percussion, marching, parade, street, collaborative, 
laptop orchestra, physical modeling, contact microphones, education, 
electronic, ensemble 
 
 
Figure 1. the Princeton Laptop Orchestra rehearsing as a 
Mobile Device Marching Band.  
1. INTRODUCTION 
In the past decade, laptop orchestras have been a steadily growing 
trend in academic institutions. As an ensemble in an educat ional 
context, they provide an excellent platform for teaching electronic 
music techniques, and combining engineering skill development with 
artistic enrichment. However, the nature of electronic music 
traditionally requires a static, concert or club style  performance 
environment. In the last few years, as mobile devices have become 
ubiquitous, several of these electronic ensembles have explored 
options for incorporating mobile computing into their musical 
practices. We present one approach to this possibility, a marching 
electronic percussion parade, and discuss some logistical and 
pedagogical issues related to this idea. 
2. RELATED WORK 
The primary framework from which this research springs is the work 
of Dan Trueman and Perry Cook, with their development of PLOrk, 
the Princeton Laptop Orchestra in 2005 [5]. Since then, the idea has 
spread and many different approaches have been explored. There has 
also been an explosion of research on making audio with mobile 
devices [4], and the work most directly related to our project is Ge 
Wang’s development of MoPho, the Stanford Mobile Phone 
Orchestra [3] [6]. Wang’s group has very similar goals, and is also 
both a performance ensemble and an educational platform for 
teaching electronic music.  Much of this work involves performers 
using mobile phones as instruments, but the actual mobility of 
performers tends to be limited to moving around a standard 
performance space. We consider our work to be an extension of 
Wang’s mobile phone orchestra idea, reaching into the even more 
mobile territory of an ensemble that travels while playing.  
The closest musical work to our project that we are aware of is the 
band Itchyo [7], from Colorado, most known for their performances 
with David Byrne of the Talking Heads. This group is a marching 
band using traditional acoustic instruments for the brass and 
percussion, but they have some portable electronic instruments 
mixed in to give a more modern flavor to their sound.  
3. CHALLENGES AND SOLUTIONS 
The stage-less, roaming nature of a Mobile Device Marching 
Band places some restrictions on the types of devices and interactions 
that can be incorporated into a performance. A minimal MDMB set-
up could involve equipping each performer with a mobile device, a 
controller for audio, and a personal amplification device.  We will 
discuss the limitations of the “minimal” set up, as well as ways to 
tackle these limits. 
 In general, performers in an MDMB will have much less 
screen-based feedback than performers working in a stationary 
setting. A mobile device screen will be significantly smaller than a 
laptop screen, and the constant motion of the ensemble would make 
concentration on the screen more difficult. Additionally, if the 
performer is dedicating both hands to using their instrument, the 
mobile device may not even be visible. These problems could 
potentially be solved by creating wearable supports for the mobile 
devices, and multiple devices could be used if extra screen space is 
needed. Hands-free displays like Google Glass could also be used. 
 MDMB performers will also generally have a relatively 
limited “working space.” A stationary performer can create a zone 
around them where they can access different pieces of equipment in 
turn, and as a result, could utilize a vast array of different physical 
objects in a performance. MDMB performers would, for the most 
part, have to carry much of their available gear with them. For 
performers hoping to switch between multiple physical tools, this 
could present quite the challenge. To use multiple pieces of 
equipment during performance, performers could use a utility belt or 
vest to carry the equipment on their person. Alternatively, extra 
equipment could be moved on a cart that is moved along with the 
performers, who could simply switch devices and store them on the 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on 
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME’14, June 30 – July 03, 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
147
cart throughout a performance. For larger performances, performers 
could even set up a work area on a moving platform. 
   Mobile devices themselves may also present computational 
limits. The limited processing power available on phones could limit 
the number of live -synthesis instruments being run on a single 
device. Also, networking between mobile devices on the move could 
provide challenges; LAN networks can be unwieldy to set up in a 
portable manner (although battery-powered routers exist), and 3G 
connections may not provide the low latency necessary for some 
applications. Another challenge of working with mobile devices is 
the limited number of ports for external hardware. Battery powered 
routers or bluetooth connectivity could be used to create movable 
networks, and microcontroller platforms such as Arduino could be 
used to build custom solutions for providing multiple hardware ports. 
4. ADVANTAGES 
However, the movable nature of such an ensemble also presents 
some unique performance opportunities.  
 A movable ensemble can interact with the concert hall in novel 
ways, and can also interact with a wider range of environments than 
the typical concert hall. When the performers, and thus, the sound 
sources, are free to move around, they can freely explore the 
acoustics of their performance space. Interaction with the reverberant 
characteristics of the performance space could be pre-planned, or 
even improvised. The portability of the instruments would also allow 
for much more flexibility in what constitutes a performance space. 
Rather than stay in a single room, performers could move throughout 
an entire building, or even move through an outdoor area. This 
freedom of movement would allow performers to make on-the-fly 
decisions as to how they would select their performance space and 
improvise based on their surroundings. Performers could even move 
through a never-before-seen environment and react to their novel 
surroundings.  
 Movable ensembles also allow for a high degree of performer 
autonomy, and inter-performer spatial relations could be used in a 
variety of ways. The data of the relative location between performers 
could be used to control the auditory or visual elements of a 
performance. Also, the visual organization of the players could be 
utilized either artistically or as a way to give the audience greater 
insight into the inner workings of the ensemble. For example, during 
a particular piece, performers playing related parts could stand close 
to each other, so the spatial movement of the perform ers would 
reflect the thematic organization of voices in a piece. Furthermore, 
performers’ ability to move around would allow them to adjust their 
position to hear others better during a performance.  
 Individual mobility on the part of the performers would greatly 
increase the potential for audience interaction and participation. 
Rather than separating the performers and the audience, the two 
could intermingle, and performers could change their positions in 
predetermined or improvisatory ways. Most importantly, performers 
could actively seek out audience members and engage them, 
facilitating a two-way interaction that is almost impossible with a 
non-moving ensemble. Two- way communication and the 
intermingling of performers and audience members could allow for 
many new types of highly interactive performance. 
5. CASE STUDY: MOBILE ELECTRONIC 
PERCUSSION MARACATU AND SAMBA 
BAND 
5.1 Goals 
There were four main goals in creating the Mobile Electronic 
Percussion Maracatu and Samba Band. First, it was imagined as an 
educational tool for introducing students to digital musical instrument 
design, signal processing and basic electronics. Second, it was an 
experiment in the basic feasibility of a simple mobile device 
marching band. Third, it was an opportunity to focus on musicianship 
with electronics, where rhythmic feel and skill would be developed 
through rehearsal. Lastly, it seemed like an especially enjoyable 
musical experience for both the student participants and the 
audiences. 
5.2 Implementation 
Once the decision was made to focus on percussion-style electronic 
instruments, we evaluated the possible methods of controlling the 
synthesis. We wanted to take advantage of mobile devices such as 
iPhones for the audio processing, but the obvious option of using the 
touchscreen as a controller seemed less than ideal. The idea of simply 
sending pulses over a network and having the performers adjusting 
parameters seemed to lack musicianship and left the performers with 
too little to do. It would also produce a sound that was too clean and 
precise for the style of music we intended to make. The fun part of 
percussion is that you get to hit things! Therefore, we decided to 
build external triggers that we could use to control synthesis on the 
mobile devices. Since getting wired data into an iPhone is not quite 
as simple as a USB connection, we decided to take advantage of the 
microphone/line input on the device as our input port.  
5.2.1  Trigger Instruments 
Each student in the group built an input trigger instrument, to which a 
contact microphone was affixed. The students had free reign over the 
design of their instruments, and the variation in design ideas was 
inspiring. Some were meant to be struck with sticks, some tapped 
with the fingers, some scraped with a sandpaper block. The contact 
microphone had to be fed into a simple transistor buffer circuit to 
protect the phone input from voltage spikes and to match the 
impedance of the source to the phone audio input . The students 
soldered together these buffers from components and attached them 
to their instruments. Another option would have been to purchase 
inexpensive pre-built contact microphone amplifiers, but building 
them from scratch was an interesting educational opportunity to learn 
about simple transistor circuits. 
 
 
Figure 2. Avneesh Sarwate’s sheet metal “trigger 
instrument”, with different grits of sandpaper to allow for 
scraping activation. 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
148
    
  
Figure 3. Noah Fishman’s “trigger instrument”, a compact 
design made from wood and foam rubb er and tapped with 
the fingers. 
5.2.2 Synthesis 
 Next, we had to find some synthesis solutions to convert the 
contact microphone signals into useful percussive audio sounds. We 
used a combination of tools, including Daniel Igleisa’s MobMuPlat 
[8] to wrap synthesis patches written using libPD [9], Brad Garton 
and Damon Holzborn’s iRTCMix [10] to access the physical models 
in the STK package [1], and an excellent commercial iOS app by 
Jarosław Jacek called Impaktor [11] that is designed to create 
synthesized percussion sounds based on microphone input. An 
interesting addition to this arsenal would be Bruno Zamborlin’s 
Mogees software [12], which is actually intended as a way to convert 
contact microphone input on an iPhone into synthesis, but it isn’t yet 
available for use as of the present writing. Another approach we used 
to complement this mobile computing solution was to connect a 
digital delay guitar pedal to the contact microphone and use an audio 
rate delay as a comb filter to produce a simple, yet distinctive  
electronic drum sound. 
 
 
Figure 4. Carolyn Chen’s “trigger instrument”, with rubber 
band strings for plucked activation.  
 
 
Figure 5. Cenk Ergün’s “trigger instrument”, nicknamed 
the “burrito” and designed to be struck with a drum stick.  
5.2.3  Amplification 
 For amplification, we initially used Behringer EPA-40 portable 
amplifiers, which can be worn over a performer’s shoulder. These are 
sufficiently loud for the purpose, and have a reasonable tone despite 
the expected lack of bass frequencies. Due to a high failure rate of the 
non-standard proprietary batteries they use, we eventually switched 
to using Fender Passport Mini amplifiers, which use standard C-cell 
batteries. The Passport Mini amplifiers did not come with a shoulder 
strap, so we installed strap-lock strap buttons onto them, and attached 
guitar straps. They turned out to be an excellent solution. One issue 
we discovered is that the directionality of the speakers is a bit of a 
problem. When the amplifier is worn over the shoulder, the speaker 
points away from the musician, so that it is hard to tell how loud you 
are. An ideal portable amplifier for this purpose would include a 
monitor speaker pointed at the player as well. For bass frequencies, 
we used a Roland MiniCube portable bass amplifier, which can be 
worn with a strap, but is rather heavy and costly.  
5.2.4  Musical Material 
 Part of the goal of this project was to teach musicianship through 
the learning of a repertoire of existing music. We learned drum 
patterns from Scott Kettner’s book on Maracatu [2] and listened to 
samba recordings to parse out the rhythms. We chose to create 
synthesized percussion instruments that mimicked the features of the 
percussion instruments used in these traditional genres, while still 
sounding identifiably “electronic” and taking the sound of the music 
into unusual territory. We were not interested in producing a faithful 
representation, but rather a unique electronic arrangement of the 
musical style. 
6. RESULTS 
The Mobile Marching Band has proved to be a successful teaching 
experience and an enjoyable musical experience for the students. 
They felt that they had learned a lot about percussive synthesis 
techniques, as well as many of the tools that can be used to program 
audio. The mobile platform opens up many opportunities for the 
ensemble to be involved in events for which a standard performance 
situation would not be appropriate. We presented a concert by the 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
149
Princeton Laptop Orchestra at Princeton University in April of 2014 
that utilized the Mobile Electronic Percussion Maracatu and Samba 
Band as a way to lead the audience from one concert location to 
another. The first half of the concert was in a standard concert hall, 
and the last piece was staged in another location, since we would be 
performing with a giant industrial robot that could not be moved into 
the concert hall. We bridged these two locations by leading the 
audience out of the concert hall, and over to the robot, playing our 
electronic percussion music, and were also joined by two acoustic 
musicians on a samba snare drum and an alfaia (Maracatu bass 
drum). We complemented the percussion instruments in this 
particular performance with a vocoded voice part, using a small iRig 
MIDI keyboard for control, a headset microphone, a vocoder patch 
created in MobMuPlat, and the same Fender Passport Mini amplifier 
that was used for the electronic percussion instruments.  
 
 
Figure 6. Jeff Snyder’s “trigger instrument”, a marching 
snare-style wooden surface with a wearable support . 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Quinn Collins’s “trigger instrument”, meant to be 
struck with a drum stick.  
 
7. FUTURE WORKs 
While the current version of the group focuses entirely on percussion, 
we would like to add many more instr ument types, such as bass 
instruments and portable electronic wind instruments. Other genres 
of music, such as Balkan brass bands or New Orleans brass bands, 
would be very interesting to approach electronically. While we chose 
to perform existing repertoire to make the initial development of the 
group simpler, we would like to work up original compositions, 
preferably from within the group itself. We intend to continue 
exploring this idea for the foreseeable future. 
8. ADDITIONAL AUTHORS 
Molly Bolten, Carolyn Chen, Cenk Ergün, Noah Fishman, M ike 
Mulshine, and A.K. Williams, Quinn Collins. 
9. REFERENCES 
[1] P. Cook and G. Scavone. The Synthesis Toolkit (STK). In 
Proceedings of ICMC 99 (Beijing, China). 
[2] S. Kettner. Maracatu for Drumset and Percussion:  
A Guide to the Traditional Brazilian Rhythms of Maractu 
de Baque Virado. Milwaukee, WI : Hal Leonard, c2013.  
[3] J. Oh, J. Herrera, N. Bryan, L. Dahl, and G. Wang . 
Evolving the Mobile Phone Orchestra. In Proceedings of NIME 
2010 (Sydney, Australia, 2010). 
[4] A Tanaka. Mobile Music Making. In Proceedings of NIME 
2004 (Japan, 2004).  
[5] D. Trueman, P. Cook, G. Wang, S. Smallwood. The Princeton 
Laptop Orchestra, Year 1. In Proceedings of the ICMC 2006, 
(New Orleans, LA, 2006). 
[6] G. Wang, MoPho – A Suite for Mobile Phone Orchestra. In 
Proceedings of the ICMC 2008 (Belfast, 2008).  
[7] http://itchyo.com/ 
[8] http://www.mobmuplat.com/ 
[9] http://libpd.cc/ 
[10] http://music.columbia.edu/~brad/irtcmix/ 
[11] http://beepstreet.com/impaktor 
[12] http://www.brunozamborlin.com/mogees/
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
150