Problems and Prospects for Intimate Musical Control of Computers
David Wessel and Matthew Wright
Center for New Music and Audio Technologies
Department of Music
University of California Berkeley
Berkeley, California 94720
1 510 643 9990
{wessel, matt}@cnmat.berkeley.edu
Abstract
In this paper we describe our efforts towards the
development of live performance computer-based musical
instrumentation.   Our design criteria include initial ease
of use coupled with a long term potential for virtuosity,
minimal and low variance latency, and clear and simple
strategies for programming the relationship between
gesture and musical result.   We present custom
controllers and unique adaptations of standard gestural
interfaces, a programmable connectivity processor, a
communications protocol called Open Sound Control
(OSC), and a variety of metaphors for musical control. 
We further describe applications of our technology to a
variety of real musical performances and directions for
future research.
Keywords
Gestural controllers, communications protocols, musical
signal processing, latency, reactive computing
Introduction
When asked what musical instrument they play, there are
not many computer music practitioners who would
respond spontaneously with “I play the computer.”  Why
not?  In this report we examine the problems associated
with the notion of the computer as musical instrument
and the prospects for their solution.
Here at the onset it would be useful to consider some of
the special features that computer technology brings to
musical instrumentation. Most traditional acoustic
instruments such as strings, woodwinds, brass, and
percussion place the performer in direct contract with the
physical sound production mechanism.  Strings are
plucked or bowed, tubes are blown, and surfaces are
struck.  Here the performer’s gesture plays a direct role in
exciting the acoustic mechanism.  With the piano and
organ the connection between gesture and sound is
mediated by a mechanical linkage and in some modern
organs by an electrical connection.  But the relation
between the gesture and the acoustic event remains pretty
much in what one might call a one gesture to one
acoustic event paradigm.
When sensors are used to capture gestures and a
computing element is used to generate the sound, a
staggering range of possibilities become available. Sadly
but understandably, the electronic music instrument
industry with its insistence on standard keyboard
controllers maintains the traditional paradigm.   Musical
instruments and their gestural interfaces make their way
into common use or not for a variety of reasons most of
which are social in character.  These more sociological
aspects like the development or not of a repertoire for the
instrument are beyond the scope of this paper.   Here we
will concentrate on factors such as ease of use, potential
for development of skill, reactive behavior, and coherence
of the cognitive model for control.   
In the figure below we provide a conceptual framework for
our controller research and development. Our human
performer has intentions to produce a certain musical
result. These intentions are communicated to the body’s
sensorimotor system (“motor program”).  Parameters are
sensed from the body at the gestural interface. These
parameters are then passed to controller software that
conditions, tracks, and maps them to the algorithms that
generate the musical material.   Admittedly this diagram
is schematic and incomplete.  One aspect that is not well
captured by it is the way in which performers’ intentions
are elaborated upon by discovery of new possibilities
afforded by the instrument. Experimental and otherwise
exploratory intentions are certainly dear to the authors. 
We find that this albeit schematic framework allows us to
view the roles of human motor learning, controller
mapping, and generative software  as an overall adaptive
system [1].
Unlike the one gesture to one acoustic event paradigm our
framework allows for generative algorithms to produce
complex musical structures consisting of many events.
One of our central metaphors for musical control is that of
driving or flying about in a space of musical processes.
Gestures move through time as do the musical processes.
Low entry fee with no ceiling on virtuosity
Getting started with a computer-based instrument should
be relatively easy but this early stage ease-of-use should
not stand in the way of the continued development of
musical expressivity.   Most of the traditional acoustical
musical instruments are not easy to play at first but do
afford the development of a high degree of musicality. 
On the other hand many of the simple-to-use computer
interfaces proposed for musical control seem, after even a
brief period of use, to have a toy-like character and do not
invite continued musical evolution.  
NIME01-11
Proceedings of the CHI'01 Workshop on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-01), Seattle, USA
Is the low entry fee with no ceiling on virtuosity an
impossible dream?   We think not and argue that a high
degree of control intimacy can be attained with
compelling control metaphors, reactive low latency
variance systems, and proper treatment of gestures that are
continuous functions of time.   With the potential for
control intimacy assured by the instrument, musicians
will be much more inclined to the continued development
of performance skill and personal style.
Latency requirements for control intimacy
Few practitioners of live performance computer music
would deny that low latency is essential.   Just how low
is the subject of considerable debate.  We place the
acceptable upper bound on the computer’s audible reaction
to gesture at 10 milliseconds (ms) and the systems
described in this paper provide for measured [2] latencies
nearer 7 ms.
Low variation of latency is critical and we argue that the
range of variation should not exceed 1 ms. Grace-note-
generated timbres as in flams can be controlled by
percussionists with temporal precision of less than 1 ms.
This is accomplished by controlling the relative distance
of the sticks from head during the stroke. Timbral
changes in the flams begin to become audible when the
variations in the time between the grace note and the
primary note exceed 1 ms. Psychoacoustic experiments on
temporal auditory acuity provide striking evidence for this
criterion [3, 4]. As we will argue below, prospects for the
solution to the latency variation problem can be resolved
by using time tags or by treating gestures as continuous
signals tightly synchronized with the audio I/O stream.
Discrete Event Versus Continuous Control
MIDI is a discrete event protocol.  MIDI events turn notes
on and off and update changes in controller values.  MIDI
events are almost never synchronized with digital audio
samples.  Furthermore, MIDI provides no mechanism for
atomic updates.  Chords are always arpeggios and even
when MIDI events are time tagged at the input of a
synthesizer they arrive as a sequence.  Moore [5],
McMillen [6], and Wright [7] provide numerous examples
of the dysfunction of MIDI.  Much of this dysfunction is
addressed by the Open Sound Control (OSC) protocol
described below.  
Many musical gestures are continuous functions of time
and should be treated as such, for example, the position
along the string of a finger on a violinist’s left hand. The
new generation of software synthesis systems such as
Max/MSP     www.cycling74.com    , SuperCollider
www.audiosynth.com    , PD    http://www-   
crca.ucsd.edu/~msp/software.html   , and Open Sound
World (OSW)     www.cnmat.Berkeley.EDU/OSW      provide
for multi-rate signal processing.   In these programming
environments it is quite natural to treat gestures with a
sample-synchronous signal processing approach.
CNMAT’s connectivity processor [8] described below
provides a mechanism for getting continuous gestures
into the computer in a manner that is very tightly
synchronized with the audio sample stream.  With this
system we demonstrate a significant increase in control
intimacy.
Open Sound Control (OSC)
Open Sound Control is a discrete event protocol for
communication among controllers, computers, sound
synthesizers, and other multimedia devices that is
optimized for modern networking technology. Entities
within a system are addressed individually by an open-
ended URL-style symbolic naming scheme that includes a
powerful pattern matching language to specify multiple
recipients of a single message. We provide high-
resolution time tags and a mechanism for specifying
groups of messages whose effects are to occur
simultaneously. Time tags allow one to implement a
scheduling discipline [9] that reduces jitter by trading it
for latency.
OSC’s use of symbolic names simplifies controller
mapping and its hierarchical name space helps in the
management of complexity.    There is also a mechanism
for dynamically querying an OSC system to find out its
capabilities and documentation of its features.
OSC has been integrated into Max/MSP (by Matthew
Wright), Csound     www.csounds.com     (by Stefan Kersten
and Nicola Bernardini) SuperCollider (by James
McCartney), and OSW (by Amar Chaudhury).   It has
been used in a variety of contexts involving controllers.
See     www.cnmat.berkeley.edu/OSC     for more detail and
downloadable OSC software.
A Programmable Connectivity Processor
The conventional approach for communicating gesture and
sound to real-time performance systems is to combine a
microcontroller or DSP chip with A/D, D/A convertors
and a network interface such as a MIDI serial controller.
We have developed an alternative, more flexible approach
that supports scalable implementations from a few
channels of audio and gestures to hundreds of channels.
Our new system to address computer music and audio
connectivity problems is based on integrating all digital
functions on a single field programmable gate array
(FPGA). All functions are determined by compiling high-
level hardware descriptions (in VHDL) into FPGA
configurations. This approach allows the considerable
investment in developing the interface logic to each
peripheral to be easily leveraged on a wide variety of
FPGA's from different vendors and of different sizes.
Since FPGA's are now available in sizes greater than a
million gates, entire DSP and microcontrollers can also
be integrated if required.
We have developed and tested VHDL descriptions for
processing serial audio data for the SSI, S/PDIF,
AES/EBU, AES-3, and ADAT industry standards. For
gestures that are continuous we sample at submultiples of
the audio rate and have VHDL modules for multichannel
8-bit, 12-bit and 16-bit A/D converters. We also provide
modules for multiple MIDI input and output streams.
Although such descriptions have been developed for
NIME01-12
Proceedings of the CHI'01 Workshop on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-01), Seattle, USA
proprietary systems, this library of modules represents the
first complete, independent suite available in VHDL.
This suite makes possible some unusual cross codings
such as embedding gestural data in audio streams,
increasing temporal precision by exploiting isochronous
data paths in the control processor.  We sample
continuous gestural signals at a submultiple of the audio
sampling rate, multiplex the channels, and represent them
as audio input signals.  This allows us to get gestural
signals into our software with the same low latencies as
audio input, and guarantees that gestural and audio input
signals will be tightly synchronized.
A novel module of particular importance in portable
computer-music performance systems implements fast
Ethernet from the hardware layer up through IP to the
UDP protocol of TCP/IP. Because of the importance of
Internet performance, Fast Ethernet implementations are
extremely reliable and finely tuned on all modern
operating systems.
A key feature of the connectivity processor is the analog
subsystem for continuous gesture acquisition. We
currently provide for 32 channels of analog-to-digital
conversion.  Voltage ranges of the converters are
selectable as are the sampling rates which are constrained
to be integer divisions of the audio rate and the
appropriate antialiasing filter cutoff frequencies.
Our system combines VHDL connectivity modules that
multiplexes 8 channels of bidirectional audio, MIDI,
S/PDIF and transduced gestures into UDP packets which
are exchanged with a portable computer using new,
customized ASIO drivers in Max/MSP. See
www.cnmat.berkeley.edu/ICMC2000    for a more detailed
description of CNMAT’s connectivity processor.
Musical Control Structures for Standard
Gestural Controllers
Throughout history, people have adapted whatever objects
were in their environment into musical instruments. The
computer industry has invested significant resources in
creating broadly available, low cost gestural controllers
without any musical application in mind; thoughtful
adaptation of these controllers for music is a fruitful yet
overlooked route.
We find the latest incarnations of the venerable digitizing
tablet (a.k.a. “artist's tablet”) very interesting for musical
control. Tablets offer accurate and fast absolute position
sensing of cordless devices in three dimensions.
Additionally, pressure, orientation, tilt and rotation
estimates are available. The tablet we use allows for
simultaneous sensing of two devices, usually one in each
hand. This rich, multidimensional control information
can be mapped to musical parameters in a variety of
interesting ways.
The most direct kind of mapping associates a single
synthesis parameter with each control dimension, for
example, vertical position controlling loudness,
horizontal position controlling pitch, etc.  This kind of
mapping proved to be musically unsatisfying, exhibiting
the toy-like characteristic that does not allow for the
development of virtuosity.
More interesting interfaces define regions of the tablet
associated with particular behaviors. For example, one
region might consist of a grid providing access to a large
palette of musical material, while other regions represent
musical processes that can operate on selected musical
material.  Repeating rhythmic cycles can be represented
graphically on a region of the tablet, and sonic events can
be placed at particular time points within the cycle [10].
We have created software in the Max/MSP environment
that we use to develop control structures for the two-
handed digitizing tablet. Examples include navigation in
timbre space, multidimensional synthesis control, note
stream synthesis, and emulations of the gestures of
strumming, plucking and bowing strings. We also
developed an interactive musical installation that uses two
joystick controllers.
Some Custom Controllers
At CNMAT we have developed applications for variety of
custom controllers, these include Don Buchla’s Thunder
and Lightning     www.buchla.com    , Tactex controllers
www.tactex.com    , Force Sensing Resistor (FSR)
technology [11], and Piezo electric sensors in conjunction
with percussion [12]. We currently have research  projects
underway that exploit a key feature of the previously
described connectivity processor – namely the
synchronization of control signals with the audio I/O
stream.   These projects include an organ keyboard with
continuous sensing of each key position [13], a variety of
micro-accelerometer projects, and new FSR devices. 
In addition we have developed new sensor systems for
multidimensional string motion [14] and have made some
advances in extracting control signals from vocal sounds.  
Metaphors for Musical Control
As suggested in the introduction, metaphors for control
are central to our research  agenda.  We have found the
work of George Lakoff and his collaborators [15, 16] on
embodied cognition to be particularly applicable.  They
argue that abstract concepts like time and space and even
the loftier concepts of mathematics are grounded in
sensorimotor experience.  We now present some of the
metaphors that have inspired the development of our
controller software.
Drag and Drop
The drag and drop metaphor is well known to users of the
Apple Macintosh.  An object is selected picked up and
dropped upon a process.   This is a natural application of
Lakoff’s movement and container metaphors.   Our drag
and drop system has been extended to the problem of the
control of musical processes using the pen and tablet
interface.  Musical material is selected and then dropped
onto a musical process.
One of the most critical features of any musical control
system is a silencer, a mechanism that allows the
performer to gracefully shut down a musical process.  To
this end we have the performer place the pen on the
NIME01-13
Proceedings of the CHI'01 Workshop on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-01), Seattle, USA
process and using a circular motion like the traditional
copy editor’s cursive delete sign the process is silenced at
a rhythmically appropriate point in time. Other interfaces
use the “eraser” end of the pen to silence processes.
Scrubbing and its Variants
Sinusoidal models allow arbitrary time-scale
manipulation without any change in pitch or spectral
shape.  We have built “scrubbing” interfaces for the tablet
in which one dimension of the pen’s position on the
tablet maps to the time index of a sinusoidal model.
Moving the pen gradually from left to right at the
appropriate rate results in a resynthesis with the original
temporal behavior, but any other gesture results in an
alteration of the original.  This interface allows a
performer to play more arbitrary musical material, while
preserving the fine continuous structure of the original
input sounds.  This kind of interface has been used in live
performance contexts with classical Indo-Pakistani
singing [17], trombone samples with expressive
glissandi, and saxophone quartet material.
Other dimensions of the tablet sensing data, e.g.,
pressure, tilt, and vertical position, can be mapped to
synthesis parameters such as loudness and spectral shape.
Dipping
In the “dipping” metaphor the computer constantly
generates musical material via a musical process, but this
material is silent by default.  The performer controls the
volume of each process, e.g., using a poly-point touch-
sensitive interface with the pressure in each region
mapped to the volume of a corresponding process.  Other
gestural parameters control other parameters of the
musical processes.
An advantage of this metaphor is that each musical event
can be precisely timed, regardless of the latency or jitter
of the gestural interface.  Once a given process is made
audible, its rhythm is not dependent on the performer in
an event-by-event way.
This kind of interface is most satisfying when there are
multiple simultaneous musical processes of different
timbres, allowing the performer to orchestrate the result in
real-time by selecting which processes will be heard.
Acknowledgments
Special thanks to Rimas Avizienis, Adrian Freed, and
Takahiko Suzuki for their work on the connectivity
processor and to Gibson Guitar, DIMI, and the France
Berkeley Fund for their generous support.
References
[1] M. A. Lee and D. Wessel, “Connectionist
models for real-time control of synthesis and
compositional algorithms,” Proceedings of the
International Computer Music Conference, 1992.
[2] A. Freed, A. Chaudhary, and B. Davila,
“Operating Systems Latency Measurement and Analysis
for Sound Synthesis and Processing Applications,”
Proceedings of the International Computer Music
Conference, Thessaloniki, Hellas, 1997.
[3] D. Ronken, “Monaural detection of a phase
difference between clicks,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 47,
pp. 1091-1099, 1970.
[4] G. B. Henning and H. Gaskell, “Monaural phase
sensitivity measured with Ronken's paradigm,” J. Acoust.
Soc. Am., vol. 70, pp. 1669-1673, 1981.
[5] F. R. Moore, “The Dysfunctions of MIDI,”
Computer Music Journal, vol. 12, num. 1, pp. 19-28,
1988.
[6] K. McMillen, “ZIPI - Origins and Motivations,”
Computer Music Journal, vol. 18, num. 4, pp. 47-51,
1994.
[7] M. Wright, “A comparison of MIDI and ZIPI,”
Computer Music Journal, vol. 18, num. 4, pp. 86-91,
1994.
[8] A. Freed, R. Avizienis, T. Suzuki, and D.
Wessel, “Scalable Connectivity Processor for Computer
Music Performance Systems,” presented at International
Computer Music Conference, Berlin, Germany, 2000.
[9] R. Dannenberg, “Real-Time Scheduling and
Computer Accompaniment,” in Current Directions in
Computer Music Research, M. V. Mathews and J. R.
Pierce, Eds. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press,
1989, pp. 225-261. 
[10] M. Wright and D. Wessel, “An Improvisation
Environment for Generating Rhythmic Structures Based
on North Indian "Tal" Patterns,” presented at International
Computer Music Conference, Ann Arbor, Michigan,
1998.
[11] J. B. Rovan, M. M. Wanderley, S. Dubnov, and
P. Depalle, “Instrumental Gestural Mapping Strategies as
Expressivity Determinants in Computer Music
Performance,” presented at KANSEI - The Technology of
Emotion, 1997.
[12] E. Campion, “Playback” (musical composition).
Paris: CNMAT and IRCAM, 1999.
[13] A. Freed and R. Avizienis, “A New Music
Keyboard featuring Continuous Key-position Sensing and
High-speed Communication Options,” presented at
International Computer Music Conference, Berlin,
Germany, 2000.
[14] A. Freed and O. Isvan, “Musical Applications of
New, Multi-axis Guitar String Sensors,” presented at
International Computer Music Conference, Berlin,
Germany, 2000.
[15] G. Lakoff and R. E. Núñez, Where Mathematics
Comes From: How the Embodied Mind Brings
Mathematics into Being. New York: Basic Books, 2000.
[16] G. Lakoff and M. Johnson, Philosophy in the
flesh : the embodied mind and its challenge to Western
thought. New York: Basic Books, 1999.
[17] D. Wessel, M. Wright, and S. A. Khan,
“Preparation for Improvised Performance in Collaboration
with a Khyal Singer,” presented at International Computer
Music Conference, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 1998.
NIME01-14
Proceedings of the CHI'01 Workshop on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-01), Seattle, USA