Music Everywhere – Augmented Reality Piano 
Improvisation Learning System 
 
 
Shantanu Das, Seth Glickman, Fu Yen Hsiao, Byunghwan Lee  
Entertainment Technology Center 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA 
{ shantand, sglickma, fuyenh, byunghwl }@andrew.cmu.edu 
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper describes the design and impleme ntation of an 
augmented reality (AR) piano learning tool that uses a 
Microsoft HoloLens and a MIDI -over-Bluetooth-enabled 
electric piano. The tool presents a unique visual interfa ce—a 
“mirror key overlay” approach— fitted for the AR environment, 
and opens up the possibility of on- instrument learning 
experiences. The curriculum focuses on teaching improvisation 
in blues, rock, jazz and classical genres. Users at the piano 
engage with interactive lessons, watch virtual hand 
demonstrations, see and hear example improvisations, and play 
their own solos and accompaniment along with AR-projected 
virtual musicians. The tool aims to be entertaining yet also 
effective in teaching core musical concepts. 
 
Author Keywords 
Augmented reality, Microsoft HoloLens, transformational 
games, music learning, improvisation 
 
ACM Classification 
Human-centered computing~Mixed / augmented reality, 
Applied computing~Sound and music computing,  
Applied computing~Interactive learning environments     
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The majority of computer-aided piano education tools use a 
screen-based display to convey information to the user [1, 2]. 
Other systems use hardware -based indicators —such as 
embedded LED key lights  [3]— to guide users to the intended 
keys to play. There are problems with both of these approaches. 
 Traditional screen-based learning tools require users to 
visually transfer information from the device or screen to apply 
on the actual instrument. Hardware-based learning tools 
provide more direct guidance, but user engagement is 
diminished due to its limited display capabilities. 
 As a solution, augmented reality (AR) technology provides 
an ideal piano-learning environment. By projecting information 
onto the ins trument, an AR system can create  more direct 
interactions for the user [4], removing the need to transfer 
information from a separate screen. With its ability to project 
virtual objects into the user’s visual perspective [5], it creates a 
new space to expl ore additional user-engagement activities and 
learning possibilities, beyond what existing screen-based or 
hardware tools can achieve.  
2. RELATED WORK 
A number of piano-learning applications already exist in the 
field. The Piano Tutor, developed by Dannenberg et al . (1990) 
[6], was one of the early implementations. Among its features 
is a grading mechanism that evaluates aspects of a user’s 
performance and identifies mistakes such as accuracy of pitch, 
timing and dynamics. As an intelligent system, it reports  these 
errors and provides user guidance to correct mistakes. A MIDI 
interface is used for such detection. The project established the 
foundation for other commercial music education systems that 
followed, such as Yousician [1] and others, which use screen-
based displays. There are even other systems, like The ONE 
Smart Piano [3], that share similar lesson methodologies , but 
use hardware in place of the screen-based displays.  
A recent system implemented by Chow et al . (2013) [4] goes 
further by utilizing A R as their display technology. It follows 
previous AR piano learning initiatives such as AR Piano Tutor  
(Barakonyi 2005) [7] and Piano AR (Huang 2011) [8] and uses 
a MIDI interface and an optical marker for tracking the position 
of the real piano. 
Rocksmith [9] by Ubisoft, emerged from a  family of products 
that combine game mechanics with music learning. Its system 
uses a MIDI -enabled guitar to communicate the notes and 
chords the user should play. 
 
 
Figure 1: The rock showcase demonstration (Mixed reality 
capture shot) 
 
3. DESIGN 
The core of the Music Everywhere experience is a scaffolded 
curriculum, designed primarily to develop instrument 
familiarity, train pianistic skills, and provide immersion and 
engagement. 
 Lessons direct user s to work with their hands apart at first, 
isolating for right hand improvisation and left hand 
accompaniment. Further, the user’s focus is limited to only a 
few notes, gradually adding new ones as the lessons progress. 
 Throughout each step of the curriculum, users are guided 
through improvisation examples, demonstrated both aurally and 
visually. Focus is placed on encouraging correct play rather 
than highlighting mistakes made, and reinforcing aspects of 
melodic development, variation, rhythmic phrasing a nd other 
musical strategies. Users learn concepts and techniques via 
interactive lessons and rehearse their skills in practice sessions 
with the virtual musicians. 
 To accomplish these learning objectives, the following 
features were designed and applied.  
511
3.1 Bluetooth-over-MIDI Connection 
To facilitate communication between the HoloLens and the 
electric piano, a MIDI -over-Bluetooth protocol is employed. 
Music Everywhere’s I/O module uses the Universal Windows 
Platform ( UWP) MIDI support API, through which 
bidirectional key events can be detected, sent and received, 
allowing the HoloLens to know when a piano key is pressed—
along with the associated velocities and durations —and/or the 
electric piano to know when a piano key should be triggered 
automatically. 
3.2 Visual User Interface (UI) Design: Mirror 
Key Overlays 
 
 
Figure 2:  Different type of overlays – Precision overlay 
indicators (left), Improvisation overlay indicators (right) 
 
Augmented reality “mirror key” overlays are positioned 
perpendicularly to the physical keys, providing unobstructed 
visual instruct ion, while connecting directly to the indicated 
keys. Additionally, their location encourages proper eye -
positioning, directing the user’s focus above the keys during 
play. This counteracts the tendency to drift one’s gaze 
downward. In the mirror key syste m, there are two distinct 
types of UI overlays: 
 
•  Precision overlay indicators  guide users to play 
individual notes, at specific timings and durations, all with 
the proper fingerings. This is useful and effective when the 
objective is to teach the user a particular melodic line. 
 
•  Improvisation overlay indicators  highlight a range of 
notes that will sound harmonious when played along with 
chords in a given progression. As the background chords 
change, the note ranges shift to match. 
3.3 Virtual Musicians 
During the Music Everywhere lessons, guests play alongside 
animated, virtual musicians in blues, jazz, rock and classical 
ensembles. In addition to providing enhanced visual 
engagement, their inclusion in the AR space offers several 
important experiential benefits. 
 
•  Genre theming informs users about the style of music they    
will play without the  need for lengthy instructional 
exposition. 
 
•  Synchronization between the music and visually-
represented musicians simulates the real  experience of 
playing with others. 
 
•  Users learn the correct context in which to use 
improvisation and, alternatively, accompaniment skills. 
3.4 Additional Features 
• Animated Hand : In order to demonstrate correct hand 
positioning and more advanced playing techniques, a 3D 
virtual hand is  introduced into the AR space. Users can 
observe the demonstrations or place their hands directly 
within the projection during play to follow along. A hand 
recording pipeline was implemented to capture the 
performance of a real pianist. A Leap Motion hand 
tracking device was used, in conjunction with a custom -
built glass casing to overcome Leap Motion’s capture 
errors. Further, we developed a key frame  animation 
system to edit and improve loss and inaccuracies 
commonly obtained during the hand data capture process. 
 
• Lesson Builder: A development framework was deployed 
to ensure the creation of engaging lesson content . The 
lesson builder includes multiple component nodes (e.g. 
key highlighting, virtual musician spawning, audio clip 
playback, etc.) and provides a gra phical user interface 
(GUI) editor for non-technical designers to build and 
iterate lesson sequences.  
 
• Score Reader : The system can import and parse any 
musical score from the notation software, Sibelius, via 
the MusicXML format. Once score data is loaded , all 
lesson components can access the imported music. For 
example, an animation node can sync a virtual musician’s 
movements to the notes contained in the player’s musical 
score, coordinating with the particular sound files for 
their parts. As well, the piano “mirror key” overlays are 
driven by data from an imported Sibelius score. 
4. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We are grateful to the faculty and administration of Carnegie 
Mellon University’s Entertainment Technology Center for 
approving and supporting this graduate student pitch project. 
Special thanks to Roger Dannenberg, Anthony Daniels, Tina 
Blaine, Ralph Vituccio, Dave Culyba, Brenda Harger and Jesse 
Schell for their valued insight and assistance. 
5. REFERENCES 
[1] Yousician. Yousician. Web & Mobile. Finland. 2014  
[2] Piano Wizard Academy, Piano Wizard, Software, US. 2005 
[3] The ONE Smart Piano, The One Light, Hardware, China. 
2016 
[4] J. Chow, H. Feng, R. Amor & B. C. Wiinsche, ‘Music 
Education using Augmented Reality with a Head Mounted 
Display’, Proceedings of the Fourteenth Austr alasian 
User Interface Conference (AUIC), 2013 
[5] R. T. Azuma, ‘A survey of Augmented Reality’, Presence-
Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 6(4), pp. 335-385, 
1997 
[6] R. B. Dannenberg, M, Sanchez, A. Joseph, P. Capell, R. 
Joseph & R. Saul, ‘A computer based multi-media tutor for 
beginning piano students’, in Journal of New Music Research 
19, pp 155-173, 1990  
[7] I. Barakonyi & D. Schmalstieg, ‘Augmented reality agents in 
the development pipeline of computer entertainment’, in 
‘Proceedings of the 4th international conference on 
Entertainment Computing’, ICEC’05, Springer -Verlag, 
Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 345–356, 2005 
[8] F. Huang, ‘Piano AR: A markerless augumented reality based 
piano teaching system’, in ‘Proc. Of the International 
Conference on Intelligent Human- Machin Systems and 
Cybernetics (IHMSC)’, 2011  
[9] Ubisoft, Rocksmith, Playstation3 & Xbox360, US 2011  
 
6. VIDEO APPENDIX 
Product video: https://goo.gl/D33VQt 
Demonstration video: https://goo.gl/FL3ptp
512