PocoPoco: A Kinetic Musical Interface With
Electro-Magnetic Levitation Units
Yuya Kikukawa
Graduate School of System
Design, Tokyo Metropolitan
University
6-6 Asahigaoka, Hino
Tokyo JAPAN
Takaharu Kanai
Graduate School of System
Design, Tokyo Metropolitan
University
6-6 Asahigaoka, Hino
Tokyo JAPAN
Tatsuhiko Suzuki
Graduate School of System
Design, Tokyo Metropolitan
University
6-6 Asahigaoka, Hino
Tokyo JAPAN
Toshiki Y oshiike
Graduate School of System
Design, Tokyo Metropolitan
University
6-6 Asahigaoka, Hino
Tokyo JAPAN
Tetsuaki Baba
Graduate School of System
Design, Tokyo Metropolitan
University
6-6 Asahigaoka, Hino
Tokyo JAPAN
baba@sd.tmu.ac.jp
Kumiko Kushiyama
Graduate School of System
Design, Tokyo Metropolitan
University
6-6 Asahigaoka, Hino
Tokyo JAPAN
kushi@sd.tmu.ac.jp
ABSTRACT
We developed original solenoid actuator units with several
built-in sensors, and produced a box-shaped musical inter-
face \PocoPoco" using 16 units of them as a universal in-
put/output device. We applied up-and-down movement of
the solenoid-units and user's intuitive input to musical in-
terface. Using transformation of the physical interface, we
can apply movement of the units to new interaction design.
At the same time we intend to suggest a new interface whose
movement itself can attract the user.
Keywords
musical interface, interaction design, tactile, moving, kinetic
1. INTRODUCTION
Today a tremendous amount of audio and visual informa-
tion is stuﬀed onto the at displays of smart phones. It
is no doubt a very convenient age, but a little bit uniform.
Our research focuses on interfaces with dynamic movements
and interfaces that can change their own shape dynami-
cally [1][6][7]. Michelitsch suggests shape-changing inter-
face called \haptic Chameleon"[9]. Parkes, et al. argued
about kinetic interaction, as they called \Kinetic Organic
Interface"[14]. They mentioned its specication and pos-
sibility for Human Computer Interaction. We have devel-
oped a box-shaped device called PocoPoco which controls
the movement of columnar units with built-in solenoid ac-
tuators and utilizes them to give users dynamic tactile sen-
sations. Figure 1 shows PocoPoco device. PocoPoco is an
input/output device that can be used without visual infor-
mation, because it can indicate all input/output informa-
tion through tactile sensations. This device is a versatile
interface that can be used in a wide range of applications
including games, telecommunication, and musical perfor-
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’12,May 21 – 23, 2012, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Figure 1: Appearance of PocoPoco
mance. It was conceived as a new kind of interface which
can be used by both people with visual impairments and
people with normal vision.
In this paper we applied PocoPoco as a kinetic musical
interface like a music sequencer. By \pushing", \catching",
\turning" and \blocking" PocoPoco, users can play elec-
tronic music easily and intuitively. This simple interface
attracts the interest of many people from children to adults,
on the other hand this device ʟs various musical interaction
attracts many people from musical beginners to profession-
als.
2. RELATED WORKS
2.1 Musical Instrument
Tenori-on[12], a Product of Yamaha, is an instrument that
enables users to play music visually. They suggest the way
of playing musical instrument, like drawing. Its visual inter-
action is attractive, but doesn't have any kinetic elements
like ours.
Here we focus on kinetic musical interface, which can
move by itself. Haptic Drumstick by Berdahl et al. is a per-
cussion instrument that applies feedback control to change
drum-roll gestures[2]. It consists primarily of a drum pad
attached to the cone of a woofer by a lightweight, cardboard
cylinder. It assists user's drum play by adding energy to the
drumstick vibrations.
Figure 2: System of PocoPoco
Moog Guitar by Moog music Inc[10]. has almost innite
sustain. This guitar has a function to extend the sound
tone using an oscillating current to a pick-up unit. E-bow
by Heet Sound Products[4] and The Overtone Violin by
Overholt[13] also use an oscillating current to extend its
sound tone.
2.2 Tactile Display
There are several displays which can transform themselves.
Iwata et al. made FEELEX [5], a kinetic display consisting
of movable pin actuators using DC motors and Piston-crank
mechanism. Relief[8] by Leithinger et al. and Recompose[3]
by Blackshaw et al. are also kinetic displays using DC mo-
tors and faders. A kinetic display with a DC motor has
speed and power. On the other hand, it's noisy.
Kinetic displays powered by a shape memory alloy can
move quietly. Lumen[15] by Poupyrev et al. and PopUp![11]
By Nakatani et al. are kinetic displays using a shape mem-
ory alloy. A shape memory alloy can move very quietly,
but on the other hand it's not so powerful. And it takes
relatively long time to transform, so it is not convenient to
move rhythmically.
3. HARDWARE
3.1 Outline
Figure 2 indicates the system of PocoPoco based on mi-
cro controllers. This device consists of 16 I/O units \Poco"
and a circuit to control it. Output are MIDI messages,
up-and-down motion of movable units powered by solenoid
actuators and full color LED light. Up-and-down motion
and LED light are controlled by two micro controller (PIC,
Microchip) individually.
3.2 Poco : original I/O unit
We developed Poco, an original I/O unit consisting of push-
type DC solenoid actuator and several sensor input parts to
realize original interactions of PocoPoco. Poco consists of
a base part and a moving part. Poco can detect \pushing"
using a tactile switch, height of a moving part using a photo
interrupter, and rotation of a moving part using two photo
interrupters. Table 1 indicates the specication of the de-
vice (PocoPoco), table 2 indicates the specication of the
original I/O unit (Poco).
3.2.1 Solenoid Actuator
As can be seen on Figure 3, there is a built-in Neodymium
magnet at bottom of the moving part. There is also an
Figure 3: Appearance of the solenoid unit
Figure 4: Solenoid units which have LEDs
enameled wire in base part. Current passed through con-
ductive coils can generate a magnetic eld. So conductive
coils can be used as electromagnets. When the solenoid
unit is connected to electricity, magnetic force comes up,
the neodymium magnet is pushed by repulsion of the force,
and the moving part oat up.
PocoPoco uses a micro controller to control the electric
current. Electric current owing to the electromagnets causes
individual cylinders with built-in magnets to be raised and
lowered. The bottom of this solenoid actuator also contains
a tactile switch that is activated when a user presses down
on the cylinders and a photo interrupter that detects the
position of the solenoid actuator. So users can play the
applications of PocoPoco by simple pushing, holding, and
turning up the solenoid actuators.
3.2.2 Full Color LEDs
There is a full color LED on the top of the base part. This
LED can change its color controlled by the micro controller,
such as Red, Green, Blue, Cyan, Magenta, Yellow, White.
Each RGB channel's lights are turned on via matrix con-
trol. A controller for LED control and a master controller
communicate with serial communication. We applied this
LED light to indicate timeline, and particular Poco's situ-
ation (Figure 4 ), such as holding. Each layer has color, so
color assists users to nd which layer the user is editing at
that time.
3.3 Sensing
Figure 5: Relation of height of moving part and
output voltage(Upper left : normal actuation, Left
below : no actuation, Upper right : holding, Right
below : up and down)
Figure 6: The mechanism to detect direction of ro-
tation
3.3.1 Matrix Switch
16 tactile switches are located under solenoid units on ma-
trix to detect pushing interaction. To push the surface of the
moving part, an extended bar (shown in Figure 3 ) pushes
the tactile switch through the solenoid coil.
3.3.2 Detecting Height of Moving Part
We implemented an optical sensor (photo interrupter) onto
the base part in order to get height of the moving part. The
moving part could levitate about 20[mm] from bottom to
top. On the other hand, the photo interrupter could detect
up to 40[mm]. Therefore, our unit can detect the case that
the user pulls the moving part higher than the range of
moving part can levitate. As a result, it can detect whether
the user is pulling on the moving part or not.
Figure 5 shows relation voltage and height position of
moving part. Upper left shows the situation that the begin-
ning and end of levitation of moving part. Lower left shows
the static situation of moving part. Upper right shows the
situation that user catch and pull the moving part from the
base part. Lower right shows the situation that the user
moves moving part up and down.
3.3.3 Detecting Rotation of Moving Part
The user can rotate the moving part along the unit's vertical
axis. In order to detect the rotation, we implemented 2
kinds of optical sensor onto the base part( see gure 3), then
we made some slits around the moving part. After that, like
a rotary encoder, the unit detects the user's rotation from
which optical sensors detect slits rst. Figure 6 shows how it
detects. This is the same approach used by rotary encoders.
In our device, PocoPoco, we have to detect rotation and
up/down of moving part at the same time. Therefore, it
is diﬃcult to apply general kind of rotary encoders to our
system. That's why we decided to make our original units.
Table 1: Specication of PocoPoco
Operating voltage 12 [V]
Max Electric Requirements 60 [W]
Dimension 205x205x90(WxDxH) [mm]
Weight 1500 [g]
Material of Chassis ABS
Internal Communication Serial(31,250 bps)
External Communication MIDI in/out
Table 2: Specication of Unit
Distance between Each Solenoid 35[mm]
Range of Motion 20 [mm]
Average Speed of Motion 260 [mm/sec]
Maximum Speed of Motion 560 [mm/sec]
Weight 15 [g]
Total Coils 500
Wire Diameter of Coil 0.29 [mm]
Spec of magnet Neodymium, 409[mT]
Photo Interrupter for Rotation TPR-105F
Photo Interrupter for Height RPR-220
4. APPLICATION
4.1 Outline
Kinetic movements of physical interface attracts human's
mind, even little children. PocoPoco plays music with syn-
chronized movement and light. It has a possibility to attract
from children to adults. It is also a versatile musical inter-
face that can play as a musical sequencer or keyboard, just
by pushing, catching, and turning units. It has 16 sound lay-
ers. Users can choose a sound instrument just by pushing
some buttons. It uses MIDI communication and it can be
controlled by MIDI messages, including sequence rhythm.
4.2 Sequence Mode
Basically PocoPoco is used in sequence mode, with which
users can play improvised loop music. By using this mode
users can create fascinating loop music easily, just by push-
ing, catching, and turning cylindrical units (Poco). In this
mode, LEDs always indicate 1 bar timeline continuously(Figure
7 ). When a user pushes the top of a cylinder, its switch is
ipped to the \on" position causing the cylinder to rise and
a sound to play at regular intervals. When a Poco turned
on is pushed down, its switch is moved to the \oﬀ" position
and the sound stops.
Each Poco can be given its own sound tone and rhythm.
These tones are arranged so that a pleasant harmony results
no matter which combination of notes is used. By using this
sequencer to play music we are able to create both aural
and visual components of a performance at the same time,
thereby linking these two senses for the audience in ways
Figure 7: 16 beat time line of LED indicator
Figure 8: data communication ow
not normally experienced.
4.3 Real-time Mode
In Real-time mode, just like a MIDI keyboard, when a user
pushes a Poco, particular sound tone comes out. Each of
the 16 Poco is assigned a MIDI note. Users can use this
mode to play melodies.
4.4 Layers
PocoPoco has 16 layers including 12 sequence mode layers
and 4 real-time mode layers. A user can choose a layer by
pushing an external button and particular Poco at the same
time. Each layer uses respective MIDI channels. Users can
assign each layer's note to sound source as users like.
4.5 MIDI Speciﬁcation
PocoPoco has a MIDI I/O port and users can use it as a
MIDI interface. Connecting to some sound source (basically
we are supposing some Digital Audio Workstation, because
they are convenient to map a particular MIDI message to
a particular sound trigger) users can play PocoPoco with
sound as users like. Users also may have to prepare some
audio interface and speakers. Figure 8 indicates a data com-
munication ow from a user to a speaker. Connecting mul-
tiple PocoPocos to a sound source, users can play ensemble
by multiple players.
5. FUTURE WORK
Until now, we performed 8 musical performances and 9
demonstrations. Every time we get some feedbacks from
audience and users, we have been making many improve-
ments to PocoPoco.
We are now investigating the eﬀect of the device's phys-
ical motion on users. We are experimenting about it using
PocoPoco. We use eye mark recorder system ( EMR-9, nac
image technology ), and compare the trace of gaze direction
for instruments that have physical motion and those that
do not. The interface is so simple that playing PocoPoco is
very easy even for children and beginners with no musical
experience. On the other hand, PocoPoco is also a sophisti-
cated device which can be used to create compelling perfor-
mances. Our goal is to make a new musical interface which
takes kinetic aﬀordance dynamically, and provide new mu-
sical interaction. We continue to design more intuitive and
deep interaction.
6. REFERENCES
[1] T. Baba, T. Ushiama, and K. Tomimatsu. Emerging
keys: interactive electromagnetic levitation keys. In
ACM SIGGRAPH 2008 posters, SIGGRAPH '08,
pages 79:1{79:1, New York, NY, USA, 2008. ACM.
[2] E. Berdahl, B. Verplank, J. Smith III, and
G. Niemeyer. A physically - intuitive haptic
drumstick. In International Computer Music
Conference, slides, ICMC, Copenhagen Denmark,
2007.
[3] M. Blackshaw, A. DeVincenzi, D. Lakatos,
D. Leithinger, and H. Ishii. Recompose: direct and
gestural interaction with an actuated surface. In
Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference extended
abstracts on Human factors in computing systems,
CHI EA '11, pages 1237{1242, New York, NY, USA,
2011. ACM.
[4] G. Heet. String instrument vibration initiator and
sustainer, 1978.
[5] H. Iwata, H. Yano, F. Nakaizumi, and R. Kawamura.
Project feelex: adding haptic surface to graphics. In
Proceedings of the 28th annual conference on
Computer graphics and interactive techniques,
SIGGRAPH '01, pages 469{476, New York, NY,
USA, 2001. ACM.
[6] K. Kushiyama, R. Ikei, and S. Sasada. Tactile grass
landscape. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2008 posters,
SIGGRAPH '08, pages 39:1{39:1, New York, NY,
USA, 2008. ACM.
[7] K. Kushiyama, S. Sasada, M. Yasada, and
Y. Suzumura. Magnetosphere. In ACM SIGGRAPH
2007 posters, SIGGRAPH '07, New York, NY, USA,
2007. ACM.
[8] D. Leithinger and H. Ishii. Relief: a scalable actuated
shape display. In Proceedings of the fourth
international conference on Tangible, embedded, and
embodied interaction, TEI '10, pages 221{222, New
York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM.
[9] G. Michelitsch, J. Williams, M. Osen, B. Jimenez,
and S. Rapp. Haptic chameleon: a new concept of
shape-changing user interface controls with force
feedback. In CHI '04 extended abstracts on Human
factors in computing systems, CHI EA '04, pages
1305{1308, New York, NY, USA, 2004. ACM.
[10] M. Music. Moog guitar, 2008.
[11] M. Nakatani, H. Kajimoto, D. Sekighuchi,
N. Kawakami, and S. Tachi. Pop up!: a novel
technology of shape display of 3d objects. In ACM
SIGGRAPH 2004 Emerging technologies, SIGGRAPH
'04, pages 21{, New York, NY, USA, 2004. ACM.
[12] Y. Nishibori and T. Iwai. Tenori-on. In Proceedings of
the 2006 conference on New interfaces for musical
expression, NIME '06, pages 172{175, Paris, France,
France, 2006. IRCAM Centre Pompidou.
[13] D. Overholt. The overtone ddle: an actuated
acoustic instrument. In A. R. Jensenius, A. Tveit,
R. I. Gody, and D. Overholt, editors, Proceedings of
the International Conference on New Interfaces for
Musical Expression, pages 4{7, Oslo, Norway, 2011.
[14] A. Parkes, I. Poupyrev, and H. Ishii. Designing
kinetic interactions for organic user interfaces.
Commun. ACM, 51:58{65, June 2008.
[15] I. Poupyrev, T. Nashida, and M. Okabe. Actuation
and tangible user interfaces: the vaucanson duck,
robots, and shape displays. In Proceedings of the 1st
international conference on Tangible and embedded
interaction, TEI '07, pages 205{212, New York, NY,
USA, 2007. ACM.