Non haptic control of music by video analysis of hand 
movements : 14 years of experience with the «Caméra 
Musicale» 
 
Jacques Rémus 
Ipotam Mécamusique 
19 rue des Frigos   75014  Paris  France 
+33 1 45 82 874 40 
jr@directmail.org 
ABSTRACT 
The "Caméra Musicale" is an interface which allows a musical 
practice based on the movement of hands and fingers under a 
camera. Born from technologies and methods developed in the 
early eighties to create music from choreographic movements, 
the “Camera Musicale” has evolved during the nineties to 
become a user friendly device since 2003. This article describes 
its fundamental principles of operation, which have remained 
relatively unchanged. It then focuses on the importance of the 
choices necessary to be made while analyzing the video image. 
Keywords 
Musical Camera, camera musicale, non haptic instrument 
interface, musical hand's mappings, Jacques Rémus'sound 
sculptures and mechanical musical machines. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The "Caméra Musicale" is an instrumental interface which 
allows musical practice based on the position and movements 
of hands in space, in the scope of a video camera. After the first 
prototype was elaborated, its development was insured by 
constant experimentations. The first version (1992) had an 
audience interact by moving their hands in mid-air, controlling 
large and mechanical musical devices. The appeal of this 
version lied in the contrast between the immaterial nature of the 
movements and the materiality of the music produced by the 
machines.  
The system was immediately embraced by audiences of all 
kinds : Festival audiences, school kids, the handicapped, and of 
course, musicians. As years went by, thousands of people have 
played "Caméra Musicale" in various contexts. 
Consequentially, its development was in close relation with the 
audience and the "Caméra Musicale" evolved on grounds of 
experimentation - a very pragmatic, rather than scientific 
approach. 
These experiments also led to the development of another 
technology: an interface controlling audio or MIDI systems. 
2. ORIGINS AND DEVELOPMENTS 
The "Caméra Musicale" was born from research and works by 
Sylvain Aubin, with the "Manorine. 
A first prototype was developed in 1982 " (patent n° 82695, 
december 1982). The point of this work was to combine a 
logical interface between a video camera and analogical 
synthesizers. The main goal of such a machine was to create 
music for choreographic performances (Stéphanie Aubin, 
performances, Paris, Rennes 1986).  
The principle was based on the analysis of a clear surface (the 
body, or a part of the body) being detached in hyper-contrast on 
a black screen. This analysis brought up many characteristics of 
the moving spot: 
X and Y, global parameters giving the position of the object  
dX and dY, local parameters describing the size of the object 
 
dY
dX
Y
X
Mobile
Reference point    
Figure 1. Global and local parameters. 
 
After these first experiments, focusing on dance movements 
generating music, it was clear that the prototype was a relevant 
tool for artistic creation. However, its potential was restrained 
by the fact that it was hard to operate by non-technicians.  
In 1992 Jacques Rémus, Sylvain Aubin and Gwek Bure Soh, 
artist, associated to undertake the project of the "Caméra 
Musicale".  
A Manorine with a MIDI interface coupled with developments 
on the Max [1] software was then created. 
David Rokeby's VNS ("Very Nervous System") [2] initially 
 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME 06, June 4-8, 2006, Paris, France. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
250
developed for dance as well, was connected in parallel to the 
Manorine-MIDI, hence completing the first version of the 
"Caméra Musicale". 
The analysis of the Manorine was the core of the system, while 
the VNS was used to enhance the movement/sound reactions. 
3. GENERAL PRINCIPLES 
The "Caméra Musicale" is assembled in part from mainstream 
elements, available in the market. Those elements are combined 
to relatively easy developments, considering one is familiar 
with live electronics software (Max-MSP) 
Here are its main components: 
- A black and white camera.  A standard IR photo filter, 
positioned on the lens, allows exclusive infrared detection. The 
camera is aimed towards the floor and stands 1 to 3 meters 
above the player's hands.  
- An infrared projector - the type used for night surveillance 
(invisible in darkness). Next to the camera, it also aims towards 
the ground. This system allows the "Caméra Musicale" to 
remain unaffected by the various lightings, often problematic in 
live performances.   
 
Infra red light 
(50 - 80 W 
halogen type)
black and white 
small camera 
with infra red filter 
on the lens
2.30 up to 
2.50 m
from the 
ground to the 
camera
screw for 
microphone 
stand
Very easy 
position-
axles
standard 
microphone 
stand
 0.80 to 1 m 
from 
the 
microphone 
stand axle
 
Figure 2. Structure of the “Camera Musicale”. 
 
- An interface or a standard video computer card (e.g. a TV card 
for computer can very well do the job) 
- A software development on Max-MSP-Jitter [1],  allowing to 
control and chose, live, various parameters of video analysis 
and musical patches. Cyclops [1] or VNS [2] plug-ins or Jitter 
[1] developments are used to filter simple information from the 
very complex original image. The filtered data then enters in 
Max, in the form of a continuous flow (25 or 30 images per 
second). It's basically a software "Manorine" with important 
improvements from the plug-ins.  
- Musical instruments: synthesizers (expanders), musical 
machines, sound sculptures or computer generated sound (Max-
MSP) 
- One or many screens, showing the hands, allowing visual 
interaction for the player and audience. 
4. DESCRIPTION OF THE VIDEO/MIDI 
GENERATED INFORMATION 
The information resulting from the video analysis remain the 
center of the development. As described above (§2), there are 
four:  
- X and Y measure the position of the mobile 
- dX measures the widest part of the mobile's image.  
- dY measures its highest part.  
The dynamic of the mobile's movement (hands or fingers) is 
essentially rendered by the speed in which X', Y', dX' and dY' 
evolve. Their calculation in Max creates four new data flows. 
The calculation of the second derivation of the first four 
parameters (accelerations X", Y", dX", dY") creates once again 
four new data flows. 
The hands and fingers can be individualized and independent 
(by definitions of areas or mobile objects' individualization).  
On this basis, all the data that can be rendered by pixel 
variations in defined areas (principle of the VNS) and the 
indications of the grids from Cyclops complete and enrich the 
possible video analysis parameters 
5. NUMBER OF INDEPENDENT 
PARAMETERS A MUSICIAN CAN 
CONTROL  
The essential choice while operating the "Caméra Musicale" is 
the number of independent parameters the musician can control 
with the camera.  
In theory, the "Caméra Musicale" allows to play with a number 
of parameters, dependent or independent, in various predefined 
areas in space (drawn on the screen). (cf. §4) However, if the 
complexity can produce gratifying results with lots of feedback 
and automatisms, they are seldom relevant.  
 
The number of independent parameters a classical 
instrumentalist can control is relatively low: pitch, intensity, 
articulation, timbre and rhythm (succession of events in time). 
It hardly exceeds four or five.  
The same goes for the "Caméra Musicale", with three or four 
independent parameters. The time parameter, rhythm, is 
considered independently from the others.  
The "Caméra Musicale" is developed to read a limited number 
(from one to four) of data flows from the incoming information.  
Only very simple patches with two to four independent 
parameters could allow a good control of the outcome. This 
applies to the beginner as well as to the accomplished musician.  
On the other hand, the  chosen parameters can be very different 
from one try to another : X, X', X", Y, Y,' Y", dX, dX,' dX", 
dY, dY', dY", surfaces, number of pixels and their variations, 
etc. 
Example 1 (basic) : X specifies the pitch of the note or sound, Y 
specifies the intensity and dY" a change in the attack or timbre.  
Example 2: dots or small areas defined in X, Y are drawn on the 
screen and the parameters in which they accelerate to reach one 
another are used (variations of pixels combined with dX" and 
dY" ensembles). For example: the faster the movement is, the 
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
251
longer (or shorter, or harmonically transformed...) the note at 
the point of release (X, Y) will be. The hands move in space at 
different speeds and "touch" predetermined points (X, Y) which 
trigger the sounds, modulated by the speed of the movements. 
Example 3: a 12 note loop is automatically played: Its speed is 
increased in Y, its velocity in X, the length of its notes in dX 
and their attack in dX'. The  mapping then takes into account 
the width of the hands, or the distance between both hands 
(dX). However, if we add a change of timbre for dY', the 
control of yet another parameter would become too difficult.  
Once the choices are made, the possibilities of the mapping 
remain very wide, even if in practice (see § 7) the movements 
chosen by the players tend to imitate those of a pianist, harpist 
or drummer ! 
6. NON “HAPTIC” BODY LANGUAGE. 
These gestures are performed in mid-air and the player has 
counterbalance every movement he makes with its opposite, in 
order to keep balance. It is hard to master at the beginning, like 
all non return (non haptic) interfaces, but this doesn't take away 
the fact that the mapping is precise and pleasant. Moreover,  the 
body being entirely engaged in these gestures, the musician's 
body language can become an object of interest for the 
audience.  
Practice has proved that the changes between playing modes 
should be done by a different system that the gestures and the 
camera. Simple midi-pedals now allow such changes, with no 
risk of errors due to bad control of the gestures. 
7. EXPERIENCE WITH  PUBLIC AND 
MUSICIANS 
The "Caméra Musicale" in use since 1992 by large audiences 
with midi robotized acoustic machines and since 2003 by 
musicians on electro-acoustic sounds 
The "Caméra Musicale" was first used by the "Concertomatique 
N°2" ensemble [3] [9] made up of several pipe organs, a string 
quartet, percussion and machines with ringed pipes [3] [5]. 
Then, it was coupled with the "Carillons des Zic-phones" [3] 
[6]. the "Carillon Concertomatique N°3" (Festival Résonnances, 
Ircam, 2002) [3] [7]. and recently, with the "Pic-Verts" (Green 
Woodpeckers) [3], the "Ensemble des machines à laver 
musicales" (The Musical Washing Machine Ensemble) [3] [7] 
[8]  and the "Orgabulles" (Bubleorgan) [3]. 
In concerts, expositions, installations, animations and festivals, 
thousands of people played with such installations and the 
mappings were progressively developed and improved. All 
these experiments show the strength of cultural perceptions 
related to musical gestures of the instrumentalists or conductor. 
Surprisingly enough, such gestures were particularly present 
with musicians.  
The "Caméra Musicale" has always proposed innovative 
mappings (examples 2 and 3 from §5 only being a sample), but 
users will usually seek three primary types of gestures:  
1) The movement related to percussion - with the tip of the 
finger or pretending to hold a drumstick or mallet (triggering 
related to a neutral zone at the edge, below the screen, which 
takes into account the entry of the finger, hand or arm in the 
image (area drawn in X Y)  
2) The movement referring to the organization of pitches on a 
keyboard (low pitches at the left, high pitches at the right: X 
parameter). 
3) Reference to the intensity, or strength they put in their 
movements (Y', Y" or more oftenly, dY' and dY" or the 
variations of pixels in the VNS). 
If some mappings do not respect one of those three primary 
approaches, they are considered to be difficult, beyond 
understanding or unnatural.  
The "Caméra Musicale" is not adapted to the type of 
movements an instrumentalist would do, in order to imitate the 
basic technique of his instrument: moving the fingers, trying to 
find the notes on an invisible instrument. 
Research has to take account of such requests, but usually 
focuses on exploring other possibilities.  
It is actually with pre-written modules in the patches that the 
"Caméra Musicale" takes form of an original instrument: 
automatic arpeggios, prerecorded loops, prewritten sequence 
modulations (as the Max Mathews sticks) erase the note 
interpretation difficulty, and opens to modulations related to a 
conductor's work. 
In addition, the relationship with the Theremin is acquired by 
pitch-bends on the midi system and more easily again with 
sounds generated by calculation (Max-MSP).  
Finally, the last developments ("Signa" duo concerts with 
theremin player Rolf Sudman (Berlin)[3]) focused on the live 
treatment and samples (scratching) of the sung voice, spoken 
word and noise. The deformation of sound was, in all cases, 
controlled by movements based on the three primary criteria.. 
Table 1 indicates the use of the parameters in the plays.  
 
Mappin
gs type  X Y X' Y' X" Y" dX dY dX' dY' dX" dY" 
INSTR. impuls 5 5           
INSTR pitch 5 2      3     
INSTR velo  4  5    4  4 2 2 
INSTR modul  2     3 2 1 4 2 3 
ORCH. impuls             
ORCH. pitch 5 1           
ORCH. velo  4           
ORCH. modu       3 4     
THER. impuls             
THER. pitch 3 3           
THER. velo 3 3           
THER. modul       1 2   2 2 
D.AUD impuls 5 5           
D.AUD pitch 4 1  3   2 1     
D.AUD velo  4  2    4   2 3 
D.AUD modu 2        1 1   
Table 1.  Frequency of the parameters in the mappings 
(classified from 1 to 5)  
Legend : 
NSTR. = INSTRUMENTAL, ORCH. = ORCHESTAL 
THER. = THEREMIN LIKE, D.AUD = DIRECT AUDIO 
impuls = impulsion, velo =velocity, modul=modulations. 
 
This table is not a statistical study, but merely a representation 
of the users' tendencies. The numbers (0 to 5) represent about 
fifty mappings: 1 = seldom use to 5= always or almost. We 
notice that instrumental mappings and mappings using the 
audio are related to the instrumentalist's basic movements 
whereas the theremin or conductor mappings allow more 
fantasy and imagination in the choice of movements.   
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
252
8. CONCLUSION 
The "Caméra Musicale" is an interface for musical performance 
and also a tool for musical creation. Other research has been 
developed in the same direction. In addition to the works of 
David Rokeby, already mentionned [2], the works of Tom 
Demeyer  with the Big Eye software [10] have influenced this 
type of work - particularly with the residence at the Steim 
foundation.  
The "Caméra Musicale" opens new paths for future musical 
practices. Its originality and reliability has been tested and 
approved by a wide audience. Still far away from its full 
potential, it should however always consider the natural 
movements of instrumentalists. 
9. REFERENCES 
[1] Cycling 74 home page : http://cycling74.com  
[2] David Rokeby home page : 
http://homepage.mac.com/davidrokeby/ 
[3] Jacques Rémus and Ipotam Mécamusique home pages : 
http://jacquesremus.com  
http://mecamusique.com  
[4] Yamawaki, K., Jacques Rémus: the musical garden with 
informatics, robotics and musical instruments In Artec'97, 
The 5th International Biennale in Nagoya 1997 , official 
catalogue, 
(June 1997), The council for the international Biennale in 
Nagoya, Naganae printing Co, Japan, p.42-49. 
[5] Rémus, J. The music of ringed pipes In  Proceedings of the 
International Symposium on Musical Acoustics  
(July 2-6, 1995), SFA Jouve, Paris, France, p.69-73. 
[6] Rhobiny, S., Because of the wonderful things he does, In 
Kilometer zero N°3,  
The Kilometer zero project, 2002, ISSN: 1629-3274, p.50-
56  
[7] L'oeil de la nuit 2003 Parcours Paris Rive Gauche, official 
catalogue of Nuit blanche 2003,  
Paris Musées, Les Musées de la ville de Paris, Paris, ISBN  
20042-87900-831-X, p.136-137. 
[8] Installation sonore, Lavage de tympans In Nova Magazine, 
Connexions pirates, N°101, Paris, Mai 2003, p.25. 
[9] Official Catalogue of Musique en Scène Festival, Grame, 
Lyon, France, april 1995, p.8-9. 
[10] Steim foundation,  (Amsterdam) homepage : 
http://steim.org  
[11] Mécamusique, In La marionnette et les autres arts, 
Musiques en mouvement, Puc n°6 
1993 Editions Institut International de la Marionnette, 
France, ISSN 0993-0701, p.56-57. 
[12] Jacques Rémus,Double Quatuor à cordes, De la Motte-
Haber, H., In  Klangkunst,Tönende Objekte und klingende, 
Räume, Laaber-Verlag, 1999,ISBN 3-89007-432-4, p.160-
161. 
[13] Jacques Rémus, Musica ex machina, Nicollet, G., Brunot 
V., In Les Chercheurs de sons, Instruments inventés, 
machines musicales, sculptures et installations,  
Ed Alternatives, Athènes, 2004, ISBN: 2-86277434-8, 
p.120-125. 
[14] Arts Ménagers, arts sonores , Le Graverend, F., In Area 
Revues, Délirantes ou célibataires, les machines dans 
l’art, N°11,  
Area  corp, Paris, march 2006, ISBN: 2-35276-002-X, 
p.160. 
[15] Les nouveaux gestes de la musique,Genevois, H., de Vivo, 
R.,  
Parenthèses , collection eupalinos, cultures musicales may 
1999, ISBN :2-86364-616-8. 
[16] La Sculpture sonore, pratique artistique en recherche de 
définition, Rémus, J. In Musiques Arts Technologies, pour 
une approche critique, Music arts tecnologies, toward a 
critical approach", (Barbanti R., Lynch E, Pardo, C., 
Solomos, M), 
L'Harmattan, France, june 2004, ISBN : 2-7475-6691-9 , 
p.61-75. 
 
 
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
253