More DJ techniques on the reactable
Kjetil Falkenberg Hansen
Speech, Music and Hearing
KTH - Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden
kjetil@kth.se
Marcos Alonso
Music Technology Group
UPF - Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona, Spain
malonso@iua.upf.edu
ABSTRACT
This paper describes a project started for implementing DJ
scratching techniques on the reactable. By interacting with
objects representing scratch patterns commonly performed
on the turntable and the crossfader, the musician can play
with DJ techniques and manipulate how they are executed
in a performance. This is a novel approach to the digital DJ
applications and hardware. Two expert musicians practised
and performed on the reactable in order to both evaluate the
playability and improve the design of the DJ techniques.
Keywords
reactable, DJ scratch techniques, interfaces, playability
1. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
It is well known that scratch DJs acquire very speciﬁc
skills and learn a more or less deﬁned set of playing tech-
niques. One recent example of formalizing the techniques
can be found in the DVD by DJ Q-bert [6], one of the lead-
ing musicians in the ﬁeld. In the DVD, about one hun-
dred diﬀerent “scratches”, or techniques, are demonstrated.
These techniques are interesting for several reasons: They
represent a natural starting point for studying how turntable
musicians—or turntablists—play expressively, they deﬁne
what a new (non-vinyl) DJ interface should manage, and
they oﬀer an approach to perform complicated playing ges-
tures with simple actions.
Since turntablism peaked in popularity in the late nineties,
many solutions for scratching and DJing without using vinyl
records and a turntable have surfaced. These are mentioned
in several earlier papers, see eg. [2, 10, 13]. Such hardware
include, among others, the CD scratch decks (e.g. Pioneer
CDJ1000), time coded vinyl controlling sound ﬁles stored on
a computer (e.g. Final Scratch), software simulations (e.g.
TerminatorX and FruityLoops), various “scratch pads” and
jog wheels, and also controllers found on keyboards.1 Com-
1These are examples from the many emerging products. For
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME08, Genova, Italy
Copyright 2008 Copyright remains with the author(s).
mon for all these directions is that they mimic or model the
speed manipulation of a turntable. To our knowledge, there
are no commercial products that take advantage of using the
above mentioned DJ playing techniques directly.
On the software side, we have seen some attempts at using
scratch techniques to simplify the process of sounding like a
real DJ. For example, with Scratcher2 the user can manually
draw speed and amplitude envelopes and play them back,
making scratch patterns on audio ﬁles. This opens the pos-
sibility of coming up with new techniques, to experiment
with the sounds or to compose music for the turntable. The
disadvantage of drawing envelopes is the lacking real-time
control for performance situations.
Another path is seen in Skipproof,3 where scratch tech-
niques can be assigned to hardware or software controllers.
Here, all the techniques are based on models derived from
analysis of real DJs’ movements [7]. The user aﬀects the
playback of the techniques by the action and gesture as-
signed, for instance can the speed of the scratch be controlled
by the eﬀort of the player. Skipproof have been used in com-
bination with the Radio Baton, gesture sensors, MIDI de-
vices and computer input such as Wacom tablet. However,
it has been desirable to treat the techniques as individual
building blocks in a scratch performance.
The presented work builds on the Skipproof application
in combination with the reactable.
The reactable instrument
The reactable is by now a well-known novel electronic musi-
cal instrument, with recent massive exposure in all kinds of
media, especially since the artist Bj¨ork gave it a pronounced
position in her stage shows and compositions. It is a ver-
satile instrument that works in a similar way as tools like
Pure Data, Max/MSP or Reaktor. It was designed to meet
artistic and musical demands not catered for by other inter-
faces,4 and it follows a well-deﬁned principle for developing
the behavior of its physical objects that are handled on the
table top [11, 12].
Integration of DJ techniques on the reactable was started
a while back with the development of a few objects that
could provide some of the functions from Skipproof [1]. These
instance, CDJ1000 was not the ﬁrst CD scratch player, but
it represented a market break-through.
2http://web.ics.purdue.edu/˜afaulsti/skrasms/
3http://www.csc.kth.se/˜kjetil/software.html
4There are however a number of interfaces with a similar
approach; most of those are listed on the reactable project
website: http://reactable.iua.upf.edu/?related
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
207
were later combined with a diﬀerent approach to scratching
by Dimitrov [4, 9]. Although these objects worked, some
improvements remained to be done, and a formal evaluation
of the scratch functionality was needed.
Within the SID initiative5 the development that started
in 2006 could continue. Main aims were to get better scratch
possibilities on the reactable, and to investigate how a trained
DJ could interact with familiar techniques in new ways. Our
method included to let musicians into the design loop and re-
ceive their feedback and expertise, and to let them evaluate
the playability. Given the latency introduced by a system
based on video recognition, we never expected the system
to be responsive enough for performing real scratch gestures
comfortably. For this reason, our main focus was on the
higher level of control and let the users control scratch mod-
els instead of scratching directly.
2. METHOD
For the reactable, the development of the objects is done
in Pure Data (Pd) patches. This allows for fast prototyping
and can even be done in run-time. The video projection that
is used to provide visual feedback on the table is also the
user environment that is displayed on the computer screen,
called the virtual environment. Working with the objects in
real life (moving, twisting and turning them) is very diﬀerent
than working with the objects in the virtual environment.
During the design phase, the virtual environment was used
for editing and simple testing. The new patches were then
tested on the real table by the developers, and parameters
were adjusted to correspond to the objects.
The underlying concept of the scratch objects on the re-
actable is that some of the patterns that DJs play on their
turntables and crossfaders are used as control models that
are triggered and manipulated by new gestures and actions.
The mapping between gestures and control is the most crit-
ical part of the design process. By assigning control prop-
erties and behavior to physical objects and by making con-
nections to sample playback functions, we came up with a
totally new method of “scratching”—and as a consequence,
with new conventions for playing. We made an eﬀort to
respect the reactable principles in designing the objects, al-
though we needed to make some compromises.
Given a virtually endless number of possible functionali-
ties and mappings to test, a few were settled on.
Since there are only a handful of reactable instruments
and the number of performers is accordingly very limited,
we decided to use two experts for testing. One was a pro-
fessional reactable musician, and the other an experienced
scratch DJ. By using experts from diﬀerent ﬁelds, we aimed
at highlighting important aspects of DJ and reactable do-
mains respectively.
Two sessions were arranged for each subject. In the ﬁrst
session, a 30 min rehearsal was followed by a 45 min per-
formance, while the second session only had a 45 min per-
formance. Some tasks were given, for instance to explore
all objects, to perform scratching with and without backing
music and to try beat juggling (another common DJ tech-
nique), but the subjects disposed the time as they wished.
5SID is the acronym for COST IC0601 Action on Sonic In-
teraction Design, http://www.cost-sid.org. The presented
work is the result of a Short Term Scientiﬁc Mission of two
weeks granted by SID, reported in [8].
For the performance sessions, the musicians were left alone
and undisturbed in a rehearsal room, and listened to their
own performance through loudspeakers. The second perfor-
mance was videotaped. While practising, they had the pos-
sibility to get help and ask questions (however, they both
preferred to practise without help).
For evaluating playability, the DJ and reactable player
answered to a questionnaire and an open interview following
each of the performances, including the rehearsal.
The questionnaire was a modiﬁed version of the TAI-
CHI evaluation questionnaire proposed by Bornand et al. [3]
for testing two diﬀerent interfaces. Our modiﬁed version,
which added a few questions directly concerning the re-
actable scratch objects, was not used to make comparisons
between interfaces (the reactable and standard scratch tools,
for instance), but rather improvement within-subject for the
performance sessions and diﬀerences between-subject.
The interviews tried to isolate speciﬁc problems subjects
faced while playing, or any other comment not accounted
for in the questionnaire. As a last part of the interview, the
subjects suggested possible improvements to the objects and
their behavior. Between the two sessions, most of their sug-
gested improvements could be addressed and implemented.
3. RESULTS
The reactable objects developed in a previous phase of the
project [1], were only slightly modiﬁed for the ﬁrst session.
In addition to the existing sample player, the vinyl move-
ment models object, and the crossfader movement models
object, we introduced a “manual crossfader” that changed
from on to oﬀ when moved, and a second sample player that
used a diﬀerent playback function. After the ﬁrst session,
the functionality of these two new objects were integrated
in the crossfader object and sample player, respectively.
As the development followed an iterative process, the re-
sults from the ﬁrst session of evaluation naturally aﬀected
the objects used in the second session. Not only the parame-
ters were adjusted between the sessions; even the functional-
ity and mapping were changed and improved. The following
section describes the state of the objects at the ﬁnal stage.
One important improvement between sessions was achieved
by moving to a new reactable software version that increased
the time resolution of the video recognition from around
30 fps to 60 fps.
3.1 New reactable objects
Figure 1 shows the three diﬀerent objects active in the
virtual environment. TheLoop player objectplays back an
audio ﬁle and has visual representations of the track progres-
sion (ii) and sound level (iii). A wave form (i) is “travelling”
from the object towards the Out. The Crossfader object
applies a crossfader movement pattern (B) to the sound,
resulting in the chopped-up sounds typical for scratching.
The sound level the Loop player will get (graphically rep-
resented by A) moves out from the Crossfader object. The
Movement speed object changes the sample player’s speed
in some deﬁned patterns (3) and beat subdivisions (2) syn-
chronized with the current bpm of the table.6 The speed
alteration enforced on the audio playback is shown with (1)
6There is a global bpm object in the normal reactable setup
that is not included in Figure 1. The metronome is visual-
ized with a wave (a) propagating from the Out.
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
208
Loop player object
i
ii
iii
Crossfader object
A
B
Movement speed object
1
2 3 Out
a (..........a)
Figure 1: Screenshot from the reactable virtual en-
gine. The three ﬁnalized scratch objects and the
table’s “output” are shown. All labels, letters and
numbers are added for explanations. Some visuals
are continuously changing (1, A, i, ii, a), while some
show the state or setting of an object (2, 3, B, iii).
which travels toward the Loop player.
For all objects, parameters can be adjusted through for
instance movement, rotation or distance to other objects.
The ﬁnal implementation is described in more detail in [8].
For the loop player, short sampled sounds are easier to
use. When the movement model object is connected, the
playback speed typically oscillates between±150% for nor-
mal scratch sounds and up to several times that for the fast
scratches. How large portion of the sound that is scratched
(similar to extent of hand movement) is decided by distance
between the movement speed object and the sample object.
The subjects pointed out that for DJs it is important to
have control over “where” the sound is at all times, and es-
pecially the start of a sound. Therefore, rotation of the loop
player should change the sound position when connected to
the movement models.
Additionally, the sampler’s playback speed could be man-
ually altered just like pushing and pulling the vinyl.
The movement speed object makes the playback speed of
the loop oscillate when connected. Although the DJ nor-
mally can vary the speed freely with the hand, the most
common action is to move it steadily back and forth to the
rhythm, resulting in the so-calledbaby-scratch. The second
most common movement is thetear-scratch, where either
the push or the pull is divided in two strokes. Here, the
player can move gradually from baby to tear scratch by ad-
justing the object’s parameters.
Initially, the crossfader and movement objects were syn-
chronized for always guaranteing a ‘perfectly’ performed tech-
nique. However, the testers would rather like to have both
objects synchronized to the global beat and to note dura-
tions derived from that bpm, but independent from each
other. This makes sense compared to how many techniques
are varied by DJs. In normal performances, there is a large
number of diﬀerent crossfader patterns, and those patterns
also deﬁnes most of the techniques. For the crossfader ob-
ject, it was found that having too many patterns was con-
fusing, and a few were chosen, including thechirp, theﬂare
and a muting of the vinyl’s return movement.
Also for the crossfader object, a manual mode was in-
cluded where the sound was constantly on or oﬀ. Moving
the object would produce a very short silence or burst of
sound, like moving the crossfader between the ﬁngers.
3.2 Evaluation
Figure 2: One of the test subjects playing with the
objects.
There was a diﬀerence between the subjects in their initial
attitude toward the interface. The reactable expert (RE)
was, as expected, trying out the objects systematically and
quickly experiencing the limitations that diﬀerentiates these
from the regular reactable setup. The DJ, on the other hand,
tried to ﬁnd how the connection between his scratching tech-
niques and these experimental objects could be made, and
experienced that it was not very easy to scratch with models.
In general, their attitudes changed over time. The RE be-
came more positive about the interaction with the objects,
while the DJ became more pessimistic, especially towards
the control of the models.
For the RE, the biggest problem was that playing with the
models was not like playing with other reactable objects. He
learnt the new objects fast enough, but got frustrated and
the enjoyment of playing did not increase. Somewhat con-
tradictively, he felt more and more that he would be willing
to use it in a concert situation, and that the possibility to
express himself musically grew with practise. For the DJ,
most aspects showed a negative trend. Still, he maintained
the impression that with practise, it was possible to play
something musically meaningful, and he felt overall that the
outcome of his actions were predictable.
The DJ was at ﬁrst very positive towards playing with
models and patterns, but when he got to learn them better,
he wanted a speciﬁc behavior. This was made clear only af-
ter the last performance, so no improvements could be made
to the objects before evaluation. The RE liked the crossfader
model, but not so much the movement model. Compared to
the reactable environment, the crossfader object ﬁtted more
closely to any expected behavior than the movement model.
To the enthusiastic ears of the authors, performances by
both testers sounded quite nice.7 It is perhaps not overly
convincing as real scratching, but it might very well match
and exceed the outcome of a total novice’s ﬁrst few attempts
7And it sounded even better in an unplanned jam session
after the experiment that also demonstrated the reactable’s
capacity as a collaborative instrument.
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
209
with turntables. With proper training, as seen in the evalu-
ation, performances will improve greatly.
Musically, the most interesting result could probably be
found in the meeting between a skilled DJ and the easy
access to the techniques normally used, with the added di-
mension of manipulating their parameters in real-time with
unfamiliar means.
4. DISCUSSION
This is the ﬁrst major test of performing with scratch
techniques, or the combination of synchronized crossfader
patterns and oscillating movement patterns. The advantage
of this approach, as compared to modeling the turntable and
mixer, is that even non-experts can perform rather intricate
and correct techniques without much practise. Results from
the evaluation show that the non-expert felt conﬁdent with
playing with the models. Given some more development,
this approach can provide realistic-sounding scratching for
various types of interfaces.
Today, the reactable is mostly used for either beat-based
or more freely structured experimental electronic music. Vi-
sually, the performances are very exiting as the blocks on the
table creates dynamically changing images. To see it being
played in traditional DJ-style demonstrates another side of
the graphical feedback, where the visualizations aid the mu-
sician in performance. Traditionally, turntablists mark their
records with stickers or notice the position of the center label
to ﬁnd the right spot in the music. Here, we experimented
with other representations, and both subjects were able to
use them to their advantage.
For real virtuoso playing, the reactable implementation of
scratching cannot match real turntables, but by manipulat-
ing the models the musician can on the other hand eﬀort-
lessly go beyond what is normally possible to accomplish,
for example very fast scratches.
After the evaluation (and unscheduled jam session), the
two musicians and the reactable team suggested a number
of improvements to the objects. For the main part, the sug-
gestions involve making the interaction smoother and easier,
not changing the way they are designed.
Working with the reactable has proved to be a helpful op-
portunity for testing how speciﬁc playing styles and musical
ideas can be transferred to unfamiliar interfaces. The fast
and easy means for prototyping and testing have many ad-
vantages. High latency and slow response time, determined
by the frame rate and processing of the video image, might
pose a problem. For manipulating techniques and patterns
this was not troublesome, but for more direct manipula-
tion of playback speed and amplitude, the instrument was
as foreseen far too slow for expert performances with our
implementation.
As mentioned in the Introduction, there was also a related
project by Dimitrov, who connected the reactable scratch
objects to physics-based models of friction sounds [9, 5].
Although not tested extensively, it was clearly possible to
use friction models instead of sampled audio as sound source
for scratch patterns.
5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are very grateful for all the time and eﬀort that the two
dexterous musicians Lele and Carles put into the project.
Thanks to the whole reactable development team (Sergi,
Martin, G¨unter) and the MTG for all help.
Also thanks to Smilen Dimitrov, who worked alongside
this project with the implementation of physics-based mod-
els of friction sounds for both reactable and scratching.
This work was sponsored as a Short Term Scientiﬁc Mis-
sion by COST IC0601 Action on Sonic Interaction Design
(SID), http://www.cost-sid.org, and by BrainTuning FP6-
2004-NEST-PATH-028570.
6. REFERENCES
[1] M. Alonso. Scientiﬁc Report from ConGAS Short
Term Scientiﬁc Mission (STSM) to Stockholm.
Technical report, ConGAS Cost action 287,
http://www.cost287.org/documentation/stsms,
October 2006.
[2] T. H. Andersen. In the Mixxx: Novel digital DJ
interfaces. InProc. of CHI, pages 1136–1137, 2005.
[3] C. Bornand, A. Camurri, G. Castellano, S. Catheline,
A. Crevoisier, E. Roesch, K. Scherer, and G. Volpe.
Usability evaluation and comparison of prototypes of
tangible acoustic interfaces. InProceedings of
ENACTIVE05, 2005.
[4] S. Dimitrov. Scientiﬁc Report from ConGAS Short
Term Scientiﬁc Mission (STSM) to Stockholm.
Technical report, ConGAS Cost action 287, March
2007.
[5] S. Dimitrov. Scientic report from SID Short Term
Scientic Mission (STSM) to Barcelona. Technical
report, MTG, UPF, 2008. Online: http://www.cost-
sid.org/browser/action/stsm/reports/.
[6] DJ Q-bert. Scratchlopedia Breaktannica: 100 secret
skratches. DVD: SECRT001-DVD, 2007.
[7] K. F. Hansen. The Basics of Scratching.Journal Of
New Music Research, 31(4):357–365, 2002.
[8] K. F. Hansen. Scientic report from SID Short Term
Scientic Mission (STSM) to Barcelona. Technical
report, MTG, UPF, 2008. Online: http://www.cost-
sid.org/browser/action/stsm/reports/.
[9] K. F. Hansen, M. Alonso, and S. Dimitrov. Combining
DJ scratching, tangible interfaces and a physics-based
model of friction sounds. InProc. of the International
Computer Music Conference, 2007.
[10] K. F. Hansen and R. Bresin. Mapping strategies in DJ
scratching. InProc. of the Conference on New
Interfaces for Musical Expression, 2006.
[11] S. Jord´a, G. Geiger, M. Alonso, and
M. Kaltenbrunner. The reacTable: Exploring the
synergy between live music performance and tabletop
tangible interfaces. InProc. of the ﬁrst international
conference on ”Tangible and Embedded Interaction”,
Baton Rouge, Louisiana, 2007.
[12] M. Kaltenbrunner, S. Jord´a, G. Geiger, and
M. Alonso. The reacTable*: A collaborative musical
instrument. InProc. of the Workshop on ”Tangible
Interaction in Collaborative Environments” (TICE),
at the 15th International IEEE Workshops on
Enabling Technologies, 2006.
[13] T. M. Lippit. Turntable music in the digital era:
Designing alternative tools for new turntable
expression. InProc. of the Conference on New
Interfaces for Musical Expression, 2006.
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
210