Project Scriabin v.3 
Chang Min Han 
MAIDM Ravensbourne College, U.K  
21H Ravensworth Road 
London, U.K 
+44 7980 088 148 
changminhan@yahoo.co.uk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Project Scriabin is an interactive implementation of Alexander 
Scriabin’s experimentation w ith “opposite mapping direction”, 
that is, mapping from hue (colour) to pitch (sound). Main colour 
to sound coding was implemented by Scriabin’s colour scale. 
Keywords 
Synaesthesia, Sonification, Touch Screen. 
1. HISTORIC BACKGROUND 
Alexander Scriabin (1872-1915) was a Russian composer whose 
music bridged the Romantic era and the twentieth century. 
Although he lived only into his forties, he managed to write ten 
sonatas for piano, a piano concerto, three symphonies, two 
orchestral poems, and large number of short piano solo pieces. 
What made him even more popular was that a Scriabin's multi-
sensory experiences, known as synaesthesia. Synaesthesia is 
defined as the interchange of sensory images from one sensory 
organ to another. Sensory organs are also referred to as modalities, 
and so synaesthesia is also known as the cross-modality, or 
crossing of the senses. There are many different types of 
synaesthesia and most common form of synaesthesia is known as 
“coloured hearing,” which is a visual representation in some form 
of colour of what the person is hearing. He wanted to see what the 
psychological effects of experiencing colour and music 
simultaneously would be for a non-sy naesthetic individual. At the 
same time, colour organs were being experimented with, and 
composers were beginning to impl ement them into their musical 
performances. Colour organs - clav ier á lumiéres - were designed 
to be played alongside regular organs especially for his fifth 
symphony, “Prometheus – The Poem of Fire (1910)”, and would 
produce coloured lights to correspond with a musical note played 
on the organ. The first performance of "Luce" - Note for Colour 
Organ - had occurred at the last days of composer's life, on spring 
1915, in New York Carnegie Hall. The light was projected onto 
multilayer screen, made of thin fabric. After Scriabin’s sudden 
death, many people have tried to continue his sound-colour 
experimentation with advanced technologies. 
2. PROJECT SCRIABIN 
Project Scriabin is an interactive implementation of Alexander 
Scriabin’s experimentation w ith “opposite mapping direction”, 
that is, mapping from hue (colour) to pitch (sound). Main colour 
to sound coding was implemented by Scriabin’s colour scale. 
Scriabin’s works are often considered to be influenced by 
synaesthetic experience. Nonetheless, it is most likely that 
Alexander Scriabin did not fully experience the physiological 
condition of synaesthesia. His colour system, unlike most 
synaesthetic experience, lines up with the Circle of Fifths, 
indicating that it was a thought-out system influenced by his 
theosophical readings and based on Sir Isaac Newton's Optics – 
Colour Circle. 
3. CREATING COLOUR TO PITCH FORMULA 
 
Table 1. Pitch, Colour and Value in HSL 
HSL Space 
H S L Note Colour by 
Scriabin 
Colour for 
Project 0-360 0-255 0-255
C Red Red 0 255 127 
G Orange Orange 38 255 127 
D Yellow Yellow 60 255 127 
A Green Green 120 255 127 
E Sky Blue Sky Blue 160 255 127 
B Blue Blue 240 255 127 
F# Bright Blue In Between 256 255 127 
C# Violet Violet 273 255 127 
G# Purple Purple 280 255 127 
D# Gray In Between 300 255 127 
A# Gray In Between 320 255 127 
F Deep Red In Between 340 255 127 
 
As I was developing Colour-to-P itch generating formula, I found 
some problematic definitions in Scriabin’s Pitch-to-Colour system, 
especially in the pitch D#, F, F# and A#. Although Scriabin’s 
synaesthetic approach was mainly based on the Circle of Fifth and 
the Colour Circle as explained above, I found that these four 
pitches had uncertain corresponding position on the Colour Circle. 
Even worse, colour for A# and D# were described as “Gray,” - 
achromatic colour, Since colour is underlying element for my 
project, I decided to modify these problematic pitches by 
positioning them on corresponding position on the Colour Circle. 
Table 1 shows my final Colour-to-Pitch coding system with some 
modifications.  
 
Permission to make digital or hard copi es of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. For variation of octave of sound,  I utilised lightness value of HSL 
colour system and divided it into  8 different levels from octave 
NIME07, June 7-9, 2007, New York, NY 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
388
1st to octave 8th. The level 8 re presents 8bit RGB colour system 
we are mainly using for computing colour. If saturation value of 
HSL colour is zero, it will ge nerate no sound because it is 
achromatic. 
4. TECHNICAL REALISATION 
On the basis of the sound gene rating formula, I programmed a 
basic patch cords with Max/ MSP in which generative sound 
would be generated. The patch program analyses average hue 
value of an entire image ar ea for main sound stream and 
supplements it with minimum and maximum hue value for 
additional sound effects. After having finished the basic 
generative sound programming, I we nt about an application to 
which I could apply this sound engi ne. It was the first application 
making the generative sound from an imported “Quicktime” 
movie clip in real time. Movie clips consist of 24fps (PAL) or 
29.97fps (NTSC) according to signal format. That is, 24 discrete 
single images, in case of PAL, are to be shown on screen in one 
second. Therefore it signifies that it is likely to generate very 
annoying or confusing sound by making 24 different pitches in 
one second at the greatest. To so lve this problem out, I confined 
generating sound to only when hue  goes out of its corresponding 
range. This tweak made an effect which synchronizes tempo of 
the image and rhythm of the sound. 
5. MAKING PATTERNS 
Human loves patterns. We automatically look for patterns in 
everything from clouds to tea leaves to cracks in the sidewalk. In 
interactive systems, we look for patterns in the connections 
between the inputs and the outputs. It is understood by Gestalt 
theory which explains our visual system as “Perceptual Whole.” I 
didn’t want to simply focus on the fact that colour makes sound. 
For stronger impact on audience, I wanted to create more specific 
link that colour can make “this melody” – pattern of the sound -, 
not just random generative sound. Thereby I can possibly sustain 
the curiosity about my project from audience. For this reason, the 
subsequent development - the second application - was making a 
musical or “logical” sound with deliberately composed – rendered 
– image sequences. For this, I analysed more than 2,000 still 
images and categorised them according to their hue and lightness 
value. By having done this, I could have a database for “Colour 
Note,” the most essential part of my project. Scientists have 
shown that the biggest responses  always come with the least 
expected event. The purpose of this  colour note was to make this 
“least expected event.” With these 1st  and 2nd  applications, I 
completed the first version of project scriabin. 
6. EXHIBITION LEVEL DEVELOPMENT 
In Newton’s Colour Circle, there are 7 distinctive colours – Red, 
Orange, Yellow, Green, Blue, Indigo, and Violet. For the 
exhibition-level development of my project, I therefore extended 
the scale of sound from stereo to 7 multi-channel sound with 7 
speakers along the circle. Each speaker has its hue degree position 
on the circle evenly, about 51.42 degree – 360 divided by 7. Each 
speaker emits sound in different volume according to the hue 
degree. If the image has an average hue of orange - 38 degree -, 
the speaker 1 will emit 73% of volume and speaker 2 will do 27% 
for pitch G. 
 
Figure 1. Sound Localisation – 7 channels. 
 
7. PROJECT SCRIABIN V.3 
What I realised from v.1 & v.2 of Project Scriabin was that there 
was only demonstration on this e xperimentation with no direct 
participation of audience. For this  reason, I developed v.3 – touch 
screen based interaction in the shape of turntable mainly with 
application 1 - hoping that it will allow more engagement by 
audience. In this version, audience can experiment colour to pitch 
sound with their own colour images in person. Currently I’m 
working on how to apply the application 2 in this touch screen 
based interaction and it will be Project Scriabin v.4. 
8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I’d like to express my special th anks to Professor Karel Dudesek 
and Jim Wood for their profuse support. 
9. REFERENCES 
[1] CYTOWIC, Richard E. Synesthesia, A Union of the Senses. 
2nd Edition. MIT Press (2002). 
[2] EASTON, Judith A. A Review of Synesthesia. 
http://www.ycp.edu/besc/Journal2003/eastonj.htm (2003).  
[3] GALEYEV, B / VANECHKINA, I. Was Scriabin a 
Synaesthete?  http://prometheus.kai.ru/skriab_e.htm 
[4] NORMAN, Donald A. Emotional Design: Why we love (or 
hate) everyday things. Basic Books (2004)   
[5] VANECHKINA I. L. On the performance of Scriabin’s 
Lighting Symphony: Myths and reality. 
http://prometheus.kai.ru/perform_e.htm#2 
[6] VANECHKINA I. L. Scriabin and Chiurlionis: on the way 
to the Light-Music Synthesis. http://prometheus.kai.ru/scr-
chiur_e.htm#6 
[7] WIERZBICKI, James. Synaesthesia. 
http://pages.sbcglobal.net/jameswierzbicki/synaesthesia.htm 
 
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
389