The Dual-Analog Gamepad as a Practical Platform for 
Live Electronics Instrument and Interface Design 
 
 Christopher Ariza 
MIT, Music and Theater Arts  
4-246, 77 Massachusetts Ave. 
Cambridge, MA 02139 
ariza@mit.edu 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper demonstrates the practical benefits and performance 
opportunities of using the dual-analog gamepad as a controller 
for real-time live electronics. Numerous diverse instruments 
and interfaces, as well as detailed control mappings, are 
described. Approaches to instrument and preset switching are 
also presented. While all of the instrument implementations 
presented are made available through the Martingale Pd library, 
resources for other synthesis languages are also described. 
 
Keywords 
Controllers, live electronics, dual-analog, gamepad, joystick, 
computer music, instrument, interface 
1. INTRODUCTION 
While countless innovative computer music controllers and 
musical interfaces have been newly built or repurposed from 
existing hardware, many of these devices end up being used 
only by a small group of performers or deployed in highly 
idiosyncratic or non-portable ways. Often this is the result of 
the controller being dependent on particular software or the 
skills of a particular performer; or the controller being 
prohibitively expensive or lacking enough controls or 
expressive range for enduring musical interest. While the 
resulting diversity of controllers is a source of great richness 
and creativity in the design of new instruments, musical 
interfaces, and music, in some cases this diversity prohibits the 
productive reuse and refinement of practical and portable 
implementations. 
 Game controllers have been re-purposed for music-making 
for decades: the Mattel Power Glove, first released in 1989, 
generated much interest in the early 1990s with the “glove” 
Max object [13]. Contemporary practitioners of live electronics 
continue to effectively use off-the-shelf joysticks, gamepads, 
and other hand-held controllers (e.g., the Nintendo Wii and 
Microsoft Kinect). The dual-analog gamepad, however, offers 
practical advantages over the many alternatives. While not a 
new hardware design, a multiplicity of mappings and interface 
designs, as demonstrated here, offers a new approach to design 
plurality with a common controller. 
 While novel controllers have attracted significant research 
interest, the dual-analog has rarely been isolated as offering 
particular advantages. Griffiths describes the use of a dual-
analog controller for live-coding, illustrating different 
mappings for Betablocker and Al Jazari, and emphasizing the 
value of using ring menus to select programming elements [4]. 
The focus here, however, is not on live-coding control, but on 
direct performance and control of real-time instruments. 
 This paper demonstrates the practical benefits and 
performance opportunities of the dual-analog gamepad. In 
addition to describing the important features of this controller, 
numerous diverse designs for instruments, implemented in Pd 
and made available in the open-source Martingale Pd library, 
will be demonstrated. The diversity of compelling and 
expressive instrument designs is evidence of the musical 
opportunities of this controller. 
2. THE DUAL-ANALOG CONTROLLER 
The term “dual-analog gamepad” is here used to describe a 
number of similar gamepads, each distinctive in featuring two 
small, thumb-operated joysticks (sometimes called 
thumbsticks). A typical dual-analog gamepad is illustrated in 
Figure 1 and Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 1. Top view of a dual-analog controller. 
 
 
Figure 2. Side view of a dual-analog controller. 
 The first dual-analog controller, called the DualAnalog (later 
the DualShock), was first released in 1997 as a revision to the 
original Sony PlayStation control pad. The original PlayStation 
control pad, while including the two sets of four top and four 
back buttons, lacked the pair of joysticks. Since the original 
DualAnalog, a number of variants have been released by many 
manufacturers, with numerous models still widely available. 
Logitech (as well as many other manufacturers) has released a 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profi t or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME’12, M ay 21- 23, 2012, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
number of USB-based models, such as the Dual Action Game 
Pad, Gamepad F310, and others. Supplied with a USB 
interface, these controllers can be easily plugged into a 
computer. Widely available and mass -produced, prices for 
these controllers are around $20. 
 For a small, cheap, and compact controller, the dual analog 
offers access to a large number of controls . The two joysticks 
provide four continuous parameters with self -centering 
positions, eight discrete button controls  (sometimes labeled 
buttons 1 through 8), and (on most models), a five-position 
(four-button) centering directional-pad (d-pad, or hat-switch) 
control. Most models feature two additional smaller top 
buttons, often labeled “select” and “start” (here called buttons 9 
and 10.) Thus, 18 independent controls are available. 
 The dual-analog controller is a good value: obtaining 14 
buttons and 2 joysticks in a USB-ready package, such as is 
offered by the dual analog, is impossible by other means at a  
similar price. For example, similar small joysticks,  purchased 
as individual components for use in custom-designed circuits 
(perhaps connected to a USB microcontroller) cost b etween $2 
and $4 each. While highly configurable software for creating 
touch-screen interfaces is available at low cost (e.g., TouchOSC 
[hexler.net/software/touchosc]), such controllers offer no tactile 
response similar to the feel of a self-centering joystick or a 
physical button, and are nearly impossible to be played without 
actually looking at the touch-screen. 
 While experience is not required, many dual-analog operators 
will already be familiar with the dual-analog hardware, thus 
offering an opportunity to “leverage expert technique” [1] in 
gaming toward expressive musical control. Further, USB 
gamepads do not have the complications, expense, and other 
problems associated with “custom” music co ntrollers [2]. 
Finally, while ergonomic, these controllers require effort to 
master the simultaneous control of two joysticks and many 
buttons; this effort, for many, is a desirable feature, a s “effort is 
closely related to expression in the playing of instruments” [9]. 
3. HARDWARE CHARACTERISTICS 
AND MAPPING ARCHETYPES 
A number of detailed mappings of the dual-analog controller 
will be presented in the subsequent section, implementing a 
wide variety of instruments, interfaces, and control paradigms. 
Before these details, a few common characteristics of the dual-
analog hardware, and mappings suggested by this hardware, are 
presented. 
 The ability to control four continuous parameters 
simultaneously and orthogonally via two thumb-joysticks offers 
great expressive flexibility. As will be shown subsequently, the 
most expressive and “playable” musical parameters are 
assigned to the joysticks. For each X and Y axis, at least 256 
discrete values (8 bits) are delivered from most hardware. This 
is twice the range of common MIDI continuous controllers, 
which typical deliver only 128 discrete values (7 bits of data, 
due to the use of 1 bit per octet to distinguish command 
messages). As the joysticks are self-centering, in some 
mappings only half of the 256-value range is used per 
parameter, with the center position being zero, and extreme 
positions providing two different 128-value ranges. 
 Perhaps the most common mapping of the joystick Y axis is 
for amplitude control. For example, in the implementations 
described below, the center position is set to a floating-point 
value scalar of 0.7; all the way down is 0.0, all the way up is 
1.25. Floating-point values are then taken to an exponent of 4 to 
provide appropriate logarithmic loudness control. Such a 
mapping provides a resting position base-level below 1.0, a 
wide range below this value for smooth fading in and out, and 
an additional range above 1.0 for accents. 
 A common mapping of the joystick X axis is for frequency 
control, such as adjusting the cutoff frequency of a low -pass 
filter. Again, the center position is set to a default value (such 
as 4,000 Hz); different ranges and scaling factors can be used 
for above and below this center pos ition, such as scaling the 
right range from 4,000 to 18,000 Hz, and the left range f rom 
4,000 to 200 Hz. Exponents can be applied to achieve 
approximately equal distance-increment-per-octave movement. 
 As previously suggested, having a default center position 
within a range of  values for a joystick axis is not always 
desirable. For example, a joystick might be used to provide the 
magnitude of modulation, or the amount of a signal sent to an 
additional processor. In these cases, the center position can 
represent zero, and two different parameters can be controlled 
on a single axis with each direction away from the center. For 
example, with an X-axis control, movement to the right might 
scale the amount of amplitude modulation from 0 to 1, while 
movement to the left might scale the amount of frequency 
modulation from 0 to 1. Such dual-mappings on the same axis 
assert that the two controls are independent and can only be 
applied one at a time. 
 The four main top and four back buttons (buttons 1 through 
8) provide eight easily access ible triggers, capable of rapid 
repetition and simultaneous access by fingers of both hands. 
(These buttons will be referred to as the “eight main” buttons.) 
Common usage of these buttons is for triggering primary 
events, with an implied ordering from low to high possible by 
the suggested sequence from top to back. A significant 
shortcoming of these buttons when used as event or sample 
triggers is the lack of velocity sensitivity. This can be mitigated 
to some degree through careful use of joystick-controlled 
parameters. 
 The d-pad control can be considered as a type of discrete 
joystick: while it offers four directional button controls 
(conventionally labeled left, right, up, and down), releasing any 
button before pressing another sends a specific discrete 
message, a center-position trigger, that cannot be otherwise 
transmitted. Common usage of the d-pad is for simply selecting 
temporary controls, such as routing a signal to a processor or 
(when combined with an appropriate visual display) navigating 
a grid of option selections. 
4. INSTRUMENT AND INTERFACE 
DESIGNS 
In order to demonstrate the diversity of instruments and 
interfaces available with the dual analog, a brief overview of 
eleven different instrument designs, broken down into six 
categories, will be described. For representative instruments, a 
table of mappings is presented. Each instrument features 
numerous dynamic performance parameters exposed through 
the dual-analog controller. The other parameters that are needed 
to define the instrument, but are not exposed with the 
controller, make up a “preset,” or a collection of static 
parameters, potentially including value ranges for the dynamic, 
real-time parameters. Methods of switching between presets 
and instruments are discussed. 
 All of the instruments presented are based on existing 
implementations available using Pure Data (Pd ) [6] and the 
Martingale Pd library (code.google.com/p/martingale). These 
instruments were developed over many years for solo and 
ensemble live-electronics performance, with the explicit goal of 
offering expressive, easy to learn, and “durable” performance 
tools. Durability here refers to designs that resist failure; that is, 
instruments that work every time, that can be played 
consistently, and that can reliably be played by touch,  even in 
the dark. The names of all abstractions in this library are 
proceeded by an “mg” to dis tinguish the Martingale library 
namespace. 
4.1 Polyphonic Triggered Samples 
From the earliest drum machines, such as the Linn Drum, to 
modern controllers and instruments in the tradition of the Akai 
MPC series, the presentation of an instrument as a bank of 
samples that can be independently triggered is common. While 
percussive samples are often employed for such instruments, 
other types of samples, such as ambient sounds or synthetic 
textures, can be used as well. An important design decision for 
such instruments is whether, once triggered, the sound 
continues to the end of the sample, or ends as soon as the key -
press is released. 
 The mgSynthBuffer8 is a dual-analog implementation of a 
similar instrument. Here, the eight main buttons each trigger an 
independent sample. As is common with the instruments 
presented here, Y1 controls amplitude, X2 controls the cutoff 
frequency of a low-pass filter, and Y2 controls the resonance of 
the low-pass filter. Joystick control of such simple but 
expressive parameters permits altering amplitude envelopes, 
producing tremolo-like effects, modifying timbre, and even 
performing wah-wah -like effects. Additionally, the d-pad is 
used as a toggle to send the signal to various delay and r everb 
processors. The parameters for this instrument are summarized 
in Table 1. 
Table 1. Mappings for a polyphonic sample-playback 
instrument (mgSynthBuffer8) 
Joysticks X1 Not connected 
 Y1 Amplitude 
 X2 Low-pass filter cutoff frequency 
 Y2 Low-pass filter resonance 
D-pad L Slow delay 
 R Fast delay 
 U Not connected 
 D Reverb 
Top buttons 1 Sample 1 
 2 Sample 2 
 3 Sample 3 
 4 Sample 4 
Back buttons 5 Sample 5 
 6 Sample 6 
 7 Sample 7 
 8 Sample 8 
4.2 Polyphonic Pitched Synthesizers and 
Noise Generators 
Triggering pitched synthesized tones, such as might be done 
from a conventional piano-style keyboard, is another common 
instrumental need. The pitched material might be based on 
common waveforms (such as saw-tooth wave tables) or various 
types of noise. 
 The mgSynthSaw is a polyphonic subtractive synthesizer. 
Each of the eight main buttons trigger a trio of slightly detuned 
oscillators. The combined tone is then mixed and processed 
with a low-pass filter (again using X2 for cutoff frequency and 
Y2 for resonance). The pitches of an eight-note scale are 
mapped to each of the main buttons; the tuning of this scale is 
encoded in the preset. The d-pad left and right buttons here are 
used to shift the scale up or down an octave, extending the 
range of the eight-note scale. The d-pad up button returns the 
scale to its initial octave. An independent ADSR envelope is 
applied to each voice; the parameters for this envelope are 
encoded in the preset and are not exposed in the controller. 
Additionally, the depth of vibrato (low-frequency frequency 
modulation) is made available on the X1 axis. The parameters 
for this instrument are summarized in Table 2. 
Table 2. Mappings for a polyphonic pitched instrument 
(mgSynthSaw) 
Joysticks X1 Vibrato depth 
 Y1 Amplitude 
 X2 Low-pass filter cutoff frequency 
 Y2 Low-pass filter resonance 
D-pad L Octave down 
 R Octave up 
 U Initial octave 
 D Reverb 
Top buttons 1 Scale step 1 
 2 Scale step 2 
 3 Scale step 3 
 4 Scale step 4 
Back buttons 5 Scale step 5 
 6 Scale step 6 
 7 Scale step 7 
 8 Scale step 8 
 
Numerous related instruments can be created with a similar 
design. For example, mgSynthNoiseFilter uses, instead of 
oscillators, a bank of eight different types of noise. Some of 
these noise-types are band-filtered, others are various 
approaches to low-frequency noise. For this instrument, X1 and 
X2 control the cutoff frequencies of a high-pass and a low-pass 
filter, respectively. Used in tandem, the two controls provide an 
intuitive way to dynamically shape the width and range of a 
pass-band applied to broad-spectrum noise timbres. The 
parameters for this instrument are summarized in Table 3. 
Table 3. Mappings for a polyphonic noise instrument 
(mgSynthNoiseFilter) 
Joysticks X1 High-pass filter cutoff frequency 
 Y1 Amplitude 
 X2 Low-pass filter cutoff frequency 
 Y2 Amplitude modulation depth 
D-pad L Slow delay 
 R Fast delay 
 U Not connected 
 D Reverb 
Top buttons 1 Noise source 1 
 2 Noise source 2 
 3 Noise source 3 
 4 Noise source 4 
Back buttons 5 Noise source 5 
 6 Noise source 6 
 7 Noise source 7 
 8 Noise source 8 
4.3 Polyphonic Looping Samples 
The remaining instruments offer more unconventional 
interfaces and instrument models. One example is an 
instrument made from samples in a looping buffer, where main 
buttons simply open and close an envelope, and expressive 
nuance is achieved by varying the rate of looping (from reverse 
[-1], to slow [.2], to fast [20]), the size of the window looped 
(from the whole sample to a small sample window), and the 
overall amplitude. 
 The mgSynthBufferLoop8 instrument implements this 
approach. Here, each of the main eight buttons turn on or off a 
different looping sample. The Y2 axis controls the rate of 
looping (with 1 at the center position) and the X2 axis controls 
the window size (where the center position is the complete 
window). X1 controls the low-pass filter cutoff frequency, and 
Y1 serves the now familiar role of amplitude control. The 
parameters for this instrument are summarized in Table 4. 
Table 4. Mappings for a polyphonic looping sample 
instrument (mgSynthBufferLoop8) 
Joysticks X1 Low-pass filter cutoff frequency 
 Y1 Amplitude 
 X2 Sample window end boundary 
 Y2 Sample loop rate 
D-pad L Slow delay 
 R Fast delay 
 U Not connected 
 D Reverb 
Top buttons 1 Sample 1 
 2 Sample 2 
 3 Sample 3 
 4 Sample 4 
Back buttons 5 Sample 5 
 6 Sample 6 
 7 Sample 7 
 8 Sample 8 
4.4 Pulse Stream Gates 
The previous instruments support a direct, real-time control of 
individual events. An alternative approach is to control larger -
level gestures or event clusters. Such designs require more data 
to be encoded in the preset, but tend to require from the 
performer less rigorous timing and nuanced performance of the 
discrete controls. One type of more gesture-based interface, 
here called a pulse-stream gate, is specialized for triggering and 
controlling percussive layers. Main buttons open and close 
envelopes, exposing streams of pulses. 
 The pulse stream gates implemented as mgSynthBufferPulse8 
and mgSynthBandpassNoisePulse use each of the main eight 
buttons to select different sound sources. Rather than triggering 
a specific sound, each button opens an envelope on a sound 
source that is automatically and repeatedly triggered at a 
constant rate. The rate of triggering for each of the eight 
sources is different, and is based on a preset-defined multiple of 
a high-rate metronome. The layering of multiple sound sources 
at different rates is made significantly more interesting by 
using, for the triggering of each event, a probabilistic 
determination. Based on the away-from-center position of X1, 
the probability of triggering each pulse-determined event is 
scaled from one (every pulse) to zero (no pulses). Thus, 
through the selection of sound sources and X1 modulation, a 
variety of rhythmic presentations is possible. Additional timbral 
control with a low-pass filter is provided with X2 and Y2. 
Various sound sources might implement this model; 
mgSynthBufferPulse8 and mgSynthBandpassNoisePulse differ 
in the use of fixed samples and band -pass filtered noise, 
respectively. Table 5 summarizes the parameters of 
mgSynthBufferPulse8. 
Table 5. Mappings for a sample-based, pulse-stream gate 
instrument (mgSynthBufferPulse8) 
Joysticks X1 Event trigger probability 
 Y1 Amplitude 
 X2 Low-pass filter cutoff frequency 
 Y2 Low-pass filter resonance 
D-pad L Slow delay 
 R Fast delay 
 U Not connected 
 D Reverb 
Top buttons 1 Sample 1 
 2 Sample 2 
 3 Sample 3 
 4 Sample 4 
Back buttons 5 Sample 5 
 6 Sample 6 
 7 Sample 7 
 8 Sample 8 
4.5 Duophonic Nonstandard Synthesizers 
Whereas, as demonstrated previously, the availability of eight 
independent buttons s u ggests the polyphonic control of 
independent sound sources, monophonic-style control offers 
valuable expressive opportunities. For example, monophonic 
pitch or timbre selection offers portamenti or glissandi between 
tones. While the eight main buttons o f the dual analog might 
offer a wider range of monophonic selections, here the top and 
bottom sets of four buttons are assigned to two monophonic 
voices, creating a duophonic instrument. 
 Two instrument models are offered as examples of 
nonstandard duophonic instruments. The mgSynthGranular-
Sample is an instrument using sample-based granular synthesis 
[8]. Each of the banks of four buttons (half of the main eight 
buttons) is used to control sounds derived from a single sample. 
Each button, based on a preset specification, defines a time 
range within the assigned sample. Thus, each button can select 
a different range within the sound source. The selected sound 
source is used by eight or more simu ltaneous layers, using 
probabilistic parameter variation to crea te typical granular 
density. Expressive variation in the granular sound source is 
provided by X1, X2, and Y2, which can be used to dynamically 
vary the grain playback rate, the grain window size (or 
duration), and the grain density (muting grain events w ith a 
probabilistic function). Y1 again functions as amplitude 
control. Granular synthesis typically requires definition of 
many parameters; reducing these parameters for practical, real -
time control is a signifcant challenge, but one that promotes the 
identification of the most expressive and musical features of the 
synthesis system. As shown here and elsewhere, the dual-
analog, in forcing the isolation of the most expressive 
parameters, encourages the design of more playble and durable 
instruments. The parameters for this instrument are summarized 
in Table 6. 
Table 6. Mappings for a duoponic granular instrument 
(mgSynthGranularSample) 
Joysticks X1 Grain playback rate 
 Y1 Amplitude 
 X2 Grain window size 
 Y2 Probabilistic grain density 
D-pad L Slow delay 
 R Fast delay 
 U Not connected 
 D Reverb 
Top buttons 1 Sample 1 window range 1 
 2 Sample 1 window range 2 
 3 Sample 1 window range 3 
 4 Sample 1 window range 4 
Back buttons 5 Sample 2 window range 1 
 6 Sample 2 window range 2 
 7 Sample 2 window range 3 
 8 Sample 2 window range 4 
 
 The mgSynthStochWave instrument employs the dynamic 
generation of probabilistic square-segment wave tables. Based 
loosely on the stochastic synthesis techniques of Xenakis [14, 
10], this instrument uses a single wave table for each of two 
voices. The waveform in the table is drawn based on 
probabilistic parameters directly controlled by X2 and Y2: the 
waveform segment size (or the size of each horizontal segment 
with a randomly selected amplitude)  and the waveform redraw 
rate (or the frequency with which new segments are drawn), 
respectively. Each monophonic voice is assigned four pitches. 
X1 here serves as the cutoff frequency of a low-pass filter, and 
Y1 controls amplitude. While based heavily on randomness, 
providing real-time control of the ranges of this randomness 
create an expressive and musical instrument. The parameters 
for this instrument are summarized in Table 7. 
Table 7. Mappings for a duophonic stochastic synthesizer 
(mgSynthStochWave) 
Joysticks X1 Low-pass filter cutoff frequency 
 Y1 Amplitude 
 X2 Probabilistic waveform segment size 
 Y2 Waveform segment redraw rate 
D-pad L Slow delay 
 R Fast delay 
 U Not connected 
 D Reverb 
Top buttons 1 Voice 1 pitch 1 
 2 Voice 1 pitch 2 
 3 Voice 1 pitch 3 
 4 Voice 1 pitch 4 
Back buttons 5 Voice 2 pitch 1 
 6 Voice 2 pitch 2 
 7 Voice 2 pitch 3 
 8 Voice 2 pitch 4 
4.6 Duophonic Phrase Stream Gates 
A final interface archetype extends the gesture-level control of 
the pulse stream gate to patterns of both rhythm and pitch 
control, and similarly employs a duophonic, two-voice model. 
Rather than only encoding the pulse-rate and sound source for 
each gesture, these instruments encode complete pitch and 
rhythm patterns, and assign a unique, looping pattern to each of 
the four buttons for each voice. Pressing a button thus presents 
different looped phrases; through dynamically varying button 
selections, hybrid phrases are created and recombined. A 
variety of  monophonic instruments can be used the synthesis 
the voices. 
 The mgSynthSawSequenceDuo, mgSynthPafSequenceDuo, 
and mgSynthBufferSequenceDuo all employ this approach with 
different sound sources and real-time controls. The 
mgSynthPafSequenceDuo instrument, for example, uses a 
phase-aligned formant (PAF) synthesis instrument [7], where 
X2 and Y2 control the center frequency and pulse width, 
respectively, of the synthesizer voice. X1 controls low-pass 
filter cutoff frequency and Y1 controls amplitude. The 
parameters for this instrument are summarized in Table 8; 
similar instruments have related mappings. While instruments 
such as these provide a meta-control of musical phrases, rather 
than direct control of musical events, the continuous parameters 
made available on the joysticks provide the performer with the 
opportunity of invigorating these gestures and phrases, 
providing additional nuance, phrasing, and contrast. 
Table 8. Mappings for a duophonic phrase-stream 
instrument (mgSynthPafSequenceDuo) 
Joysticks X1 Low-pass filter cutoff frequency 
 Y1 Amplitude 
 X2 PAF center frequency 
 Y2 PAF pulse width 
D-pad L Slow delay 
 R Fast delay 
 U Not connected 
 D Reverb 
Top buttons 1 Voice 1 pattern 1 
 2 Voice 1 pattern 2 
 3 Voice 1 pattern 3 
 4 Voice 1 pattern 4 
Back buttons 5 Voice 2 pattern 1 
 6 Voice 2 pattern 2 
 7 Voice 2 pattern 3 
 8 Voice 2 pattern 4 
5. INSTRUMENT AND PRESET 
SWITCHING 
The models described above are presented as singular , static 
instruments. Such an approach may be effective for limited 
musical contexts, but performers will benefit from the ability to 
quickly switch instruments and presets during live 
performance. The approach embraced here is to provide a broad 
sonic palette, not through the use of one complex instrument, 
but through the quick switching of numerous simple 
instruments.  
 Throughout the Martingale library, dual-analog instruments 
are switched using buttons 9 and 10 (the “select” and “start” 
buttons), selecting an active instrument on a bidirectional 
circular array or ring menu of all instruments. As many as eight 
different dual-analog instruments are simultaneously loaded 
and made active. A Pd abstraction routes the control data: 
values from the dual-analog are routed to each of the 
instruments, one at a time, based on a value that is incremented 
or decremented by buttons 9 and 10, wrapping around from, for 
example, 8 to 1 or 1 to 8. This type of control, similar to the 
ring menu selector used in many computer games and 
demonstrated in Griffiths [4], provides quick access to each 
instrument. 
 The 9 and 10 buttons can also be used to advance presets for 
individual instruments. Martingale implements this by 
triggering a change in present when both buttons 9 and 10 are 
pressed simultaneously. Presets are incremented within a set 
range, and mapped around to the first preset after exceeding the 
range of all presets. Thus, a second ring menu (albeit 
monodirectional) is used for preset control.  
 By exposing both instrument and preset switching directly on 
the dual-analog controller, a vast grid of sound and control 
options is available from a single piece of hardware. This 
approach permits a performer to call up a large range of sound 
sources without recourse to the computer trackpad, mouse, or 
keyboard. While visual feedback regard ing the current 
instrument and/or preset is beneficial, it is not required. Such a 
model lets the performer play a single controller away from the 
computer, without even looking at the computer or the 
controller, providing a compelling musical performance while 
avoiding many of the common criticisms of live-electronics 
performance. Dating from early performances of The Hub, 
audience members have been baffled by the dispa rity between 
the sounds of live electronics and the static, screen -focused 
performance of many musicians; Gresham-Lancaster, for 
example, relates how audience members said they “looked like 
a bunch of air traffic controllers” [3]. Trueman similarly 
describes how a common complaint “leveled at laptop 
performers” is that “they were all just checking their email” 
[12]. As Griffiths states, “use of a gamepad allows the 
performer to leave the confines of the screen and keyboard, and 
means the computer is less of a central point compared to other 
laptop performances” [4]. Leaving the screen and keyboard is 
an advantage common to many controllers; the dual -analog, 
however, offers a pleasing and compact visual presentation, 
letting the audience clearly see the performer playing a physical 
instrument. 
6. LANGUAGE AND PLATFORM 
SUPPORT 
For most operating systems, the USB interface of the dual 
analog presents itself as a standard human interface device 
(HID). Various computer-music languages need only expose 
the serial data-stream of the controller to begin mapping data to 
musical applications. 
 The Martingale Pd library includes, in addition to all of the 
instruments described above, Pd abstractions for numerous 
variations of dual-analog controllers and specific platform 
requirements. For MacOS and Linux users, the Pd “hid” object, 
created by Hans-Christoph Steiner (at.or.at/hans/pd/hid.html) 
and distributed as part of Pd-extended, performs correctly for a 
variety of dual-analog controllers. Actual values returned by the 
controllers may be in different formats or value ranges. 
Martingale manages this diversity by creating, for each 
controller type, abstractions that return values and triggers in 
uniform and normalized ranges. 
 Use of dual-analog controllers in Pd on Windows is presently 
less stable, due to the lack of a robust HID interface. Good 
solutions are available through alternative “joystick” and 
“hidin” objects (distributed with Martingale and Pd-extended). 
 Use of dual-analog controllers in Max/MSP can be easily 
achieved through the “hi” (human interface) object. 
SuperCollider provides a similar “HIDDeviceService” object; 
additional, more specialized game-pad interfaces are also 
available for SuperCollider (e.g., OSCGamePad at 
oscgamepad. sourceforge.net). Other computer-music 
languages are likely to provide similar inte rfaces. If no native 
support is available, HID to MIDI or OSC translators, such as 
junXion (www.steim.org/steim/ junxion_v4.html), may be 
used. 
7. CONCLUSION 
The diversity of instruments for which the dual analog can 
serve as a controller is made clear from the previous examples. 
All of these instruments are presently available in the 
Martingale library. The goal of this paper, however, is not just 
to supply example mappings and interface d esigns, but to 
illustrate the benefits of designing instruments for a common, 
inexpensive, and practical hardware controller, and encourage 
others to also design instruments and interfaces for this 
controller. Further, embracing parameter reduction and 
isolation, as this controller demands, promotes more playable 
and durable instruments. Dual-analog controllers are literally 
everywhere; providing interfaces and instruments for these 
controllers offers many opportunities. 
 For example, in introducing a new synthesis technique or 
synthesis language, developers can offer simple interfaces 
using the dual-analog. Better then a static recording or a GUI-
based demonstration, performers using a dual-analog controller 
can quickly and easily explore the parameters of a new 
synthesis design. 
 For students of live electronics, finding a point of entry can 
be difficult. Instead of trying to explore performance with a 
keyboard and a mouse, or using an expensive controller that 
might require extensive and time consuming custom mappings, 
students can begin immediately making expressive gestures 
with the dual-analog controller and existing instruments. 
Providing numerous contrasting designs (such as those 
provided in Martingale) exposes students to a variety of 
synthesis techniques and mapping strategies. As the dual -
analog controller is likely to be familiar and inviting, such 
instruments “invite exploration and intuitive approaches to 
performance ... [to] draw the performer into a kind of 
performance flow” [12]. Such an approach means that, for these 
instruments, programmability will not be a curse [1] and the 
trap of “constant technical improvement means eternal 
unfamiliarity with the instrument” [5] can be avoided. 
 Finally, extensive practice on a single type of controller, even 
with diverse instrument models, lets performers gain a type 
mastery, avoiding the problem that “the performer doesn't 
really know how to play his or her instrument, which he or she 
may just have finished building” [5]. While not esoteric or 
unusual, dual-analog instruments offer “interfaces that demand 
practice and force the players to ‘break a sweat’” [11]. 
 The dual-analog controller does not met every instrumental or 
control need: velocity-sensitive buttons are desirable, as are 
sensors such as accelerometers (which some models do 
include). However, for around $20, the dual-analog offers easy 
access to a number of controls rich with potential for designing 
engaging real-time live-electronics instruments. 
8. REFERENCES 
[1] Cook, P. 2001. “Principles for designing computer music 
controllers.” In Proceedings of the Conference on New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression. 
[2] Fiebrink, R. and G. Wang, P. Cook. 2007. “Don't Forget 
the Laptop: Using Native Input Capabilities for Expressive 
Musical Control.” In Proceedings of the Conference on 
New Interfaces for Musical Expression, pp. 164–167. 
[3] Gresham-Lancaster, S. 1998. “The Aesthetics and History 
of the Hub: The Effects of Changing Technology on 
Network Computer Music.” Leonardo Music Journal 
8:39–44. 
[4] Griffiths, D. 2007. “Game Pad Live Coding Performance.” 
In J. Birringer, T. Dumke and K. Nicolai, eds. Die Welt als 
virtuelles Environment. Dresden: TMA Helleraue. 
[5] Perkis, T. 2009. “Some Notes on My Electronic 
Improvisation Practices.” In R. T. Dean, ed. The Oxford 
Handbook of Computer Music. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, pp. 161–166. 
[6] Puckette, M. 2002. “Max at 17.” Computer Music Journal 
26(4):31–43. 
[7] Puckette, M. 2007. The Theory and Technique of 
Electronic Music. Hackensack, New Jersey: World 
Scientific. Available online at 
http://www.crca.ucsd.edu/~msp/techniques/latest/book-
html. 
[8] Roads, C. 2002. Microsound. Cambridge, Massachusetts: 
MIT Press. 
[9] Ryan, J. 1991. “Some Remarks on Musical Instrument 
Design at STEIM.” Contemporary Music Review 6(1):3–
17. 
[10] Serra, M. 1993. “Stochastic Composition and Stochastic 
Timbre: GENDY3 by Iannis Xenakis.” Perspectives of 
New Music 31(1):236–257. 
[11] Smallwood, S. and D. Trueman, P. R. Cook, G. Wang. 
2008. “Composing for Laptop Orchestra.” Computer 
Music Journal 32(1):9–25. 
[12] Trueman, D. 2007. “Why a Laptop Orchestra?” Organised 
Sound 12(2):171–179. 
[13] Winkler, T. 1998. Composing Interactive Music. 
Cambridge: MIT Press. 
[14] Xenakis, I. 1992. Formalized Music: Thought and 
Mathematics in Music. Indiana: Indiana University Press.
 