Dimensionality and Appropriation in Digital Musical
Instrument Design
Victor Zappi
Centre for Digital Music, School of EECS
Queen Mary University of London
Mile End Road, London E1 4FZ, UK
victor.zappi@qmul.ac.uk
Andrew P . McPherson
Centre for Digital Music, School of EECS
Queen Mary University of London
Mile End Road, London E1 4FZ, UK
a.mcpherson@qmul.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the process of appropriation in digi-
tal musical instrument performance, examining the e↵ect of
instrument complexity on the emergence of personal play-
ing styles. Ten musicians of varying background were given
a deliberately constrained musical instrument, a wooden
cube containing a touch/force sensor, speaker and embed-
ded computer. Each cube was identical in construction,
but half the instruments were conﬁgured for two degrees
of freedom while the other half allowed only a single de-
gree. Each musician practiced at home and presented two
performances, in which their techniques and reactions were
assessed through video, sensor data logs, questionnaires and
interviews. Results show that the addition of a second de-
gree of freedom had the counterintuitive e↵ect of reducing
the exploration of the instrument’s a↵ordances; this sug-
gested the presence of a dominant constraint in one of the
two conﬁgurations which strongly di↵erentiated the process
of appropriation across the two groups of participants.
Keywords
design, appropriation, interaction, mapping, embedded hard-
ware
1. INTRODUCTION
Musicians often use instruments in unexpected ways. The
history of musical instruments is replete with examples of
performance practices which challenged the designer’s orig-
inal intentions. Jazz saxophone playing overturned many of
the norms of classical technique. Distortion on the electric
guitar was an engineering limitation before it became the
sound of rock and roll. The turntable was a home playback
device before it became a tool of scratch DJs.
In these examples, the process ofappropriation, in which
performers developed a (possibly idiosyncratic) working re-
lationship with the instrument, came to deﬁne the instru-
ment’s identity. While how best to design for appropria-
tion has been studied in the human-computer interaction
literature [1], appropriation in musical instrument design
is less well understood. If a performer uses a new musical
interface in an unexpected way, should this be considered
a design success or failure? What characteristics of instru-
ment design make a performer more or less likely to discover
personalised performance techniques?
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’14,June 30 – July 03, 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
This paper investigates appropriation and the emergence
of personal styles amongst performers of a simple digital
musical instrument (DMI). Building on the results of a
study by Gurevich et al. [6], ten musicians were given an
unfamiliar instrument with highly constrained sonic capa-
bilities. Through a series of rehearsals, performances, ques-
tionnaires and interviews, we sought to achieve three goals:
1. To verify and extend the results of Gurevich et al. [6]
on the inﬂuence of constraints on musical style.
2. To study the role ofdimensionality in how perform-
ers approach musical instruments. Speciﬁcally, we ask
whether an instrument with more dimensions of con-
trol produces a richer set of musical interactions.
3. To identify signs of appropriation and personalisation
in performers’ interactions with an instrument.
1.1 Constraints and Personal Style
Constraints can be a powerful motivator for musical creativ-
ity. Magnusson [10] observes that musicians encountering a
new instrument tend to explore its constraints rather than
engaging only with the designer’s intended a↵ordances, a
result which holds even for more complex augmented in-
struments which are partially familiar [11].
Gurevich et al. [6] conducted a study in which nine
performers were given a one-button instrument; the but-
ton produced a tone of ﬁxed frequency and loudness. This
two-state device (tone or no tone) represents perhaps the
simplest possible electronic musical instrument, yet the per-
formers developed a broad array of playing styles. In ad-
dition to rhythmic variations, many performers discovered
non-obvious playing techniques such as muting the speaker
with the hands or tapping on the box. Despite the simplic-
ity, many performers felt that they had not achieved mas-
tery of the instrument during the study period. Reﬂecting
on the diversity of styles, the authors proposed “that the
very fact that the instrument was so constrained helped to
make space for this personal element to emerge.”
1.1.1 Investigating Dependence on Context
One aim of the present paper is to attempt replication of
the results of [6] amongst a di↵erent group of musicians,
with a di↵erent instrument possessing more degrees of free-
dom. We ask whether the emergence of diverse and unusual
playing styles is a general feature of performer-instrument
interaction, or whether this is solely a reaction to a partic-
ular set of constraints.
1.2 Dimensionality, Mapping and Creativity
Mapping between sensor data and sound production has
been a central consideration of DMI design for over a decade
[7]. Many approaches to mapping design have been ex-
plored, including one-to-one and many-to-many relation-
ships between sensors and sonic parameters, hierarchical
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
455
approaches [3], and mappings based on physical or gestural
metaphors [13].
An important consideration is mapping dimensionality:
in how many independent dimensions can the performer
control the sound of the instrument? In DMI design, it is
a common assumption (though by no means unchallenged
[2]) that increasing the number of dimensions of control in-
creases the expressive range of the instrument; accordingly,
many new instruments tend toward a large number of con-
trols to maximise the instrument’s potential ﬂexibility.
The cognitive and motor bandwidth of the performer
places an upper limit on the usable dimensionality of the
instrument [8], as do considerations of the learning curve
[14]. But in this paper, we ask a more basic question: for
even the simplest instruments (where there is no cognitive
or motor limitation), is higher dimensionality a help or a
hindrance to the performer’s creativity? In particular, is
appropriation more or less likely to occur on an instrument
with a larger number of control dimensions?
2. INSTRUMENT DESIGN
One purpose of our study is to verify and extend the re-
sults included in [6] concerning the development of style in
relation to constraints. Gurevich et al. argue that a musi-
cal instrument characterised by a highly constrained design
leads performers to discover a diversity of style based on
unexpected usage. On the other hand, stylistic variations
ﬂourish through the absence of strong externally imposed
constraints, such as conventions established by common per-
formance practice.
Starting from these considerations, we created a new sim-
ple DMI. Any resemblance with familiar musical instru-
ments was avoided, including both appearance and main
a↵ordances, while a new set of design constraints was intro-
duced. At the same time, we tried to maintain most of the
fundamental design features of the one-button instrument
used in [6], while expanding its sonic and control capabilities
to assess the role of dimensionality on performers’ responses.
“I think it would be neat if it had some sort of velocity
sensitivity or something like that... I would make it
something in the touch... If touch controlled timbre... but
just with that one button.” — Participant of the
one-button instrument study [6]
2.1 Hardware
A self-contained instrument was necessary for the study,
since the reliance on additional devices would have dramat-
ically inﬂuenced the approach to practice and the perfor-
mance usage of the instrument itself. Even a simple ex-
ternal PA inevitably introduces a set of extended controls
over a system and makes available a track record of prede-
ﬁned possible interaction techniques (e.g., gain saturation,
amplitude modulation). To be able to combine all the neces-
sary components into a whole system, a Beaglebone Black1
(BBB) was chosen as core of the instrument. The BBB is a
small yet powerful embedded Linux board, hosting a 1 GHz
ARM Cortex-A8 processor and equipped with a USB port
for data connection and power supply, a uSD card slot and
extensive General Purpose Input/Output (GPIO). To sup-
port audio output capabilities, we used a Beaglebone Audio
Cape2, an add-on board featuring stereo input and output.
The board is carried inside a cubic wooden enclosure
15cm on a side. This conﬁguration was selected since the
cube is an unconventional shape for an instrument, at ﬁrst
1http://beagleboard.org/
2http://elinux.org/CircuitCo:Audio_Cape_RevA
glance not deliberately ergonomic and not tied to any mu-
sical usage conventions. Given its geometry and its size
(the minimum size to hold all the components), the cube-
instrument can be either easily held in one hand or played
on a surface such as a table or stand.
One of the sides of the box mounts a loudspeaker, which
is almost fully exposed through laser-cut holes. On an ad-
jacent face, two sensors are placed on top of each other: on
the bottom, a Force Sensitive Resistor (FSR) and, on the
top, a 5cm x 2cm capacitive multitouch sensor (XY posi-
tion; originally from [9]). Both are directly connected to the
GPIOs of the BBB using analog input and I2C, respectively.
An onboard battery allows use of the instrument without
a power supply cord. Battery life is about 2 hours; a small
hole on one of the sides of the cube exposes a USB connector
for recharging. It is possible to switch the instrument on and
o↵pressing the battery power button. An LED next to the
switch lights when the BBB has booted and the instrument
is ready to be played. Unlike [6], and due to the digital
nature of our system, the charge level of the battery does not
interfere with the audio synthesis and ampliﬁcation process.
2.2 Software and Mappings
An audio engine written in C++ and built upon the Ad-
vanced Linux Sound Architecture3 (ALSA) APIs was devel-
oped and compiled for the BBB’s native ARM processor.
The audio engine includes a FM synthesizer and a control
thread capable of accessing sensor data from the circuitry
attached to the GPIOs of the board.
The synthesizer generates 2 overlapping but distinct sounds,
a percussive hit resembling a snare and a sustained drone
sound. The mapping design consists of a direct many-to-
many strategy. Both the sounds are triggered when the
touch sensor detects a touch hit; the percussive sound is
automatically released while the drone stops when all the
ﬁngers are removed from the sensor. Whenever the touch
sensor is triggered, the FSR pressure values control the ve-
locity of the percussive sound and the cut-o↵frequency of
a low pass ﬁlter applied on the drone, allowing for a contin-
uous modulation within a deliberately restricted range.
Measurements estimated that the worst case event au-
dio latency for this conﬁguration of the instrument is below
7ms. The actual mapping happens in the control thread,
which also logs all the retrieved sensor data onto a uSD
card connected to the BBB. Data are timestamped and in-
clude number of detected touches on the capacitive sensor,
X-Y touch positions, touch areas and maximum pressure;
although only the ﬁrst touch hit is used to trigger the syn-
thesizer, the positions of up to three touches can be detected
by the sensor, all of which are logged separately.
2.2.1 Two Parallel Mapping Implementations
Compared to the one-button instrument in [6], our instru-
ment features a somewhat higher level of complexity. We
aim to assess whether performers still develop diverse and
unusual playing styles when the instrument is characterised
by a higher number of a↵ordances and di↵erent constraints.
Since we also aim to evaluate the role of dimensionality in
the appropriation process, we developed two versions of the
same instrument with identical hardware but slightly dif-
ferent mappings. The ﬁrst version allows control of timbre
using pressure, as described in the preceding section. The
second encompasses all the capabilities of the ﬁrst, but also
adds control of pitch (both percussive sound and drone) us-
ing the X (longer) axis of the touch sensor. The pitch range
is approximately 4 semitones. Such a small range was de-
3www.alsa.opensrc.org
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
456
Figure 1: Pictures taken during the second performance, showing di↵erent ways of playing the instrument.
signed to discourage musicians from playing melodies on
the instrument. Conversely, the pitch range was continuous
rather than rounded to discrete semitones; this was done to
provide both pitch and timbre controls with similar sets of
degrees of freedom and constraints.
In both versions, multi-ﬁnger data and Y-axis touch po-
sition are not mapped to any control. For matter of clarity,
from now on we will refer to the 2 di↵erent versions of the in-
strument as1 and 2 Degree-of-Freedom (DoF)instruments.
3. USER STUDY
Ten cube-instruments were constructed; ﬁve of them had
one degree of freedom, and the other ﬁve had two degrees
of fredom. The software running on each board was set to
log sensor data as soon as the instrument was switched on,
generating a new log ﬁle for each session.
3.1 Participants
A total of 10 paid participants took part into the study,
and each received an instrument. Our call for participants
aimed at enrolling 2 di↵erent groups of musicians with spe-
ciﬁc features. Out of the many people who replied to our
advertisement, we selected: a ﬁrst group of 5 musicians who
shared a certain experience with unconventional electronic
instruments and experimental approach. A second group
of 5 musicians who, though coming from di↵erent music
backgrounds (e.g., classic music, rock, folk), featured more
“standard” musical skills, mainly related to the capability of
playing an acoustic or electric instrument. Since no females
replied to our call, the study includes only male subjects.
3.2 Rehearsal and First Performance
We met each participant separately, and details about the
other enrolled musicians were not made known. This was
done to avoid them inﬂuencing each other in the way they
played the instrument. Instruments were handed out during
individual ﬁrst meetings, such that both groups included
both types of instruments (1 DoF and 2 DoF). Participants
were unaware that two types of instrument existed.
Participants were ﬁrst asked to prepare an unaccompa-
nied performance using the instrument, 1 to 3 minutes long,
structured or totally improvised. Complete freedom was
given in terms of how to play the instrument, imposing no
constraints on posture or setup (e.g. sitting, standing, using
a table). They were asked to come back and perform after
a rehearsal period of 2 weeks.
The ﬁrst set of performances took place in a small black
box theatre in the authors’ department, spread over 10 dif-
ferent days, again to prevent participants from meeting;
the audience was composed of the authors only. Each per-
formance followed the same structure: performers were in-
structed to start playing the instrument when ready; once
ﬁnished, they were asked to complete a Likert scale ques-
tionnaire including 4 groups of sentences regarding their
perception of the instrument, covering:
1. General mastery – whether they had completely mas-
tered the instrument or they needed more time to re-
ﬁne their technique.
2. A↵ordances’ discovery – to what extent they explored
the (hidden) capabilities of the instrument.
3. Degrees of freedom usage – whether they used all the
a↵ordances discovered, or just a subset of them.
4. Style and behaviour – how unconventionally they played
the instrument compared to what they expected other
performers to do.
Then, a structured interview was held, addressing areas of
interest similar to the ones featured in [6]:
1. Musical content of the performance – improvised or
structured, variations, range of material played.
2. Physical interaction with the instrument – posture,
technique.
3. Impressions of the instrument – initial reactions, un-
derstanding of the interface, perception of a separated
components vs. a self-contained instrument, expecta-
tions, perceived features and limitations or problems,
previous experience with other similar instruments.
4. Rehearsal experience – frequency and duration, en-
gagement, perceived improvement through practice and
skill self-assessment.
Both the performance and the interview were audio and
video recorded, and logged data from the rehearsal period
and performance were saved. Before leaving, participants
were asked to prepare a second performance in two weeks,
under the same constraints, but this time fully structured
(repeatable). This would happen in front of a real audience.
3.3 Second Performance with Audience
All the participants were asked to come back and do the
second performance on the same day, in the same venue as
before. The event was publicly advertised, and an audience
of 31 people attended the show. This provided participants
with a more realistic performance scenario. Participants
went on stage one at a time and played their piece while
the rest of the group waited backstage (Figure 1). None of
them was allowed to attend other participants’ peformances,
even after the conclusion of their own; moreover, they were
asked to refrain from discussing about any topic related to
the cube-instrument while together.
After the conclusion of this second set of performances,
two questionnaires were distributed among the participants.
The ﬁrst one was an identical copy of the Likert scale ques-
tionnaire ﬁlled in after the ﬁrst performance. The second
one consisted of a written version of the structured inter-
view, extended with some questions about di↵erences be-
tween the 2 performance experiences and suggestions for
further development of the instrument.
The audience was also asked to ﬁll in a questionnaire.
This consisted of open-ended questions about the level of
mastery of the instrument and the diversity of style per-
ceived throughout the 10 performances, as well as about
the general understanding of the instrument.
Performers were then asked to give anencore, exactly re-
peating the piece previously played. This time they had
the opportunity to attend the other participants’ perfor-
mances. After this session, a group discussion concluded
their involvement in the study. This was meant to focus on
the perceived di↵erences between the instruments and be-
tween the di↵erent participants’ techniques, to leave space
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
457
for free comments and questions about the instrument or
study, and to elicit general inter-participant debate.
All the performances, including the encore, and the group
discussion were audio and video recorded.
4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In this section, qualitative and quantitative data collected
throughout the study are combined to investigate how con-
straints and dimensionality a↵ect style and appropriation.
4.1 Diversity of Style
The 10 participants showed a signiﬁcant diversity of styles
in their performances. Following the methods of [6], this
diversity was estimated by annotating the behaviours ob-
served in the video recordings. Four main categories were
coded: A↵ordances, Musical Variations, Posturesand In-
teraction Techniques. Although these categories partially
overlap with those of the one-button instrument study [6],
some grouping di↵erences were introduced to account for
the e↵ects of the more complex instrument metaphor.
In Table 1,A↵ordances lists all the actions that were
explored by participants to produce sounds and music (simi-
lar to the “ways of playing” category in the reference study).
Main a↵ordances relate to the use of the sensor to trigger
sounds and to modify the built-in timbre/pitch parameters.
Examples include hits and slides on the sensor.Hidden af-
fordances (shown with a star in the table) are those which
were not intentionally built into the instrument, and not
directly perceivable from its design [4]. They rely on the
exploitation of features of the instrument not necessarily
connected to the sensor, such as rubbing on the wooden
sides of the box or touching the speaker.
Musical Variationslists how the discovered a↵ordances
were used musically. Entries in A↵ordances and Musical
Variations support many-to-many relationships: di↵erent
a↵ordances can be used to obtain the same musical varia-
tion (e.g., ﬁltering the sound either using the hand or an-
other surface); conversely, di↵erent musical variations can
capitalise on the same a↵ordance (e.g. a constant drone
or a rhythmically modulated sound can be both generated
pushing the ﬁnger on the sensor).
Postures includes both bodily positions and ways of
holding the instrument.Interaction Techniquesrefers to
the speciﬁc ways in which the actions suggested by a per-
ceived a↵ordance were carried out. For example, the sensor
can be pushed (the a↵ordance) using both a single ﬁnger or
the entire palm (the interaction techniques), to generate a
drone (the musical variation).
Analysis of Table 1 suggests that the nature of the instru-
ment elicited a remarkable variety of styles and behaviours.
Such a simple but important observation conﬁrms the re-
sults of Gurevich et al. [6], highlighting that the emergence
of diverse and unusual ways of playing a DMI does not nec-
essarily depend on one speciﬁc set of constraints.
A deeper analysis of the ﬁrst two table columns (A↵or-
dances and Musical Variations) hints at why, for this in-
strument, style variety is even wider than [6]. In contrast
to the one-button instrument, style variations related to the
main a↵ordances of the cube-instrument (the non-star en-
tries) are many and determine almost the 30% of the overall
diversity (13 out of a total 47 entries). Indeed, the cube-
instrument is characterised by a more complex metaphor
than the one-button device; more degrees of freedom seem
to have led to the exploration of a wider set of a↵ordances.
Despite of the degrees of freedom intrinsically available
within the instrument, comments from the interviews make
clear that participants perceived the device asvery con-
strained. Interaction was deﬁned as“limited”, “frustrating”
A↵ordances
Push
Hits
Slides
Complete sensor coverage
Rubbing box sides*
Rubbing over sensor*
Tapping box*
Licking sensor*
Manual ﬁltering*
Table ﬁltering*
Fingernails hits*
Singing*
Touching speaker*
Objects on speaker*
Combined a↵ordances*
Musical Variations
Drone
Rhythmic drone modulation
Arhythmic drone modulation
Rhythmic hits
Arhythmic hits
Unpredictable timbre/pitch
Ri↵s
Glide
Vibrato
Rhythmic rubbing*
Arhythmic rubbing*
Rhythmic ﬁltering*
Arhythmic ﬁltering*
Rhythmic tapping*
Poliphony*
Distortion*
Rattling objects*
Postures
Sitting
Standing
Instrument between legs
Instrument on laps
On surface
Static
Flipping sides
Speaker towards audience
LED towards audience
Interaction Techniques
Fingers
Palms
Both hands
More than one sensor touch
Combined techniques
Table 1: Diversity of style. Marked with a star,
entries related to hidden a↵ordances; entries in light
grey are found in the 1DoF group only, entries in
dark grey are found in the 2DoF group only.
and artistic production was referred as“a challenge”. Per-
formers’ reactions to these limitations consisted of searching
and ﬁnding novel and“interesting”solutions to play the in-
strument. As argued by Gedenryd [5], from this perspective
the presence of limiting design features is only apparently
negative, especially in creative ﬁelds where structure (i.e.,
constraints) mediates excessively wide ranges of options.
Performers apparently explored unconventional techniques
both because of and in spite of the perceived constraints.
Two examples of these parallel approaches are Participant
ID 0 (P0), who deﬁned this process in these terms:“I found
that the subtlety which was within its limitations was where
something interesting musically could happen...”;a so p p o s e d
to P5, who said:“I found the normal interaction, I mean
the pad, a little limited. So, once I got a bit acquainted
with the pad itself, I looked for a way to extend the possibil-
ities, to enrich sound and control.”These comments align
with the style diversity in Table 1. Style variations ascrib-
able to hidden a↵ordance exploration (star entries in ﬁrst
two columns) are copious; covering more than the 40% of
the table entries, they form the most diverse cluster. This
suggests that the number and the strength of the perceived
constraints stimulated the discovery of unconventional ways
of playing and the development of a personal style. Such
a result is in line with Schon’s general theory ofreﬂection-
in-action [12], according to which the clash between sought
goals and limitations stimulates critical inquiry, on-the-spot
experimentation andartistry.
4.2 The Role of Dimensionality
The preceding analysis combined data from all 1DoF and
2DoF groups. To investigate the role of dimensionality on
style and interaction techniques, we will next consider the
behaviour and reactions of each group separately.
In Table 1, entries observed only in the 1DoF group are
assigned a light grey background, while entries observed
only in the 2DoF group are given a dark grey background.
Entries with white backgrounds were found in both groups.
Overall, diversity of style is strongly present in both the
groups. However, the performers who played the 2DoF
instrument explored hidden a↵ordances and related musi-
cal variations in a more limited way. Out of the 19 hid-
den a↵ordance-related entries, only 11 were observed in the
2DoF group; conversely, variations of style found in the
1DoF group use 17 of the same 19 entries.
A comparative analysis of main a↵ordance exploration
reveals interesting and unexpected results. The number of
musical variations strictly based on pitch control introduced
by the 2DoF group is only two,glide and vibrato. Further-
more, main a↵ordance-related entries in the ﬁrst and fourth
table columns (non-star;A↵ordances and Interaction Tech-
niques) completely overlap between the groups. This sug-
gests that no additional main a↵ordances were perceived by
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
458
the 2DoF group and that the physical usage of the instru-
ment was exactly the same.
This qualitative result is also supported by log data anal-
ysis. For each participant, mean and standard deviation
of the sensor activation during the performances were com-
puted and compared across the two groups. Three dimen-
sions were taken into account: pressure, X and Y position
of the ﬁrst touch (the one which triggers the synth), all
normalised between 0 and 1. A two-sample Kolmogorov-
Smirnov test indicated that the two clusters of sensor usage
data do come from the same continuous distribution, thus
showing no signiﬁcant di↵erence between them.
The spatial distribution of touches over the sensor for the
two groups is in line with this result. The heatmap shown
in Figure 2 represents the number of touches detected by
the sensor, quantising its surface in 230 small squares. A
tendency to spend more time on the edges of the sensor is
noticeable in both the 1DoF instrument (left) and the 2DoF
instrument (right). Some traces of spatial exploration of the
sensor along both X and Y axes are also visible. While in
the 2DoF group, X-axis exploration can be connected to
the search for a desired pitch, extensive X-axis usage was
also found in the 1DoF group. P3 accounted for this spatial
exploration as follows:“Using two ﬁngers in two di↵erent
places in the touch pad...I can trigger [notes] quicker than
using one ﬁnger.”The same technique was also used by
P4. Other participants from the same group used modu-
lation techniques which combined changes of both pressure
and position, for example P8 and P3. P8 and P0 ﬂipped
the instrument sideways, thus reaching the sensor from a
di↵erent angle, touching its edges rather than the centre.
These behaviours and the related quantitative data seem
to conﬁrm previous speculations on style diversity across
the groups. Indeed, they clearly show how di↵erent ways
of playing the instrument (e.g., pitch-based or rhythmic-
based) were based on the same a↵ordances and techniques
(e.g., touching the sensor in di↵erent spots), regardless of
the number of degrees of freedom of the instrument.
4.2.1 Two Instruments, a Dominant Constraint
In accordance with both [6] and our own expectations, the
addition of a control dimension signiﬁcantly changed the
perception of the instrument between groups. As previously
highlighted, many of the a↵ordances and musical variations
appeared in only one group (e.g. touching the speaker to
distort the sound or licking the sensor to have an inﬁnite-
sustain drone).
The numerical questionnaire ﬁlled out by the performers
also shows a signiﬁcant di↵erence in reaction (Figure 3). On
average, the two groups responded di↵erently to Sentence 4
(There are many other ways of using this instrument I still
have to explore), with the 2DoF group believing much more
than the 1DoF group that all the instrument’s features had
been explored. Sentence 6 (My performance was based on
as u b s e to ft h ei n t e r a c t i o n sIh a v ee x p l o r e d) showed a high
level of disagreement within the 1DoF group, indicated by a
large variance, while almost all the 2DoF performers totally
agreed with the statement. Overall, this suggests that the
2DoF sees an instrument which is incapable of providing ad-
ditional a↵ordances, while the 1DoF group see a richer and
more complex device which they have not fully explored.
The reason for the 2DoF group feeling more limited than
the 1DoF group is suggested by the participants’ comments.
In the ﬁnal interview, 3 of 5 participants from the 2DoF
group strongly agreed that the limited pitch range was their
main concern. P2 expressed his frustration:“Even though
Ih a dac o u p l eo fn o t e s ,It h i n kIs t i l lf o u n di taq u i e t l y
frustrating experience just to have those notes instead of
Figure 2: Heatmap representing the spatial density
of touches over the instrument’s sensor for the two
groups of participants. Density is normalised over
the total number of touches and goes from dark blue
(lowest density) to dark red (highest density).
ac o u p l eo fo c t a v e s . ”Conversely, P6 commented:“People
who had the other version were doing more experimental
stu↵... as soon as I realised it had a pitch...I concentrated on
that.” P7 had a 2DoF instrument, and he reacted strongly
when asked about the 1DoF version:“I already felt really
restricted by only having a minor third [the perceived pitch
range], I was already really angry about that! So, I think
if I’ve just had one pitch, I would have just been like...I’m
trying to be a musician darling! I can’t work with one note!”
These comments suggest that participants with the 2DoF
instrument not only tended to engage more with constraints
rather than a↵ordances, but speciﬁcally focused on a sin-
gle, dominant constraint, limiting hidden a↵ordance explo-
ration. An additional clue supports this hypothesis. While
suggestions for further development of the instrument were
diverse within the 1DoF group (only 1/5 mentioning di↵er-
ent notes), 4 out of the 5 participants in the 2DoF group
asked for a wider pitch range, or for the extension of the
length of the sensor to cover more octaves.
In particular, quotes like the one from P7 (“I wanted to
play discrete notes, I found it more musical somehow...”)
might imply that the pitch is related to common musical
conventions; this would explain its dominant role in con-
straints. Probably, for the 2DoF group, the perception of
new a↵ordances (elicited by the new degree of freedom) was
counterbalanced by the perception of a strong constraint on
pitch range, resulting both in less evident unconventional
usage of the instrument and only a limited inclusion of new
techniques based on the pitch a↵ordances themselves.
4.3 Appropriation and Cognitive Bandwidth
The appropriation process for any technology is strongly
dependent on its design [1]. The user takes personal own-
ership of the technology by two nonexclusive approaches:
the exploitation of the intended openness and interpretabil-
Figure 3: Mean and standard deviation of the Likert
scale evaluation of performers’ questionnaires.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
459
ity of the system, and the deliberate subversion of design
functions. Our user study shows how, for DMIs, these two
approaches are tightly connected to the degrees of freedom
and the constraints which together deﬁne the instrument.
We suggest that appropriation of a DMI can be mea-
sured partly by the number and extensiveness of the paths
explored through the a↵ordances of the instrument, as the
player understands them. In other words, a user who has
appropriated the instrument is likely to have found many
combinations of ways to engage with the instrument’s af-
fordances (whether or not there might be other a↵ordances
the user is not aware of). This metric is related to the con-
cept of style in [6], but it deals mainly with theusage of
a↵ordances to obtain musical output.
DMI appropriation is important, since the same instru-
ment must often be reintrepeted to ﬁt the needs and expec-
tations of di↵erent musical situations, genres and audiences.
Furthermore, every player is di↵erent; a DMI which is ca-
pable of being appropriated is one on which each player
can build a personal style. The stylistic divergence of the
10 performances suggests that an appropration process was
underway with each participant.
During the ﬁnal performance and encore, technical fail-
ures and dead batteries required 3 instruments to be ex-
changed. In each case, the player performed on another
instrument with identical degrees of freedom. Although
the instruments were nominally identical, each player ex-
pressed discomfort at using a di↵erent instrument (inves-
tigator: “Here is an equivalent box to play on”; performer:
“But this isn’tmy box!”). All three a↵ected performers felt
their original instrument was superior, preferring its par-
ticular touch response. In some cases, performers had also
made their own marks and annotations on the box. These
signs strongly point to the instrument having been appro-
priated by the performer.
The notion of adominant constraint(Section 4.2.1) shows
how dimensionality inﬂuences appropriation, even before
the development of style. [2] suggests that DMI interaction
and understanding of mappings will be inﬂuenced by the
varying skills of each performer. Similarly, we suggest that
the limited exploration of unexpected uses among the 2DoF
group may indicate the existence of acognitive bandwidth
for appropriation. In other words, whenever a new degree
of freedom is made available on an instrument, the strength
of the constraints it brings with it determines to what ex-
tent a↵ordances will be explored. In our study, the addition
of a constrainted pitch parameter resulted in (on average)
less exploration of other a↵ordances and constraints of the
instrument. But depending on the performer’s cognitive
bandwidth for appropriation, he or she may nonetheless per-
ceive many a↵ordances alongside the dominant constraints,
developing a personal style based on a thorough appropria-
tion of the instrument.
5. CONCLUSIONS
In summary, our study of 10 performers showed that a very
simple musical instrument gave rise to a wide variety of
musical styles. Conﬁrming the results of the one-button
instrument study [6], use ofhidden a↵ordances accounted
for a large portion of style variations between performers.
Though our instrument had more degrees of freedom than
[6] and a correspondingly greater variety of styles, perform-
ers nonetheless found it to be very constrained. Our results
suggest that the emergence of diverse and unusual playing
styles is a general feature of highly constrained instruments
rather than a reaction to one speciﬁc instrument design.
By comparing otherwise identical instruments with and
without pitch control (2DoF and 1DoF), we found that
adding a control dimension reduced the exploration of hid-
den a↵ordances, and that performers in the 1DoF group
thought that there weremore features left to explore than
those in the 2DoF group. Use of the sensor pad was simi-
lar between groups even though touch location only carried
sonic meaning in the 2DoF group. We also found that the
addition of pitch produced adominant constraint; perform-
ers with 2DoF found the narrow pitch range to be the pri-
mary limitation of the instrument, where performers with
1DoF did not miss the lack of pitch control.
Appropriation is a feature of many human-technology re-
lationships; for DMIs, we suggest it strongly relates to how
the instrument’s a↵ordances (including hidden a↵ordances)
are used in musical practice. The diversity of styles amongst
participants, coupled with the strong reactions when per-
formers were asked to change instruments, indicates that
appropriation took place across the study. The reduced ex-
ploration of a↵ordances in the 2DoF group suggests that
there may be cognitive limits to what any given performer
can explore at once. This question merits further investiga-
tion. Further work will also examine the perspective of the
audience and patterns of performer-instrument interaction
revealed by the sensor data.
6. REFERENCES
[1] A. Dix. Designing for appropriation. InProc. British
HCI Group Conf. on People and Computers,2 0 0 7 .
[2] C. Dobrian and D. Koppelman. The ‘E’ in NIME:
musical expression with new computer interfaces. In
Proc. NIME, pages 277–282, 2006.
[3] J. Fran¸ coise, B. Caramiaux, and F. Bevilacqua. A
hierarchical approach for the design of
gesture-to-sound mappings. InProc. SMC,2 0 1 2 .
[4] W. W. Gaver. Technology a↵ordances. InProc. CHI,
1991.
[5] H. Gedenryd.How designers work - making sense of
authentic cognitive activities. PhD thesis, Lund
University Cognitive Studies, 1998.
[6] M. Gurevich, P. Stapleton, and A. Marquez-Borbon.
Style and constraint in electronic musical instruments.
In Proc. NIME,2 0 1 0 .
[7] A. Hunt and M. M. Wanderley. Mapping performer
parameters to synthesis engines.Organised Sound,
7(2):97–108, 2002.
[8] D. J. Levitin, S. McAdams, and R. L. Adams. Control
parameters for musical instruments: a foundation for
new mappings of gesture to sound.Organised Sound,
7(2):171–189, 2002.
[9] A. Mac Pherson. Touchkeys: capacitive multi-touch
sensing on a physical keyboard. InProc. NIME,2 0 1 2 .
[10] T. Magnusson. Designing constraints: Composing and
performing with digital musical systems.Computer
Music Journal,3 4 : 6 2 – 7 3 ,2 0 1 0 .
[11] A. McPherson and Y. Kim. The problem of the
second performer: Building a community around an
augmented piano.Computer Music Journal,3 6 ( 4 ) ,
2012.
[12] D. A. Schon.Educating the Reﬂective Practitioner:
Toward a New Design for Teaching and Learning in
the Professions (Higher Education Series).
Jossey-Bass, 1987.
[13] A. Tanaka. Mapping out instruments, a↵ordances,
and mobiles. InProc. NIME,2 0 1 0 .
[14] D. Wessel and M. Wright. Problems and prospects for
intimate musical control of computers.Computer
Music Journal,2 6 ( 3 ) : 1 1 – 2 2 ,2 0 0 2 .
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
460