Precise Control on Compound Curves
Robert Huott
Huott Sound
214 W29th St. #1503
New York, NY  10001
914-316-1772
bhuott@earthlink.net
ABSTRACT
This paper presents the ‘Bean’, a novel controller employing a
multi-touch sensate surface in a compound curve shape.  The
design goals, construction, and mapping system are discussed,
along with a retrospective from a previous, similar design.
Keywords
Musical controller, sensate surface, mapping system
1. INTRODUCTION
The Bean is a development of ideas tested in the ‘Ski’ over
several years [2].  As with the previous design, the main goal is
to create a musical instrument with a broad sonic scope, one
that can play in many styles and easily collaborate with
traditional or modern instruments.  Using conductive rubber
materials and an AtmelAVR microcontroller [4], a multi-touch
sensing pad is built on an arbitrary shape with three distinct
peaks intended to delineate octaves of the instrument’s range.
Notes are mapped so that musically useful intervals fall under
the fingers naturally.  The map combines some elements from
stringed instruments, the piano keyboard, and the kalimba,
making it more intuitive for the experienced musician.  I will
discuss experience gained on the Ski and how it was applied
this new experiment.  While the Ski made headway towards a
viable instrument, technical improvements were needed for
further development of a precise playing technique.  The Bean
takes a fresh approach on the instrument’s shape, and is the
next step towards the kind of accuracy that will enable
virtuosic performance characteristics in a new controller.
2. FORM FACTOR
2.1 Choice of Shape
The Tactex [3] pads used in the Ski are only flexible in one
axis, limiting the choice of shapes for the playing surface.  In
looking for ways to include more positional cues in the shape,
the idea of portions of a sphere for each octave kept coming to
mind.  In an early drawing, it began to look like a giant pea-
pod and so the bean shape was conceived.  While it is visually
novel and memorable, the ends of the pod are useful for
holding it under the chin or between knees.  It is hoped that a
roughly spherical section for each octave will help in locating
notes on the surface.  Another new shape element is a convex
surface on the back of the instrument making it easier to grasp
without stretching.  Compared to the Ski, the new instrument
is much shorter so that it will be easier to transport.  It can
have a leg added to rest on the floor, a neck strap, or can
simply be held by the
musician as described above.
2.2 Construction
A fiberglass over foam
construction method was
chosen for the Bean.  It is
similar to the way surfboards
are made and has the
advantages of low cost and
ease of carving.  After shaping,
the body was painted and
laminated with two layers of
fiberglass cloth and epoxy.
Once complete, the active
sensing area was cut out, foam
core removed, structure and
electronics added inside, and
the sensor laminate applied to
the outside.  The finished
product is strong and light,
and changes or repairs are
fairly simple to make.
2.3 Sensing Pad Details
After seeing conductive rubber used in the HyperPuja during
NIME03 [5], I experimented with using it in a position-
sensing pad.  Zoflex® conductive rubber [6] is available in
sheets, either conductive full-time or under pressure (like a
switch or force-sensitive resistor).  Here a pressure-switching
sheet is sandwiched between rows and columns of conductive
material.  At the bottom layer, aluminum tape is used for the
column strips.  On top are rows of full-time conductive rubber
glued to the back of a leather playing surface.  Contacts are
made where the strips wrap around the edge of the pad.
Using the Atmel microcontroller, a voltage is applied to each
row in sequence.  If there are pressure points on that row, the
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Nime’05, May 26-28, , 2005, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Figure 1. The Bean
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
244
voltage will pass through the switching layer to the column
strips underneath.  The columns are read in groups to make
four 8-bit words for each row, which are sent to the computer
via a serial connection and used to build a matrix representing
activity on the pad.  Centroid detection is carried out by a
Max/MSP/Jitter object written by Randy Jones [1].
One difficulty with the Ski was the wide separation between
fingers needed to register discrete centroids.  In the new pad,
separate centroids appear even when adjacent fingers are nearly
touching each other, making it easier to form chords.  This is
achieved by spacing the sensitive points about 4mm apart as
opposed to 12mm on the Ski.  
3. MAPPING  STRATEGY
3.1 An Evolving Favorite
Since the tuning used on the Ski worked well and could stand
more exploration, the same basic tuning is used on the new
instrument.  In it, four notes of a pentatonic scale are mapped
to fall under four fingers resting in a natural, relaxed position
(home position).  These are the 5th, 6th, root, and 3rd, in that
order [Figure 2.].  The map is a mirror image on each side (like
a harp or kalimba).  Pitch is lower at the top and higher at the
bottom, similar to a stringed instrument but equally spaced
like a keyboard with one octave per ‘pea’.  Moving a
fingertip’s width toward the center of the pad will lower the
pitch by a half-step, and toward the outer edge, up a half-step.
3.2 Sound and  Playability
The sound of these instruments comes from a software
synthesizer and so could be anything at all.  Since the main
effort is to develop a technique, I have chosen to use simple
sounds which make tuning and articulation easy to hear and
adjust: a straightforward synth bass, a melody voice built from
a flute patch, and a basic analog synth with resonant filter, etc.
Like any instrument, it lends itself more to certain kinds of
musical figures than others.  For instance, wider intervals are
much easier to manage then closer ones, and scales currently
work best with a two-handed technique that is tricky and a bit
awkward.  In its non-quantized pitch mode (‘fretless’) it is very
expressive and can make lyrical melodic lines and strong bass
parts.  Improvements made on the sensing pad will afford
broadening the technique.  For instance, the ability to play
single-handed chords in the Bean has opened up a whole new
area to explore.
4. LOOKING FORWARD
4.1 Technical Challenges
Certainly, increasing the density of sensors has improved
accuracy of the pad and opened up new avenues for technique
development, but it also vastly increases computational
overhead needed to support the device.  For this reason, speed
will continue to be a big issue.  Sending sensor data using
digital audio signals instead of standard serial ports is one
way to help things.  Handling more signal processing at the
microcontroller level instead of at the host computer will help
improve efficiency.  Also, more experimentation is needed
with different materials and construction methods for the pad.
4.2 Final Thoughts
A major step forward with the Bean is that it was relatively
inexpensive to make in terms of the cost of materials.  This
device was hand-made and therefore time-consuming and
difficult when real precision was needed.  Future versions will
use printed circuits on flexible materials to solve this problem
and make it simple to build more instruments cheaply.
Getting a few beans into the hands of more people, especially
musicians and children, will provide valuable feedback to help
speed development.
5. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Many thanks to Bill Verplank, Scott Wilson, and Michael
Gurevich. from the CCRMA workshop, and to the Banff Centre
and Pablo Mochcovsky for the unique environment and
support.  Special thanks to Gideon D’Arcangelo, Tina Blaine,
and Sid Fels for their support and inspiration.  Thanks also to
Ed Huott and Tom Huott for technical and logistical support.
6. REFERENCES
[1] Jones, R., 2upTechnology,      www.2uptech.com     
[2] Huott, R. “An Interface for Precise Musical Control”
Proceedings of the 2002 Conference on New Instruments
for Musical Expression (NIME 2002), Dublin Ireland
[3] Tactex Controls, Smart Fabric technology,
www.tactex.com     
[4] Wilson, S., Gurevich, M., Verplank, B., & P. Stang,
“Microcontrollers in Music Education - Reflections on
our Switch to the Atmel AVR Platform”, Proceedings of
the 2003 Conference on New Instruments for
MusicalExpression (NIME 2003), Montreal, Canada.
[5] Young, D., Essl, G, “HyperPuja: A Tibetan Singing Bowl
Controller”, Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New
Instruments for MusicalExpression (NIME 2003),
Montreal, Canada.
[6] Zoflex conductive rubber, Xilor Research LLC,
http://www.irmicrolink.com/Pressure_activated_Conduct    
ive_rubber.html    
Figure 2: Tuning Map
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
245