Vibration, Volts and Sonic Art: A practice and theory of 
electromechanical sound
 
Jon Pigott 
Cardiff School of Art and Design 
Bath Spa University 
www.sonicmarbles.co.uk 
jpigott@uwic.ac.uk 
ABSTRACT 
This paper explores the creative appropriation of loudspeakers 
and other electromechanical devices in sonic arts practice. It is 
proposed that this is an identifiable area of sonic art worthy of 
its own historical and theoretical account. A case study of an 
original work by the author titled Infinite Spring is presented 
within a context of works by other practitioners from the 
1960’s to present day. The notion of the ‘prepared speaker’ is 
explored alongside theories of media archeology, cracked 
media and acoustic ecology. 
 
Keywords 
Electromechanical sonic art, kinetic sound art, prepared 
speakers, Infinite Spring. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
In 2004 I began experimenting with the physical manipulation 
of loudspeaker cones in my music and creative sound practice. 
During a residency at WRAP arts centre, Bergen, in 2005 I 
built an installation consisting of speakers with torn and broken 
cones, I used aluminium foil to cover speakers and attached 
metal objects to speaker cones. In my Visual Speakers of 2006 I 
coupled a speaker cone to an acetate sheet such that it would 
audibly and visibly vibrate, and used another to act as a 
vibrating switch contact to flash LED lights. In the Sonic 
Marble Run (2007) and Infinite Spring (2010) I used beads, foil 
cups, springs and other objects to mechanically modify 
electrically transmitted sound. I use the term ‘prepared speaker’ 
for these devices in reference to the prepared piano pieces of 
John Cage and other examples of ‘prepared’ instruments where 
objects are mechanically coupled to traditional musical 
instruments to alter sonic behavior in some way.  
 This creative appropriation of the loudspeaker reveals a 
general interest and focus on electromechanical transduction 
within sound and sonic arts practice, which I aim to explore in 
my work. By preparing and extending speakers and other 
electromechanical devices I hope to identify them as sound 
sources, and raise questions on the relationship between the 
mechanical nature of the speaker cone and the electromagnetic 
nature of the energizing signal driving it. Electricity is 
ubiquitous as an energy source for all manner of human sonic 
activity yet the acoustic transmission of sound remains a 
mechanical phenomenon. The meeting, transduction and 
interplay between these two forces offers rich creative 
possibilities which I hope to exploit in my work and explore in 
the work of others. 
 This paper provides a context for this approach to creative 
sound practice offering possible ways to navigate the aesthetic 
and technical concerns of working in this way. A brief survey 
of works, techniques and technologies that can be said to exist 
in this arena is provided along with a case study of my recent 
piece Infinite Spring which makes extensive use of both 
prepared speakers and motors to create an electromechanical 
sonic environment (see figs 1- 4). 
2. CONTEXT 
2.1 Brief Survey of Works 
Courting the unique electromechanical qualities of the 
loudspeaker in sonic art and experimental music is nothing 
new. It was the notion that ‘the loudspeaker should have a 
voice which was unique and not just an instrument of 
reproduction but as an instrument unto itself’ [7] which inspired 
David Tudor (1926-1996) to make the installation and 
performance piece Rainforest in various incarnations between 
1966 and 1974.  The piece, still recreated today, uses cone-less 
loudspeakers as transducers, to enable an electrical signal to 
mechanically excite objects such as bedsprings, slinkys and 
sheet metal. The mechanical activity of each of these objects is 
then amplified using Piezo electric contact microphones [5]. 
The piece, in all its guises, is documented by Matt Rogalsky 
who uses the term ‘sculptural speakers’ to describe the Tudor 
devices [5]. 
 In Music For Solo Performer (1965), Alvin Lucier directly 
coupled loudspeakers to percussion instruments such as snare 
drums and gongs such that they would be mechanically excited 
by the amplified brainwaves of a performer wearing electrodes. 
Lucier comments that ‘the brainwave piece is as much about 
resonance as it is about brainwaves’ ([8], p. 204). ‘I’m trying to 
make the connection between sympathetic vibration, which is a 
physical thing, and the next idea is the room as a speaker’ ([8], 
p. 205). Lucier is promoting the idea that the speaker 
preparations in this piece go beyond the percussion instruments 
and could be extended to include the influence of the room as 
an acoustic space.  
 The notion of using space as an extension to the loudspeaker 
is further explored by Lucier in ‘I am sitting in a Room’ (1970). 
Here he cycles a recording of his own voice through a 
loudspeaker in a room, recording the result and replaying it 
back into the same room contiguously until the signal degrades 
leaving just the sonic resonances of the room / loudspeaker 
combination exposed. One of Lucier’s inspirations for the piece 
was the testing procedure that loudspeaker manufacturer Bose 
used for their products to help identify irregularities in 
frequency response ([8], p. 80). Although, as with much of 
Lucier’s work, there is a theme of interrogating acoustic space, 
it is clear that this interrogation is electromechanical in its 
nature and, as we have seen, the loudspeaker and its extensions 
were a central part of Lucier’s vision for the piece.  
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and th e full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME’11, 30 May–1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
84
 
 
It is this use of loudspeakers in the exploration of sympathetic 
vibration and resonance that makes this work relevant to my 
own creative experiments with loudspeakers and other 
electromechanical devices. Where Lucier has used percussion 
instruments for his speakers I have experimented with springs, 
foil, beads and plastic. 
 Other works of interest, from the same era, include Steve 
Reich’s Pendulum Music (1968), which explores the musicality 
of electromechanical feedback via loudspeakers and swinging 
microphones. This piece is relevant as the resonant nature of 
the feedback is defined by the electromechanical system of the 
speaker and microphone combination, and further modified by 
the mechanical, swinging of the microphones. Pendulum Music 
is a music born entirely of a dialogue between the electrical and 
mechanical energies within the system, and their points of 
transduction. The main source of sound in Infinite Spring i s  
also created by an electromechanical feedback system as can be 
seen in fig 1. 
 Contemporary sound art practitioners exploring the sonic 
potential of the electromechanical include Zimoun [15] with 
pieces such as ‘Swarm of Prepared Vibration Motors’ (2008) 
and ‘111 Prepared DC Motors’ (2010). Prepared 
electromechanical devices populate much of Zimoun’s work, 
which also includes the use of loudspeakers. Zimoun’s web site 
describes the work as a ‘rigorous reductionism of the means 
used to produce sound’ and as exhibiting an ‘electric, dynamic 
sense of disquiet’ [15]. The technique of using the DC motor as  
a loudspeaker or sounding device of sorts is also something I 
have employed in Infinite Spring. 
  
 
 Peter Bosch and Simone Simons used oscillating motors 
driven by ‘musical phrases’ ([1], p. 106) to excite a large 
sprung structure of shipping crates in Krachtgever (1998). 
Here, each crate is filled with a different material and the 
various resonances of the structure are explored by varying the 
frequency of the signal driving the motors. Much of Bosch and 
Simons work concerns itself with electromechanically induced 
vibration and resonant behavior, including ‘The Electric 
Swaying Orchestra’ (1993) which, they claim, has much in 
common with Pendulum Music ([1], p. 104).  
 Another contemporary practitioner worth considering here is 
Pierre Bastian [10] who has used motors as the driving force of 
his Mechanium mechanical orchestra and other installations 
since the 1970’s. Here we find the electromechanical device in 
a context of traditional automata, and there are many themes 
relating this approach to my own, and to the other pieces 
considered above. 
2.2 Music Technology Context 
Music technology design has historically made use of 
electromechanical transfer for sound processing where purely 
electronic techniques were yet to be developed. Examples 
include the Leslie rotary speaker cabinet and the Ondes 
Martineau, which offered a choice of speakers, one of which 
vibrated a gong, whilst another had twelve strings strung over 
the front and back of the speaker to induce sympathetic 
vibration [8].  Early reverberation devices such as the spring 
and plate reverb used electromechanical transduction and 
amplification to extract sonorities from material objects, in a 
Figure 1. Technical scheme of Infinite Spring 
figure. 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
85
process not dissimilar to that used by Cage in Cartridge Music 
(1960) [8], Stockhausen in Microphonie (1964) [8] as well as 
Tudor in Rainforest. Electromechanical user modifications have 
also appeared in this context, and there is much lively internet 
debate as to which rock guitarist was the first to purposely 
damage the speaker cone of their guitar amplifier to achieve a 
fuzz guitar tone and which recording was the first to feature 
electromechanical feedback from an electric guitar [4]. 
2.3 Towards a Theoretical Context  
In these examples we find a balance of creative focus (in music, 
sound art and technological design terms) between the 
electronic domain of signal manipulation and the mechanical 
domain of material vibration. This is in contrast to what has 
become a more common creative approach in technologically 
mediated music, of focusing almost entirely on the realm of 
electronic signal manipulation, be it in the analogue or digital 
domain. It could be argued that the current prevailing model for 
music technology systems is one that views the loudspeaker as 
a subservient device, a mechanical ‘limb’ controlled by an 
electronic ‘brain’, whose resonant irregularities are problems to 
be eradicated wherever possible. Certainly in terms of computer 
based composition and synthesis, studio recording and 
production and electronically mediated live performance this is 
a broadly applicable model. Barry Truax ([13], p. 9) 
commented in 2001 that “it is significant that that the current 
emphasis of audio technology is almost entirely on the signal 
processing aspects and not the actual points of energy transfer”.  
The prepared loudspeaker and other extended 
electromechanical interfaces seek to redress the balance of 
creative focus between electrical and mechanical energy in 
music and music technologies, and in doing so they reassert 
their power as the final gatekeeper in the signal chain of the 
electronic music system.   
 The prepared speaker achieves this through a method and 
practice that could be aligned to the discourse on cracked 
media as described by Caleb Kelly [9]. Primarily concerned 
with the breaking, scratching and purposeful creative 
destruction of sound recording media (vinyl, CDs etc) for sonic 
effect, the world of cracked media concerns itself with the 
physical user intervention of electric media. Kelly’s book 
presents this partly as a critique of the recording, commercial 
music and technology industries as well as in the context of 
modern tactical and creative uses of everyday technologies. 
Whilst the prepared speaker’s means may be radical and 
involve destructive user modification, we have seen how other 
technologies such as the Ondes Martineau and the mechanical 
reverb have achieved an electromechanical balance through the 
electronic design limitations of their era. An aesthetic and 
musical focus on electromechanical technology may therefore 
usefully be aligned to a notion of media archaeology. This field 
proposed by Singfried Zielinsky, among others, proposes that 
we ‘find something new in the old’ with regard to media 
technology, as opposed to accepting the ‘continual march of 
progress’ ([14], p. 3) towards new technologies. It sets out to 
‘destroy the Whig version of technological history’ [12]. The 
loudspeaker is old technology; its basic moving coil design still 
in use today can be traced back to at least the 1890’s ([2], p. 
39). Many would argue it is a far from ideal technology with 
sonic irregularities that we are stuck with until better solutions 
are sought. The prepared speaker and other appropriations of 
electromechanical devices may offer new creative possibilities 
with old technologies in a practice that reflects the values of 
media archaeology. 
 
 
 
 
3. INFINITE SPRING 
3.1 Technical Description 
At the centre of my piece Infinite Spring is a prepared speaker 
system that has been developed to operate as an 
electromechanical oscillator (see fig 1). It is built from a large 
steel spring suspended such that its lowest coil touches a piece 
of wood that is glued to the centre of a loudspeaker (see fig 3). 
The top of the spring is coupled to a Piezo ceramic pick up 
which is used to transduce any movement or vibrations present 
into an electrical signal. The signal from the Piezo pick up is 
amplified and fed back to the loudspeaker whose cone is 
mechanically coupled to the bottom of the spring as described 
above. The vibration of the speaker sets the spring vibrating 
which, via a feedback chain of transduction and amplification, 
causes the speaker to vibrate (see fig 1). The whole 
electromechanical system oscillates when power is applied to 
the amplifier and it is possible to set the parameters so that it 
produces an audible, harmonically rich sound without causing 
uncontrollable feedback.  
 The signal from this spring / speaker oscillator is also used to 
drive two small DC motors. The DC motors here are essentially 
being regarded as rotary loudspeakers in a technique described 
both by Nick Collins [3] and the ‘Electronic Peasant’ [6]. With 
an AC audio signal driving them, the motors twitch and vibrate 
rather than rotate fully in their usual manner. The motors have 
armatures attached to their rotors that strike other metal objects 
in the installation (a metal CD storage tower and a grill tray – 
see figs 1 and 2), and the sound from these objects is also 
picked up using Piezo ceramic transducers, and amplified. The 
signals from the spring, the CD tower and the grill tray are 
amplified and routed out to a combination of three 
loudspeakers, one of which is prepared with beads, whilst 
another has the paper cone removed and replaced with a small 
tin cup (fig 4). The electromechanical sounds generated by the 
spring are modified by the electromechanical system of the 
motors, the CD tower and grill rack. All these sounds are 
further modified by the prepared speakers that broadcast the 
final mix in the room, and of course by the room itself. Figure 1 
shows the full technical scheme for the piece and figure 2 
shows an overview of how it was realised in its first public 
Figure 2. Infinite Spring installation at BV Studios 2010. 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
86
exhibition at the BV open studios event in Bristol, UK, in 2010. 
Film documentation of the piece at this exhibition is viewable 
at www.sonicmarbles.co.uk. 
 
 
 
 
3.2 Sonic Behaviour 
Infinite Spring is a simple, dynamic system that produces a 
controlled but diverse and unpredictable music that is timbrally 
rich, always changing and never ending. The spring itself 
produces very deep tones, which would be inaudible without 
the contact microphone and amplifier system used to capture 
them. When this tone is used to drive the motors they twitch 
and vibrate sporadically creating a percussive element to the 
piece as the armatures strike the other metal objects. When the 
spring’s tone is heard through the foil cup speaker it is 
diminished to a small tinny rattle.  
 Truax states that ‘…the electroacoustic process is not merely 
a simple extension of the capabilities of sound, but rather a 
fundamental transformation of how it works...it permits totally 
new concepts to operate’ ([13], p. 124). At each point of 
transduction in Infinite Spring these ‘new concepts’ are able to 
operate. The amplification of the normally inaudible low 
frequencies of the vibrating spring, and the transference of 
those vibrations to other materials and objects, in such a way as 
they are made to sound in a form of mechanical synthesis, 
constitute Truax’s transformations in this context. Even causing 
objects to sound continuously over long periods of time is a 
difficult thing to achieve in the purely mechanical world, yet 
easily achievable in the electromechanical one. The spring in 
this piece will vibrate continuously, or until someone switches 
the power off. Both Truax [13] and R. M. Schaffer [11] 
consider the dynamic behaviors of mechanical sound compared 
to the fixed waveform behaviors and immortality of electrical 
sounds. Infinite Spring creates a balanced dialogue between 
those two behaviors in a sonic and kinetic installation that 
draws attention to the physical cause and effect of sound as it is 
transmitted mechanically and electrically. This is achieved 
through the appropriation and modification of existing 
technologies, and through a design technique that uses nothing 
more complicated than would be found in an electrically 
amplified gramophone. 
4. CONCLUSIONS 
This paper has shown the context in which my piece Infinite 
Spring sits both in practical and theoretical terms, and in doing 
so has begun to set out an arena of the creative application of 
electromechanical transduction within the sonic arts. 
 
 
 
 
It has exposed many themes and techniques that are worthy of 
continued exploration within creative sound and music practice, 
both in my own work and the work of others. This exploration 
will need to involve further surveys and analysis of works, 
practices and technologies, as well as practical experimentation. 
Infinite Spring is worthy of further practical development, 
particularly with regard to maximising the visual impact of the 
piece in any future exhibition scenario.  
5. REFERENCES 
[1] Bosch, P. and Simons, S. 2005. Our Music Machines. 
Organised Sound 10(2): 103-110. 
[2] Chanan, M. 1995. Repeated Takes. London: Verso. 
[3] Collins, N. 2006. Handmade Electronic Music: The Art of 
Hardware Hacking. Oxford: Routledge. 
[4] DIY stomp boxes forum, accessed 2011: 
http://www.diystompboxes.com/. Torn speaker fuzz thread: 
http://www.diystompboxes.com/smfforum/index.php?acti
on=printpage;topic=67452.0 
[5] Driscoll, J. and M. Rogalsky. 2004. David Tudor’s 
Rainforest: An Evolving Exploration of Resonance. 
Leonardo Music Journal, 14: 25-30.  
[6] Electronic Peasant web site: 
http://www.electronicpeasant.com/ 
[7] Hamburg, T. interview with David Tudor, 1988. Available 
from http://www.emf.org 
[8] Holmes, T. 2002. Electronic and Experimental Music. 
London: Routledge. 
[9] Kelly, C. 2009. Cracked Media: The Sound of 
Malfunction. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. 
[10] Pierre Bastien web site: http://www.pierrebastien.com/ 
[11] Schafer, R. M. 1977. The Soundscape: our sonic 
environment and the tuning of the world: Vermont: 
Destiny 
[12] Sterling, B. 2008. The Life and Death of Media. In: Miller, 
P.D. (ed). 2008. Sound Unbound: Sampling Digital Music 
and Culture. Massachusetts: MIT Press. Ch 6. 
[13] Truax, B. 2001. Acoustic Communication. Westport CT: 
Greenwood. 
[14] Zielinski, S..2008.  Deep Time of the Media: Towards an 
Archaeology of Hearing and Seeing by Technical Means. 
Massatusits: MIT press. 
[15] Zimoun web site: http://zimoun.ch/ 
 
 
Figure 3. Prepared speaker vibrating spring 
 
Figure 4. Foil cup prepared speaker 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
87