boomBox
Jamie Allen
New York University – Interactive
Telecommunications Program author's
721 Broadway, 4th Floor
New York, NY 10003 USA
+1 347 563 5941
Jamie@nyu.edu
ABSTRACT
This paper describes the development, function and
performance contexts of a digital musical instrument called
“boomBox.”  The instrument is a wireless, orientation-aware
low-frequency, high-amplitude human motion controller for
live and sampled sound.  The instrument has been used in
performance and sound installation contexts.  I describe some
of what I have learned from the project herein.
Keywords
Visceral control, sample manipulation, Bluetooth®, metaphor,
remutualizing instrument, Human Computer Interaction.
1. INTRODUCTION
There have been great advances in both the specificity and
sensitivity with which real-time computer music processes can
be controlled.  Much work has been done to produce real-time
software tools which sculpt and mold synthesized, prerecorded
and live-captured sound materials down to minute changes in
character. A result of this specificity is that hardware interfaces
for computer music have necessarily become increasingly
sensitive, responsive and consequently somewhat delicate in
construction.  The responsiveness of computer music
instruments would seem at odds with the idea of road-worthy,
tough designs for vigorous, or even violent, musical gesture.
Few new interfaces for musical expression allow for full use of
the dynamic range of human motion, from the lightest tap to
the most aggressive movements such as a kick or a punch.
This relatively delicate or precarious design of computer
music interfaces is frustrating to some performing computer
musicians.  At times, both in improvisation and composed
performance it is desirable to pummel, mash and heave digital
audio material in a hands-on way.  The boomBox was built to
address this desire.
The boomBox was developed for Gideon D’Arcangelo’s New
Instruments for Musical Expression class New York
University’s Interactive Telecommunications Program.  It was
also intended to be a test bed for general instrument design
concepts.
2. ARTISITC MOTIVATION
2.1 Holistic Design Concept
Many new interfaces for musical expression are designed
primarily through the specification of a physical form or
gestural property, which is then used to some musical end.
Often the physical and/or gestural form of the instrument are
intentionally unrelated, or unconcerned with metaphoric or
contextual links.  Some gesture tracking, reactive environment
and other work would appear to employ this approach [1, 2, 3].
The boomBox was purposefully designed iteratively, based in
part on a desire to participate in “remutualizing the
instrument.” [4] That is, I wanted to pass from physical
interface to sound design and back again during design,
towards the development of an physical design and sonic
output that compliment one another aesthetically and
figuratively.  This strategy can result in a more holistic
performance and instrument exemplar, as sonic attributes
become an allegory for the interface or gesture used to create
them. Other work which would seem to have benefited from
this process are the Helical Keyboard Client (inspired by the
cyclic nature of scale systems) [5], the PebbleBox [6] and
Pikapika [7].
As of the present iteration of the device, the boomBox is
centered around transient sonorities, often described as
‘clanging’, ‘jostling’ and ‘jerking’ of sampled computer
sound buffers.  The boxy, bulky form and interaction potential
of the device categorically suggest such a musical motivation.
Here, the re-mix is most literally interpreted, as sample-based
material is jumbled together in exciting ways.  The completed
instrument, which appears to the casual viewer as a typical
equipment flight case, is shown being performed in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Performance of the boomBox.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Nime’05, May 26-28, , 2005, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
168
2.2 Exceptional Robustness
As Joel Ryan points out physical effort “binds time to the
measure of control,” [8] and can be a very important part of
expressive gestures.  The primary interaction with the
boomBox requires a good deal of physical exertion on the part
of the performer.  This was an initial objective of the project,
and takes advantage of what I call high amplitude, low
frequency human motion – hitting, kicking, throwing and the
like.  It was resultantly necessary to ensure that the
instrument’s construction was extremely durable.  There are of
course secondary benefits to such a design requirement,  in
terms of portability and transportability of the instrument.
2.3 Wireless Operation
It was essential that a wireless solution for the boomBox be
found as many of the interactions that its form suggests would
be impossible were it tethered.  This solution was found in the
Bluetooth® wireless protocol, a robust and electrically
efficient wireless solution for interfacing serial data to most
computer operating systems.
A preliminary wired version of the boomBox was made, but
upon production of wireless version of the instrument, there
were a few very positive unexpected results. The amount that I
personalized the instrument increased,  as it could be easily
brought anywhere with me.  Audience engagement within
performances improved as there is nothing on stage except the
performer and the suitcase, and so nothing to divert attention
from the instrument-performer interaction.  Also, the wireless
design, to an unexpected degree considering the real necessity
of a computer and amplification system, gives the impression
that sounds are emanating from the instrument itself.  I discuss
these ideas further later in this report.
2.4 Acoustic Sound Amplification
As the boomBox began to take shape and preliminary testing
was performed, it became obvious that it would be highly
desirable to allow output of the acoustic sound of the box
being played.  The molded plastic of the box provides an
acoustic sound, when struck, which is percussive and slightly
resonant.   Amplified outside the boomBox, the sound is
reminiscent of a contact microphone based work. [9,10]
2.5 Leveraging Product Design Principles
In the design of any object, consideration of product and
industrial design principles can be helpful.  The boomBox
emphasizes the notion of affordance, in that it is an instrument
constructed from a common object with which most people
have some familiarity with.  Affordances are “fundamental
properties that determine just how the thing could possibly be
used.” [11] Like the now notorious JavaMug presented at the
Conference on Human Factors in 2001, [12] the boomBox can
be approached by musicians and non-musicians alike, as the
form of the dialogue between human and object is pre-
established.  In installation or public exposition contexts, the
familiarity of the boomBox as an everyday object allow a
degree of a priori  virtuosity that is enticing  In a more
conventional performance situation, the affordances of the
boomBox gives the audience a framework for the performance.
The performer is likely to pick up a suitcase, put it down,
throw it, catch it, et cetera, but not likely to pluck it or blow
into it.  
Mental models are another product design concept of
significance.  The standard mental model for the function of a
traditional Western instrument is that the location of sound
production and the location of physical interaction with the
instrument are coincident.  This model is highly obfuscated in
most interfaces for computer music by the presence of wiring
trailing off to a laptop or sound production unit. Response to
the boomBox shows that wireless, unhindered operation of a
musical interface can in fact leave standard mental models
intact.  To many, experiencing the boomBox leaves them with
the impression that the sound output is “coming from” the
instrument itself.  This illusion seems to be at least partially
due to the absence of obvious cabling.
3. IMPLEMENTATION
3.1 Casing & Construction
The boomBox’s superstructure is based on a commercially
available injection-molded hard travel case manufactured by
Samsonite (shown in Figure 2.).  The case, when closed and
locked, is water-tight and can withstand almost any human-
made force.  Every effort was made to preserve both the
outward appearance and structural integrity of the travel case.
Inside the boomBox is a form-
cut foam padding layer, into
which the logic electronics are
mounted. All other individual
electronic sub-circuits are all
contained within smaller cases,
themselves packed with
another layer of foam padding.
To ensure that the device
could withstand even the most
punishing physical abuse, all
of the electronic and
mechanical components inside
the boomBox are inbuilt to prevent any movement.
Piezoelectric sensors are affixed using epoxy to the inner
surface, tilt sensors and accelerometers are mounted in rubber
jackets and bolted to the case’s rigid frame.  The power supply
is wedged tightly in a partition of the case with still more foam
padding.
3.2 Sensor Technologies
The boomBox’s main sensors are piezoelectric polymer strips
from MSIUSA [13], conditioned with tuned amplification
circuitry, and mounted along the interior walls of the
superstructure.  These signals are provided as input to audio
amplification systems from the boomBox.  The system is also
equipped with three tilt sensors for orientation data and 2 dual
axis accelerometers for motion detection and rotation
information.  Flex sensors are mounted in the handles of the
box, for more subtle, continuous control of musical processes.
Finally, a rotation sensor is mounted in the wheel base of the
rolling case.  Each sensor technology was selected in order to
give the overall instrument both coarse and fine control of
sonic processes.  In particular, the piezoelectric sensor
amplification was tuned in a way to allow localized
differentiation between areas on surface of the boomBox, and
to maximize dynamic range.  General functional locations of
sensors are diagrammed in Figure 3.
Figure 2.  The boomBox,
before, and after, sensor
installation.
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
169
Figure 3. Sensor regions of the boomBox.
3.3 Bluetooth® Wireless Link
With due deference to the design principles outlined in 1996
by Perry Cook [12], in the design of the boomBox, wireless
was not that bad (compared to wired).  Along with a few other
recent musical interface designs [14], the boomBox employs
the efficient and simple solution of Bluetooth® wireless serial
data transfer.  A Maxim chip is used to interface the PIC
microcontroller to a Bluetooth®-to-RS232 is interface from
Initium [15].  Data is received on a computer running Mac OS
X, which creates an emulated serial port accessed in Max/MSP
via the serial object.
The serial data protocol devised for control data relay was
made extremely efficient by using unused portions of the 10-
bit analog conversion value to encode the sensor ID number.
Ultimately, sensor-update latencies within Max/MSP were
consistently under 15 ms.
3.4 Analog Audio Output
The piezoelectric vibration sensors in the boomBox are
provided as analog output as well as being coupled to the
input pins for control data.  The piezoelectric sensors
themselves are amplified using TL082 op amp circuits.  These
signals are fed to a set of four analog audio output jacks, as
well as being coupled to an internal 2.5 V for conversion by
the analog to digital converters on the PIC microchip.  The
signal chain, showing reference levels for control and audio
signals is diagrammed in Figure 4.
Figure 4. Piezoelectric sensor signal flow for both control
data and audio output.
4. PERFORMANCE  CONTEXTS
4.1 Improvised Solo Performance
The first use of the boomBox for performance was at John
Zorn’s Tonic in New York City.  The performance was
organized by Gideon D’Arcangelo as part of a showcase of New
Interfaces for Musical Expression projects from NYU.  I
structured the performance very little, and as the instrument
was at that time quite new to me, a narrative developed on
stage based on exploration of the new device.  A picture from
the performance is included in Figure 5.
Figure 5.  boomBox at the NIME showcase at Tonic, NYC.
4.2 Public Sound Installation
Following the Tonic show and subsequent improvised solo
performances with the boomBox, I exhibited at the Interactive
Telecommunications Program Winter Show 2005.  The
boomBox was unassumingly arranged in a secluded area of the
show space.  A four-channel recording of Grand Central Station
in New York was looped in the background, “Please do not
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
170
leave luggage unattended.  Any luggage left unattended will
be subject to search and may be destroyed.  Thank you for
riding the MTA, New York City transit…”  For the first time,
the political implications related to fear of terrorism suggested
by the boomBox were invoked explicitly. Visitors were left to
engage the instrument as they wished, in as forcefully a
manner as they chose.
Exhibition of the boomBox as an interactive sound
installation was an opportunity to witness the many
similarities between improvisational performance public
interactivity with sound.  The engagement that the boomBox
provided children and adults alike was akin to the visceral
pleasure I experience in improvising with the instrument.  A
photo of the arrangement of the boomBox in the installation
space is shown in Figure 6.
Figure 6.  Interactive sound installation presentation of the
boomBox.
4.3 Dance Performance
A further context for performance I explored with the
boomBox was with Pursue the Pulse, a multimedia and dance
group.  The performance narrative was loosely based on the
sound installation presentation of the boomBox.  Dance
improvisation was done with the instrument, the premise of
the performance being that the dancers inadvertently found a
piece of left luggage on a subway car.  A photo of the
performance is shown in Figure 7.
Figure 7. The boomBox in dance performance with Pursue
The Pulse.
5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
My sincere thanks are extended to the NIME community, and
in particular Gideon D’Arcangelo for his help and enterprise.
Thanks are also due to my colleagues at ITP who were helpful
in enumerable ways throughout development of the boomBox.
6. REFERENCES
[1] Tarabella, L.  Improvising Computer Music: An Approach.
SMC ‘04 Conference Proceedings, First Sound and Music
Computing Conference, (Oct. 2004), 185-191.
[2] Paradiso, J. A., Hsiao, K.. Strickon, J., Lifton, J., Adler, A.
Sensor systems for interactive surfaces. IBM Systems
Journal, Volume 39, 2000. 892.
[3] Miyashita, H.,  Nishimoto, K.  Thermoscore: A New-type
Musical Score with Temperature Sensation.  Proc.
NIME03. (June 2004), 104.
[4] Cook, P. Remutualizing the Instrument: Co-Design of
Synthesis Algorithms and Controllers. Proceedings of the
Stockholm Music Acoustics Conference. (Aug. 2003).
167-680.
[5] Herder, J., Cohen, M.  Design of a Helical Keyboard.  Proc.
of Int. Conf. On Auditory Display. (Nov. 1996).
[6] O’Modhrain, S., Essl, G.  PebbleBox and CurmbleBag:
Tactile Interfaces for Granular Synthesis.  Proc. NIME04.
(June 2004).  74.
[7] Bahn, C., T. Hahn, and D. Trueman.  Physicality and
Feedback: A Focus on the Body in the Performance of
Electronic Music, Proceedings of ICMC2001. (2001).
[8] Ryan, J. Effort and Expression. International Computer
Music Conference.  (1992).
http://www.steim.org/steim/texts.php?id=3      (Consulted
January 31st, 2005)
[9] Driscoll, J. Rogalsky, M. David Tudor's 'Rainforest': An
Evolving Exploration of Resonance. Leonard Music
Journal.  14. (2004).
[10]  Cage, J.  Cartridge Music. (1960).
http://www.johncage.info/workscage/cartridge.html    
(Consulted January 31st, 2005)
[11]  Norman, D. A. The Psychology of Everyday Things. New
York: Basic Books. (1988).
[12]  Cook, P.  Principles for Design of Computer Music
Controllers, ACM CHI Workshop in New Interfaces for
Musical Expression . (2001).
[13]  MSIUSA/Measurement Specialities.
http://www.msiusa.com/default/index.asp      (Consulted
January 31st, 2005)
[14]    Aimi, R., Young, D., Bluetooth Beatbug.
http://web.media.mit.edu/~roberto/btbb.html     (Consulted
Januray 31st, 2005)
[15]  Initium Corporation.     http://www.initium.co.kr/    ]
(Consulted Januray 31st, 2005
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
171