Empathetic Interactive Music Video Experience 
 
 
Myunghee Lee 
Digital Experience Lab. 
Korea University 
revise1@naver.com 
 
Youngsun Kim 
Digital Experience Lab. 
Korea University 
zyoko85@korea.ac.kr 
 
 
 
Gerard Jounghyun Kim 
Digital Experience Lab. 
Korea University 
gjkim@korea.ac.kr 
ABSTRACT 
Empatheater is a  video playing system  that is controlled by 
multimodal interaction.  As the video is played, the user must 
interact and emulate predefined “events” for the video to 
continue on.  The user is given the illusion of playing an active 
role in the unraveling video content and can empathize with the 
performer.  In this paper, we report about user experiences with 
Empatheater when applied to musical video contents.  
Keywords 
Music vi deo, Empathy, Interactive video, Musical event, 
Multimodal interaction. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Aside from lone audio, music video is another popular format 
for appreciating music.  In [6], we propose d an interactive 
video system, named “Empatheater.”   In Empatheater, as the 
video is played, the user must inter act and emulate predefined 
“events” (authored beforehand) through appropriate multimodal 
and whole body interaction.  Without the timely interaction, the 
video stops, and the system shows additional information  as 
how to continue.  Empatheater was designed with the emphasis 
on how to lead the user to feel empathy e.g. with main content 
driving character (see Figure 1). 
 
In this paper, we have applied Empatheater to appreciating 
music empathetically  through inter action with music videos.  
Music listeners often imagine themselves being the singer, 
dancer, conductor and mimic them in various ways.  We 
believe that Empatheater can promote  and upgrade  such 
experiences even further  and offer a more active way of 
enjoying music.  We applied Empatheater for a small user 
group to experience four different types of music videos  and 
present findings in terms of their user experiences  and 
modifications needed.  
2. RELATED WORK 
Interactive video was first proposed by Lippman in t heir 
seminal Aspen Movie Map system [1].  However, at the time, 
the focus was more on the interactivity itself, offering different 
endings through interaction and non -linear story structure.   
Recently, interesting works on non -conventional interaction 
with video contents have been proposed.  For example, Hurst 
has proposed for various forms of touch screen and gesture 
based interface for video browsing [2][3][4].  However, most of 
these works were  geared toward the problem of efficient 
browsing rather than transforming the video content itself into 
user experience.  
 
 
Figure 1: (a) Screen capture of Empatheater.  Musical 
events to interact to appear in the bottom time line.  (b) 
User interacting using a Wii-mote. 
 
Jehan et al. presented a work in which the pace of a “dancing” 
video was controlled by different musical beats [5].  The altered 
pacing (according to various beats) attributed to eliciting 
different experiences from a same video clip.  Empatheater 
extends this idea by introducing more interactivity and empathy.  
Empatheater also bears some similarity to the music rhythm 
games where the user must interact timely to musical events.  
However, they fall short of creating any empathy due to the 
lack of controllability of the musical flow [7]. 
3. EMPATHEATER 
Empatheater is implemented as an ordinary video player but 
with an added capability to interpret interaction information.  In 
order to interact with the video (and stop or forego the playing), 
interaction events must be specified and stored beforehand.  
Event information amounts to the type of the interaction and 
point at which (time) it happens. For this, we have also 
implemented a simple authoring tool through which the 
aforementioned information can be specified with ease. The 
type of required/desired i nteraction (both input and output) is 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistrib ute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME’12, May 21-23, 2012, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
also specified by the author (e.g. “Space bar ( keyboard),” 
“acceleration sensor with value > x”, “play sound file”, etc.).  
 
In order to help user interact with the video (during play time) 
at the right time in the rig ht way, a basic timeline/bar widget is 
shown and in addition iconic cues are displayed to foretell the 
type of upcoming interaction.  However, when the user fails to 
interact in the right way (e.g. no or “weak” interaction), the 
video stops and further hin ts are displayed. Similarly to the 
interaction points themselves, these guidance features are 
inserted manually using the aforementioned authoring tool.  
 
We believe in principle that the interaction must be multimodal, 
whole body based and inspired from the content of the video, to 
elicit the empathetic feeling.  As such, musical events are to be 
enacted with “musical” interaction, e.g. MIDI keyboard strike, 
Wii-mote action motion, voice activation, etc.  The author can 
freely design such interaction (both  input and output) and store 
it along with the event information to be interpreted during the 
play.  Indication of successful interaction is also important in 
giving the illusion of control to the user.  In the middle of 
Figure 1(a) is a graphic firework i n response to a timely 
interaction (e.g. dance motion, conducting gesture, voice 
activation) by the user. 
4. USER STUDY 
We chose four different types of music videos to investigate the 
users’ empathetic musical experience: (1) interacting in motion 
(simple tapping) to (and enacting to perform) relatively slow 
melodic events  (excerpt from Mozart Piano Concerto No. 21, 
2nd movement), (2) interacting vocally to medium tempo 
melodic events  (Beethoven’s Ode to Joy) , (3) interacting in 
(dance-like) motion to fast te mpo but mostly regular beats  
(Korean p op dance song) , and (4) interacting in (conducting -
like) motion to  accentuated or pompous musical events  
(Beethoven’s 3rd Symphony, final movement). 
 
In this pilot experiment, we asked twelve subjects  (college 
students, average age: 22.5) to experience the four above music 
videos by (1) mere passive listening and (2) interacting using 
Empatheater (one factor, within -subject, repeated measure).  
The experiment proceeded as follows.  In condition 1  
(“Passive”), the u ser s imply sat, watched and listened to the 
short music video.  In the second condition  (“Empatheater”), 
the user used various methods (e.g. tap, voice, swing motion, 
and conduct like gestures) to enact the musical events (marked 
in the time line of Empatheater, see Figure 1 ) in the respective 
video.  The orders of the types of the music video given and 
interaction conditions were all counter -balanced.  The subject 
completed a short survey asking about user experience mainly 
through the level of empathy and pres ence (answered in 5 
Likert scale: 0~4), and preference (tabulated in pecentages). 
 
Figure 2 shows the major experimental results (due to shortage 
of space, we only show responses to four survey questions).  
Users answered with Empatheater they experienced much 
higher empathy with the main character (e.g. performer in the 
video) and felt like actually carrying out the musical task 
(Figures 2(a) and (b)).  They answered they were able to 
understand the musical content more deeply (Figure 2(c)).  
These results  were all with statistically significant differences 
to the “Passive” condition.  Although not shown a similar 
results was obtained regarding the level of immersion and 
presence felt.  The users also reported among the four types 
musical videos, “Conducting” was preferred the most (Figure 
2(d)) and was also identified as the most effective content type 
for Empatheater.  The “Dance” was felt most ineffective and 
lest preferred because the subjects did not feel comfortable 
even in the experimental setting to openly dance and because 
the motion gestures were limited to just simple Wii -mote 
swings.    
 
 
 
Figure 2: Experimental results: Passive (left) vs. 
Empatheater (right) (a) Empathy elicited, (b) How much 
felt as carrying out the task (e.g. conducting, playing the 
piano, singing, dancing), (c) How much the user 
appreciated the given content and (d) Preference among the 
music video types (in percentages). 
 
5. CONCLUSION 
 In this paper, we have introduced “Empatheater,” a video 
system activated by multimodal interaction.  Our pilot study 
has shown that when applied to music videos, it can help user 
identify with the performer and help comprehend the music 
more deeply.  We believe Empatheater can provide a new way 
of experiencing and appreciating music, in an “active’ way.   
6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This research was supported by the Ministry of Knowledge 
Economy and KIAT through the “Workforce Development 
Program in Strategic Technology”. 
7. REFERENCES 
[1] Lippman, A. Movie-maps: An application of the optical 
videodisc to computer graphics. Proc. of the 7th annual 
conference on Computer graphics and interactive 
techniques, 1980, pp. 32–42. 
[2] Hurst, W. Interactive audio-video browsing. Proc. of ACM 
Multimedia Conference, 2006. 
[3] Dragicevic, P., Ramos, G., Bibliowicz, J., Nowrouzezahrai, 
D., Balakrishnan, R. and Singh, K. Video browsing by 
direct manipulation. Proc. of ACM CHI, 2008. 
[4]  Goldman, D., Gonterman, C., Curless, B., Salesin, D. and 
Seitz, S.  Video object annotation, navigation and 
composition. Proc. of UIST, 2008. 
[5] Jehan, T., Lew, M. and Vaucelle, C. Cati dance: self-
edited, self-synchronized music video. SIGGRAPH 
Technical Sketch, Conference Abstracts and Applications, 
2003. 
[6] Lee, M., Kim, G. J. Empathetic video experience through 
timely multimodal interaction. ICMI-MLMI, 2010. 
[7] Wikipedia, BeatMania. 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beatmania, 2012
 