A Notation System for the Karlax Controller 
 
 
Tom Mays 
Académie Supérieure de Musique de Strasbourg 
Conservatoire National Supérieur de Musique de Paris 
CICM – Université de Paris VIII 
contact@tommays.net 
 
Francis Faber 
La Grande Fabrique 
Dieppe 
francisfaber@lagrandefabrique.com 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
In this paper we expose the need to go beyond the 
composer/performer model of electronic instrument design and 
programming to encourage the transmission of compositions 
and the creation of a repertory via notation of repeatable 
performance practice . Drawing on 4 years of practice  using the 
Karlax controller (Da Fact) as a base for  new digital musical 
instruments, w e present our notation system  in detail and cite 
some mapping strategies and examples from to pieces in a 
growing repertory of chamber music compositions for 
electronic and acoustic instruments.  
 
Keywords 
notation, mapping, comp osition, gesture, performance, K arlax, 
instruments and electronics, digital musical instruments, DMI 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Over the years , we have focused much of our energy on live 
performance of electronic music and intermedia. After programming 
and performing with the Meta -instrument (created by Serge De 
Laubier at Puce Muse1), Nintendo Wiimotes and camera-tracking 
based interfaces, in 2010 we discovered the Karlax, created by Rémi 
Dury of the French company Da Fact2. 
 The look, feel, weight , precision, solidity, dependability and 
flexibility of the Karlax made it a good candidate for our DMI 
development. It is a  commercially available, industrially tooled 
though hand -assembled wireless gestural device, combining 
continuous controller keys, velocity pistons, switches and three axes 
of accelerometers and gyroscopes. We considered that its potential to 
become widely used warranted not only composing for it but 
developing method, performance practice and notation in the creation 
of a repertory. Could its malleability enable it to be used in the 
creation of DMIs that could overcome the “split between interface 
and sound engine” that Magnusson[4] refers to in his dream of a 
better electronic instrument? Can it be expressive, virtuosic, and 
intuitive enough to satisfy what Machover[3] refers to as the notion 
of the inevitability of a successful instrument – not only  for 
composers and performers, but for the public as well? In considering 
Wessel, Wright and Schott’s desired features for gestural 
interfaces[5], the Karlax clearly attains them: the ability to detect 
subtle as well as larger gestures, continuous as well as event based 
                                                                    
1 Serge de Laubier / Puce Muse: http://www.pucemuse.com  
2 Rémi Dury / Da Fact: http://www.dafact.com 
control, low latency and high bandwidth, reliability and portability. In 
the very least we saw it as an opportunity to go beyond the 
composer/performer/programmer model and start to write pieces 
for DMIs tha t could be performed by others  – repeatable and 
shareable. This requires a stable, transmissible computer patch 
environment, coherent mapping strategies and a concise yet readable 
system of notation and scoring – notation being considered essential 
in describing repeatable actions of sequences of control change[1]. It 
not only involves starting to compose and collect a repertory of 
pieces, but establishing certain performance practices, as well as the 
methods and training techniques that go with them.  
 A new electronic chamber music ensemble, Fabrique Nomade, 
became an exploration space for these ideas, seeking to reconnect 
with the practice, the attentive listening and the intimate nature 
of  traditio nal chamber music.  It commissions pieces for Karlax 
and one to three acoustic instruments where the composer provides 
the score and the computer programs (Max patches), but does NOT 
perform. The ensemble ’s Karlax performer then practices and 
rehearses the piece as would any instrumental performer – both alone 
and with the other musicians – true to the chamber music tradition. 
The work on the compositions, DMIs and scores for the ensemble 
was the impetus and the source of research behind this paper. 
2. BACKGROUND 
In order to reflect on a system of notation , we organized think 
tank meetings at the Conservatoire National Supérieur de 
Musique de Paris  in 2011 and 2012 called Karlax Ecritures3 
around the idea of proposing coherent strategies for Karlax 
notation and mapping to facilitate composition and 
performance. There were several electroacoustic professors and 
composition students in attendance such as Luis Naón  and 
Daniel Fígols-Cuevas, as well as outside composers and 
musicians such as Rémi Dury , Lorenzo Bianch i and Laurent 
Matheron. Many of the ideas that became the notation system 
that we expose in this paper hav e their roots in these meetings, 
and were often the result of collective effort and consensus. 
Compositions stemming from these ideas include Kahla by 
Daniel Fígols-Cuevas for large ensemble and Karlax -driven 
electronics, two pieces for violin, cello and Karlax  (Fogg by 
Lorenzo Bianchi and Ripples Never Come Back  by Michele 
Tadini), The Well -Tempered Patch III  for flute and Karlax by 
Tom Mays, and Frottement, bourdon, craquement  for cello and 
Karlax by Francis Faber . 
3. BASIC KARLAX NOTATION AND 
SOME MAPPING NOTIONS 
In the chamber music context of the Fabrique Nomade  
ensemble, the Karlax needed a precise, time -based notation 
system in close relation to the writing for the acoustic 
instruments. The notation needed to be detailed yet not clutter 
the page with overly precise indications that would make it 
unreadable – a condition described by Burtner[2] in his notation 
                                                                    
3 Karlax Ecritures: http://karlax.tommays.fr  
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on 
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME’14, June 30 – July 03, 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
553
simplification strategies where too much detail makes 
performance impractical.  
 We sought to develop  notation and mapping strategies for the 
Karlax, while creating DMIs involving the elements of “controller, 
gesture, mappings, mapping metaphors, sound generator and sound 
emission” as described in Wessel, Wright, Schott [5]. In doing this, 
we understood that there are certain generalities implied from its 
physical characteristics, outside of the design of any specific 
computer-based instrument. We will look at each group of controller 
functions and suggest some basic notation ideas that stem from those 
physical and technical characteristics, along with some mapping 
strategies that can be applied. 
3.1 The keys 
The Karlax, held somewhat like a clarinet, contains ten keys, one for 
each finger with two smaller keys for the each little finger (see 
Figure 1). These are continuous controllers that send either MIDI or 
OSC values. 
 
Figure 1: Keys, pistons and rotation axis 
The most direct way of mapping the keys would be as a series of 
faders that could be applied directly to various parameters of a sound 
generator or other process – much like any common MIDI fader box. 
This seems simple on the surface, but in practice it can quickly make 
for very difficult and complicated performance. The keys are under 
spring tension so it very difficult to maintain constant intermediate 
positions, especially with several fingers at once. In addition, 
achieving specific, a ccurate, pre -determined values is nearly 
impossible since the physical distance of the movement is fairly 
small and the only real point of reference is feel. Whatever precision 
might be possible where only one finger is involved becomes 
exponentially more difficult as more fingers are adde d. It is our 
conclusion that it is better to not rely too heavily on the MIDI fader 
paradigm and focus rather on the dynamic gestural possibilities that 
the keys provide. In practice, this means establishing mappings that 
allow a certain tolerance in terms of the positions of the different 
keys. This could involve calculating the velocity of the key press or 
applying smoothing techniques that depend more on the time that a 
key is pressed rather than finding an exact position. The notation 
should reflect this tolerance by not indicating position too precisely, 
and by trying to focus more on dynamics, interpolation time and 
duration.  
 A less precise position indication in the notation makes it more 
important for the musician to respond to audible cues – hearing the 
result and adjusting the p osition or velocity accordingly. This 
underlines the interpretive quality of the performance and emphasizes 
the musician’s need to hear what they play and not just execute 
commands. We beli eve that a s uccessful notation will balance 
indications of action (tablature) and results (audible feedback).  
 We chose to keep the notation of the keys as simple and traditional 
as possible so as to be easy to combine with instrumental writing. We 
use two 5-line staves, one for each hand, and indicate each key on 
consecutive lines with a normal notehead. We chose to put the left-
hand staff on the bottom and the right -hand staff on the top  for 
reasons of a certain pianistic sensibility of the ensemble’s Karlax 
performer4. This make the first line on the lower staff correspond to 
the left index finger or key 1, and so on. The little fingers can press 
keys 4 and 5 (left) or keys 9 and 10 (right), individually or together. 
Figure 2 shows this notation, the numbers relating to the image of 
Figure 1. 
 
Figure 2: Basic keys notation 
 If a velocity mapping paradigm is used for the keys, traditional 
dynamics notation would be the most appropriate, but in the case of 
pressing the keys slowly over time or only partially, we needed other 
mechanisms. One possibility is to use silence to crescendo and 
decrescendo to silence lines in front of and after the noteheads to 
show when to begin or end the change of position. Figure 3 shows 
an example of this notation, while also proposing a slashed notehead 
to indicate a partial key press. It is taken from The Well-Tempered 
Patch III by Tom Mays5. 
 
Figure 3: Pressing and releasing keys  
In spite of the difficulty involved, Michele Tadini chose to 
employ a key percentage technique in Ripples Never Come 
Back6, as we can see in Figure 4. Upon closer inspection, we 
can observe that he  limits the key presses to 4 values: 25% , 
50%, 75% and 100%, which is a  reasonable compromise 
between precision and simplicity.  
 
Figure 4: Percentage technique for key presses  
3.2 The Pistons 
Positioned just in front of each key (or p airs of keys as is the 
case with the smaller 4 -5 pair on the left and the 9 -10 pair on 
the right), just under the base of each finger , at the level of the 
proximal phalanges, are 8 velocity -sensitive pistons. These can 
be directly mapped to synthesis notes  or samples, or with a 
threshold detector can be used to activate/deactivate processes 
by pressing at any velocity greater than a defined threshold. 
 It makes sense to simply notate these as one would any MIDI 
note instrument, though in order to fit them w ithin the same 
staff lines as the keys, we chose to notate them in the 4 spaces 
using square noteheads. The pistons are numbered 1 to  8 and 
are played starting with the left index and ending on the right 
little finger (See Figure 5). 
                                                                    
4 A woodwinds approach could also be imagined which would 
reverse the two staves and all of the lines,  placing the left 
hand on the upper staff and the right hand on the lower staff. 
5 The Well -Tempered Patch III  for flute, Karlax and live 
electronics by Tom Mays, 2013. Commissioned by La 
Grande Fabrique. 
6 Ripples Never Come Back  for violin, cello, Karlax and live 
electronics by Michele Tadini, 2012. Commissioned by 
Studio Art Zoyd. 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
554
 
Right hand 
 
Left hand 
 
Figure 5: Basic piston notation 
Figure 6 shows another passage from The Well -Tempered 
Patch III involving piston notation.  
 
Figure 6: Musical example of piston notation 
3.3 The axis rotation and bends 
The two halves of the Karlax are joined together by a rotary 
axis that is adjusted by turning either hand, or both hands in 
contrary motion  – although we prefer turning the left hand to 
affect changes in axis position because turning the right hand 
may alter acceleration/gyroscope values due to the fact that the 
sensors are located in the bottom or right-hand section. At each 
end of the axis movement is a spring -loaded bend, which feels 
a bit like half of a keyboard bend wheel. 
 This makes for three distinct controller values: axis, bend left, 
bend right. Throughout the different pieces of the  ensemble’s 
repertory, two different notation methods for the axis and bends 
have developed – one involving symbols descr ibing position, 
and the other indicating position by noteheads on a 3 -line staff. 
3.3.1 Axis rotation - method 1 
The first method involves a one -line staff positioned above the 
keys and pistons staves which is used for motion. The axis 
rotation symbols are placed under the line, and orientation 
symbols are placed above (See 3.4 The motion sensors). 
Symbols representing the position of the axis are placed at the 
appropriate time in the score. Dotted lines indicate gradual 
change from one position to another. Figure 7a shows an  
example of a very simple icon inspired by the 180° rotation of 
the axis. To this we add a small curve d arrow to indicate a free 
movement and a thick curved arrow at the right and left 
extremities to indicate the two benders  (Figure 7b). 
a. 
     b. 
  
Figure 7: a. Basic axis notation, b. free movement and right 
bend 
Figure 8 shows a musical example from Frottement, bourdon, 
craquement de Francis Faber 7 that uses  axis rotation, with a 
gradual transition from left to right in the 4/4 measure, and a 
free movement in the next measure.  The staff below is for the 
right-hand keys and pistons. 
 
Figure 8: Musical example of axis rotation  
                                                                    
7 Frottement, bourdon, craquement  for cello, Karlax and li ve 
electronics by Francis Faber, 2013. Commissioned by  La 
Grande Fabrique. 
3.3.2 Axis rotation - method 2 
The second notation method for the axis rotation and bends 
involves inserting a 3 -line staff in between the left and right 
hand keys/pistons staves – underlining the physical position of 
the axis which is  the middle of the instrument. The lines are 
spaced 50% farther than normal in order to be able to place 
noteheads at two different positions within the lines. In this 
way, seven total positions can be notated (middle line for 
center, just above middle line for 1/3 left, just below top line 
for 2/3 left, top line for full left, and the same below the middle 
line for the right (see Figure 9). 
 
Figure 9: Axis rotation on a 3-line staff 
 Square noteheads help the performer identify the relative 
positions more quickly, and thick dotted lines show gradual 
transition between two positions. The bends are identified by 
noteheads above or below  the top and bottom lines, with a 
small arrow for clarification and ease of reading.  
 Figure 10 shows a musical example taken from The Well -
Tempered Patch III  where the axis goes progressively from 
center to 2/3 left, to 1/3 left, to full left, then back to center.  
 
 
Figure 10: Musical example of Axis notation  
3.4 The motion sensors 
For motion  detection, the Karlax contains three axes of 
accelerometer and gyroscope sensors, sending derived x-tilt and 
y-tilt values as well. W hether using direct 
accelerometer/gyroscope data, tilts , or some other derived 
values such as azimuth and distance, we opted for  a notation 
method indicting various spatial orientations of the Karlax 
which can be starting or ending points f or gradual or rapid 
transitions. 
 We had initially experimented with a set of left -right, front -
back indicators (shown in Figure 11), but these proved to be too 
rigid as they considered each axis separately rather than 
holistically, making it very difficult to indic ate complex 
movements. 
 
Figure 11: Initial symbol proposal for Karlax motion  
 We then designed a new system of icons that  symbolically 
represent the position of the Karlax as “seen from above”  in a 
polar format . This system tries to balance precision and 
simplicity by giving approximate positions, with the 
understanding that the performer will complete the missing 
precision with audible feedback  – adjusting the performance 
based on the sound of the instrument, as would any 
instrumental performer. Tested in at least two pieces up until 
now, it has proven very easy to use.  
 There is an outer circle and an inner circle with a thick line 
something like the hands of a clock stemming out from the 
center. If the Karlax is in the neutral position (pointed up, or 
else in a natural slightly off -center position compensated for by 
zeroing the sensor data), we see two thinly drawn concentric 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
555
circles and a thick dot in the center. As the Karlax is angled 
outward, in any direction, we consider tha t it is at the first 
distance level, draw ing the stem out to the first circle which is 
made bolder for emphasis. If the Karlax is positioned to lay 
horizontally in any polar direction, we consider th at it reaches 
the second circle, the stem is lengthened a nd the second circle 
is made bold (see Figure 12). 
 
Figure 12: Current "view from above" notation for Karlax 
motion. 
 We determined that the right balance between simplicity and 
precision requires eight  positions for the inner circle (every 45 
degrees), and 16 positions for the outer circle (every 22.5 
degrees) – more precision being necessary in the outer circle . 
This makes for a total of 25 symbols, including the neutral 
position. 
 These symbols are pl aced in a dedicated motion staff (which 
may share space with the axis rotation in some cases as 
described in 3.3.1). The symbols are placed in specific temporal 
positions in the score that indicate fixed position, point of 
departure or point of arrival, while thick dotted lines show 
interpolation between positions. In practice, this is fairly easy to 
read and effective. Figure 13 shows a musical example taken 
from The Well -Tempered Patch III  involving m otion, key -
presses and axis rotation.  
 
Figure 13: Musical example of motion notation  
3.5 Impulses 
The Karlax sends fixed velocity note information relating to 
impulse movement in any of the six spatial directions. These 
are internal values derived from the accelerometer information. 
These impulses have not yet found their way into compositions 
for Fabrique Nomade, and so we do not have a tested, validated 
notation technique. However, a simple arrow butting into a line 
should suffice to  indicate an impulse movement in a certain 
direction – stopping suddenly (see Figure 14). These would 
logically be placed on the motion staff. 
 
Figure 14: proposed symbols for impulses  
3.6 The switches 
The mu ltiple finger switches on the front and back of the 
Karlax can be used for triggering or  for turning processes on 
and off. These switches are not often used in our pieces, and 
when they are, we tend to re -use our older symbols for switches 
on the wiimote n unchucks. See Figure 15 for a front switch 1  
(FS1) symbol located on an additional lower staff line for 
pedals and switches . These switches serve more as actuators 
than sources of gesture.  
3.6.1 The pedals and switches staff line 
In concerts by Fabrique Nomade , the Karlax performer is often 
seated. In these case, we add two foot pedals , one switch for 
triggering an event change within each composition, and one 
continuous controller for main volume.  We create an 
additional one-line staff to notate the event pedal as a triangular 
notehead with an associated event number (to be verified with 
the current number in the Max patch display that the performer 
refers to from time to time on his com puter screen), and the 
continuous pedal with tradi tional dynamic markin gs, 
crescendos., decresc endos (See Figure 15). We also place any 
Karlax switches as described above. 
 
Figure 15: Pedals staff line 
4. Conclusions 
Our proposed notation system for Karlax has proven functional, 
expressive and readable in several pieces written for and 
performed by the Fabrique Nomade  ensemble. There  is still 
room for improvement and the system will evolve with 
subsequent pieces, but we have presented here what we 
consider to be a solid base for future work.  
 This notation system can be considered more of a tablature 
than a sound result -based notation, which, while it does not 
indicate much about what is going on in the electronics, is very 
useful for the performance, and as a training aid in learning 
how to play the Karlax. One can easily a dd a staff or two to 
notate the resulting electronics separately.  
 Notation is only a part of the equation of the idea of 
transmission of a work created for a DMI. Not only should the 
gestures indicated by the notation be repeatable, but the 
program (patch) part of the DMI needs to be stable, portable , 
expressive and intuitive . With this proposition  to solve  the 
basic notation problems, a rich area of necessary development 
will be a set of standard patches for performing expressive, 
gestural-based sound  with the Karlax . These patches , and 
existing ones , combined with our notation, can be directly 
applied to composition and the establishment of a repertory for 
the Karlax controller. 
5. REFERENCES 
[1] M. Burtner. Composing for the (dis)Embodied Ensemble : 
Notational Systems in (dis)Appearances. In Proceedings of the 
International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical 
Expression, (NIME 2003), pp. 63–69, 2003. 
[2] M. Burtner. Noisegate 67 for Metasaxophone: Composition and 
Performance Considerations of a New Computer Music 
Controller. In Proceedings of the International Conference on 
New Interfaces for Musical Expression, (NIME 2002), pp. 24–
29, 2002. 
[3] T. Machover. Instruments, Interactivity, and Inevitability. In 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces 
for Musical Expression, (NIME 2002), pp. 115–115, 2002. 
[4] T. Magnusson. Designing constraints: Composing and 
performing with digital musical systems. Computer Music 
Journal, 34(4):62–73, 2010.  
[5] D. Wessel, M. Wright, J. Schott. Intimate Musical Control of 
Computers with a Variety of Controllers and Gesture Mapping 
Metaphors. In Proceedings of the International Conference on 
New Interfaces for Musical Expression, (NIME 2002), pp. 192–
194, 2002
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
556