Body Lutherie: Co-Designing a Wearable for Vocal
Performance with a Changing Body
Rachel Freire
Sensorimotor Interaction Group
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarbrücken, Germany
rfreire@mpi-inf.mpg.de
Courtney N. Reed
Institute for Digital Technologies
Loughborough University London
London, United Kingdom
c.n.reed@lboro.ac.uk
Figure 1: Body Lutherie in action: the breath-based vocal anti-corset, Bones, designed for the more-than-human voice.
ABSTRACT
Research at NIME has incorporated embodied perspectives
from design and HCI communities to explore how instru-
ments and performers shape each other in interaction. Ma-
terial perspectives also reveal other more-than-human fac-
tors’ influence on musical interaction. We propose an ad-
ditional, currently unaddressed perspective in instrument
design: the influence of the body not only the locus of expe-
rience, but as a physical, entangled aspect in the more-than-
human musicking. Proposing a practice of “Body Lutherie”,
we explore how digital instrument designers can honour and
work with living, dynamic bodies. Our design of a breath-
based vocal wearable instrument incorporated uncontrol-
lable aspects of a vocalist’s body and its physical change
over different timescales. We distinguish the body in the de-
sign process and acknowledge its agency in vocal instrument
design. Reflection on our co-design process between vocal
pedagogy and eTextile fashion perspectives demonstrates
how Body Lutherie can generate empathy and understand-
ing of the body as a collaborator in future instrument design
and artistic practice.
Author Keywords
More-than-human design, vocal performance, eTextiles,
agency, wearable interaction, co-design
Licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License (CC BY
4.0). Copyright remains with the author(s).
NIME’24, 4–6 September, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
CCS Concepts
•Applied computing → Performing arts; Sound and music
computing; •Human-centered computing → Interaction de-
sign theory, concepts and paradigms;HCI theory, concepts
and models;
1. INTRODUCTION
Luthiers, crafting string instruments, work with living trees
and their wood. Some properties of the luthier’s materials
are controllable: different species can be grown and har-
vested to specifics. But, other uncontrollable aspects —
climate, weather, genetic expression, rainfall — also influ-
ence the wood. The tree brings its own agency and the
luthier’s intimacy with their non-human-yet-living collabo-
rator shapes their choices as they meet design constraints
and contexts [44]. The luthier’s skill is derived in these de-
cisions to work with the unique, living aspects of the wood
[10]. The same can be felt in digital lutherie [52, 3]; a pro-
gramming language’s structure and parameters can shape
choices in resulting sonic creations [36, 55].
Like trees, our living bodies are inconsistent, dynamic,
and unpredictable, taking on strange and often uncomfort-
able qualities. In shaping our experience of the world, so too
do our bodies shape our musicking. With ever-increasing
attention on embodied perspectives in instrument design
[43], practices such as somaesthetics [40] have analysed the
subjective human experience of the body and its role in mu-
sical interaction. But, as much as our experiences shape our
interaction, so do our physical bodies and their variability.
Perhaps more so than musicians using physical instruments,
the body’s agency in musicking is intensely felt for vocal-
ists. Both instrument and identity [45], the singing voice is
not only experienced, but also present itself as a physical,
living aspect of the body. There are many aspects of the
vocal body that are unable to be controlled.
This paper discusses our co-design, uniting Freire’s per-
spectives of fashion, costume, and eTextiles with Reed’s vo-
cal performance and pedagogy, for the more-than-human
physicality of a vocal body [17]. Drawing on somatic aware-
ness [24], material-discursive practices [44], and Barad’s
agential realism theory [5], we propose Body Lutherie as
a design practice to distinguish and appreciate parts of the
entangled body that have a life of their own [18]. We outline
the design of Bones, an anti-corset that emphasises expan-
sion and shape changes in Reed’s body over different time
scales to capture her abdominal movements during vocal
breathing. We work with an aesthetic eye for costuming,
important in perception of vocal performance [16], in ad-
dition to functionality. We demonstrate through this co-
design how the more-than-human can provide inspiration
and guide the design of new musical instruments. We offer
reflection and guidance on Body Lutherie and demonstrate
how this practice can be utilised for NIME and broader
human-computer interaction (HCI) research.
2. BACKGROUND
We first introduce embodiment and material-led design, in
both NIME and broader HCI, to outline our proposed prac-
tice of Body Lutherie. Utilising Barad’s agential realism,
we de-centre elements of human experience to refocus on
the more-than-human voice as contributor in musical in-
teraction. We conclude with relevant eTextile approaches,
through which we will enact this framing for vocal design.
2.1 Vocal Embodiment
Interaction happens via sensory perception through our liv-
ing bodies [41]. Shaped by our sensory experiences, this em-
bodied perception happens through our active role in our
world [12, 56], extending to how we feel and think as we
interact with other phenomena in it [38]. Perception and
action cyclically shape each other, constantly evolving as
we learn. Other living and non-living agents we interact
with, like technology, become entangled in this cycle [18].
Instruments, including digital musical instruments (DMIs),
become musical through our interaction with them [65] and
musicians and instruments continually become entangled
with each other in music-making [64, 43].
In HCI, and particularly within the NIME community, so-
maesthetic practices have been used to explore this embod-
ied, sensory experience within musical practice [40]. Soma
design practices [24] use the “somatic-turn” inward to the
lived experience of interaction through bodily senses [54].
Constantly changing, our experiences of our living bodies
provide space to examine and appreciate individuality and
subjectivity [25] in musical practices and give attention to
the role the body plays in this perception [24]. For instance,
we can “make strange,” our habitual behaviours to under-
stand typical embodied experiences [37].
Cotton et al. engage with somatic experiences of breath
in vocal performance. Cotton performs with a wearable,
breath-sensing, pneumatic-actuated corset. In The Body
Electric, this disrupts her habitual breath to examine sen-
sory experiences of expansion around her body [8]. Simi-
larly, the shape-changing garment can externalise the sen-
sation of the breath, giving this somatic experience a life
of its own [31] and demonstrating symbiotic relationships
between the sensors and Cotton’s senses during vocal per-
formance [62]. In an examination of intercorporality, these
internal sensory experiences of breath can be shared through
haptic feedback and felt externally by others [32]. Reed et
al. similarly examine somatic aspects of breathing in laryn-
geal movement via surface electromyography (sEMG) [48].
Reed’s autoethnographic examination of her laryngeal mus-
cles through sonification in vocal performance reveal how
sensory experiences can be disrupted, highlighting how the
body moves in unexpected and uncontrollable ways [49].
These examples focus on the authors’ somatic experiences
as vocalists; by disrupting habits and highlighting aspects
of the living body, beyond typical sensory experiences, it
becomes clear that the vocal body has a life of its own. The
breath becomes strange [31] and the movement of muscles,
previously unnoticed, becomes obvious and disruptive [49,
50]. With attention to these uncontrollable or imperceptible
aspects of the body, our present research finds its place: we
focus on the physical body, its semi-controllable states, and
its agency in co-constituting our interaction.
2.2 Body Materiality
To focus on the physicality body as a factor of our experi-
ence with it, we draw also from the “materials-turn” in de-
sign research [13]. Materiality gives attention to how more-
than-human agents, particularly physical materials, “talk”
to designers; their properties (textures, pliability, density,
appearance, etc.) are entangled with our experiences and
contribute to the design of interactive systems [61]. This
material focus is rooted in posthumanism [27]: Materials
have no inherent meaning, but instead acquire meaning
through our interaction [5]. Material properties can provide
inspiration and enforce constraints [20]; for instance, tex-
tiles lend their own qualities to decisions in wearable design
[30, 47]. Materiality is also part of the luthier’s considera-
tion: working with sensory-based material perception and
selection [46] is part of the woodworking process [44]. Such
posthuman perspectives have also been extended to discuss
data-as-material [63, 2], for instance the social properties of
biodata [26] in boundaries between human and machines in
performance [33].
Drawing on and uniting these two turns — the somatic
and material — we can examine the musical body as mate-
rial to emphasise its agency, influence, and entanglements.
As if a material, the voice only acquires its presence and
meaning through encultured and contextualised perceptions
of it. Nina Sun Eidsheim’s organology of the voice demon-
strates how the voice is not treated like other musical in-
struments [16]. The perception of the “voice” includes the
space in which it resonates [15], as well as socio-cultural
aspects that further dictate its meaning [14]. If the voice
were perceived like other instruments, we might discuss it in
such material-discursive ways, focusing on physiology, respi-
ratory organs, and soft tissues. This body-as-material focus
reframes the“voice”as a a dynamic collection of interdepen-
dent, more-than-human elements [7].
2.3 Body Lutherie
To examine the body’s agency in vocal interaction, we take
an intentional, conscious view of the voice as more-than-
human organ [23], existing as its own within the entangled
cultural influences and our experience living in it. We term
this approach Body Lutherie, inspired by the material-led
knowledge of luthiers in their designs with living materials.
However, in comparison to traditional lutherie and working
with wood, we can only design with the body we have. Our
approach emphasises the body’s quirks and ever-changing,
growing qualities, both physically and experientially, to be
creatively included in DMI design. Body Lutherie high-
lights these aspects of the more-than-human as parts of a
human assemblage [7]; parts of the physical body work as
an musical ecosystem in vocal performance to co-constitute
the experience of singing. Our ideal in a practice of Body
Lutherie is to design for and appreciation the agency and
influence the physical body brings to musical interaction.
Vocalists already acknowledge the body as both 1) part
of the identity [45] through sensory-based understanding
and self-recognition, and 2) an uncontrollable, often fickle,
and separate force to be listened to and respected. Physio-
logical changes like hormonal cycles, fluctuations in hydra-
tion, fatigue, age, and environmental stressors change our
physical body and experience [22, 7], requiring us, vocalists
or not, to adapt [21]. Vocalists make considerable efforts,
even adopting near-superstitious behaviour, for vocal hy-
giene and care-taking [1].
Previous NIME research, such as that by Jensenius, Don-
narumma, Tanaka, and Martin (with many others) demon-
strate the body’s agency, positively exploiting uncontrol-
lable aspects of bodies through sonic interaction. Jensenius
uses involuntary action like body sway, micro-movements
[28, 29], and muscle tension in standstill performance [39]
for interactive sonification. Similarly, Tanaka and Don-
narumma explore the noisiness of muscles and the limits
of gesture through sEMG sonification [58, 11, 59]. Tanaka
also explores tension and restraint through playing with the
boundaries between self and his physical body [57].
A practice of Body Lutherie can likewise distinguish the
physical voice from the other concurrently arising perspec-
tives of the embodied and encultured voice. Utilising Barad’s
theory of agential realism and the entanglement of agents
as non-ontologically separate entities [5, 4] we make a par-
ticular agential cut [6] between these perspectives. Similar
distinctions have been made with breath sensing: Body re-
ceptivity involved understanding how the voice was affected
by movements and the influence of the self and voice on each
other [60]. To be clear, we do not argue that the voice is not
embodied and is not part of the human; rather, we cut apart
aspects between the self (things we can perceive) and the
unknown self (things we cannot) as inspiration for design
with the more-than-human voice [17].
2.4 Fashion for Bodies and Voices
We enact our design for the vocal body through wearable
eTextile design. When designing for and with the body, de-
cisions are made as to the meaning of wearable garments for
both inward and outward representation. The universality
of clothing is something we all understand and utilise in our
everyday lives [51]. Within the broad discipline of clothing
design, we draw from a combination of costume, fashion,
and garment technology perspectives. The research of tex-
tile historian Mary Schoeser illustrates that humans did not
evolve and subsequently learn to weave, but rather the phys-
ical, structural act of weaving created conditions to facili-
tate complimentary structural evolution in the brain [53].
Similarly, Body Lutherie allows the structure of the body
to guide design [61]. Interacting with the living canvas of
the body, its conscious and unconscious functions, and the
structure and materials of the garment - and responding
to the often unpredictable, dynamic intersections of these
factors - is what enables successful iteration and evolution.
We draw inspiration from vocal wearables at NIME, for
instance the previously discussed vocal wearables [48, 51, 8,
32]. Of particular interest, The Body Electric is designed
around Cotton’s body and perception of her breath. The
breath is semi-autonomic; when we are not consciously con-
trolling it, the body takes over and functions independently,
subtly outside of our realm of active experience. The ob-
servable expansion of the abdomen occurs as the result of
diaphragmatic tension and control in singing, providing a
visual representation of this constant rhythm.
As we design for Reed’s body, it is important to note that
the abdomen and belly, which expand with the movement
of the breath, are of a particular sensitivity in the culture
and environments in which she has grown up and lived.
Physiological changes and fluxes are more commonly ex-
perienced by women and entangled with social taboos and
expectations of women’s bodies [22]; self-worth and vocal
perception is commonly derived from the appearance of the
physical body and its ever-changing shape through one’s life
[16]. However, much of the body’s shape is uncontrollable
and a result of genetic factors and environment.
3. CO-DESIGN FOR THE VOCAL BODY
We now turn to our design ofBones for Reed’s body. Freire
is an expert in textiles, costumes, and electronic garments,
having previously designed interactive wearables for artists
such as Imogen Heap [42] and cutting highly technical cos-
tumes for feature film [35]. Reed is a semi-professional ex-
perimental vocalist, and vocal interaction researcher. We
introduce Freire’s perspectives of bodies as a structural, liv-
ing architectures and Reed’s of her body as her collaborator:
3.1 The Structural Body
As a designer, especially in costume, we learn to see a per-
son situated in their body. For example, costumes are of-
ten discreetly designed to empower and augment an actor
or performer’s inherent characteristics, expressed subcon-
sciously through their physical body. It is the costumer’s
job not only to to tell a story, but to build the garment in
a way to better enable the embodiment of a state or char-
acter. The preferences of the wearer and the overarching
design brief may initially exist in opposition. This is bal-
ance negotiated at the technical level, reading the body as a
material in itself. The person, their body, and the garment
exist as a nuanced collaboration, rather than the oversim-
plification of the garment as a technical outerlayer over the
body. A risk in designing complex wearables is the feeling
that disparate elements have been combined and simply lay-
ered. Unifying these layers requires consideration of these
aspects with equal importance, including changing physi-
cality of the body both naturally over time and through the
influence of materials as the design is developed.
Design benefits from a simultaneously functional and aes-
thetic approach as these elements should not be considered
in isolation. The structural architecture of pattern cutting
also requires a balance of instinct and observation and can
be described from two predominant perspectives: technical
(flat pattern cutting) and intuitive (draping). Complex gar-
ments utilise both, and deciding where to combine the two
approaches requires physical prototypes and iteration.
The idea of a corset describes a highly engineered gar-
ment which has for centuries been used in differing degrees
of collaboration with the body, both for support (medical),
aesthetic control and constraint (waist reduction). Conces-
sions may be necessary for the functionality of a garment,
which might not best suit the preferences of the collabo-
rating body, e.g., if comfort is a priority but restrictive el-
ements must be in place for optimum functionality. These
affordances are the conversation the designer/maker facili-
tates between the body and the garment. The maker must
understand how to leverage the selected materials to best
suit the integrity of both body and garment. It is in the
process of prototyping that material properties themselves
have a voice in the conversation.
Our relationships with garments are symbiotic. They ide-
ally become an extended part of us and the design process
aims to harmonise where and how these elements intersect.
We must see Reed’s body and the garment as two collabo-
rating actors, and the co-design process as a unified whole;
a living entanglement of the conscious and unconscious, the
human and garment. Careful observations along with tacit
knowledge can enhance the design and how body and ma-
terials move in collaboration.
3.2 The Collaborative Body
Reed’s relationship with her body is often as “other”. Her
vocal breath is linked with experiences of her past vocal
teachers encouraging, albeit in a negative attitude, the ben-
efits of “looking fat” to provide space for full diaphragmatic
movement in singing. While singing, the diaphragm is con-
tracted to create space for the lungs. Maintaining tension
controls the breath, so as to not run out of air too quickly.
But, this becomes very automatic, “I don’t think about it
much unless I know I will be strained for air in a partic-
ular vocal passage. My body just does its thing. I have
had to spend a lot of time becoming comfortable with this
idea of not looking as I would maybe like others to see me
on stage.” Similarly, Reed described her own perspectives
on the superstitious vocal hygiene habits most singers take:
“You have to pay attention to how your body is on a par-
ticular day... sometimes just wake up and know your body
isn’t going to cooperate or behave the way you want, and
you need to plan how to behave if you’ve got a performance.
You’re almost at the mercy of your own body.”
Discussion around Reed’s explanation of her body and ne-
gotiating or collaborating with it inspired our Body Lutherie
approach. To further the uncontrollable presence of the
body, an unexpected shift in Reed’s health and caretaking
of her body after finishing her PhD and beginning a new
job provided more unexpected variation: during the course
of the eight-months of design at the time of this writing,
Reed has lost 11 kg. This shifted the physical shape of her
body, her experience of its agency in her vocal practice, and
her perceptions of self over the design process.
4. DESIGN STAGES
Working with Body Lutherie, we designed a breath-based
vocal corset, Bones.1 We outline the design stages and con-
struction from sensor to toile, intial and revised V1 proto-
type (Figure 2). Freire and Reed live in Spain and the UK,
respectively, so the garment was fitted and adjusted over
the eight months in a series of three week-long, in-person
meetings in Germany while implementing it into collabora-
tive performance [19].
4.1 Design Concept (Month 0)
The anatomy and discipline of controlled breathing helped
us to identify the parts of the garment which would need
to move and accommodate the vocal behaviour. We fo-
cused on the movement of the diaphragm in Reed’s lower
belly, at hip height. Observation of the physical abdomen
allowed the body to lead the design and provided a starting
point to inspire, describe, and devise a structured garment
1For reference, a video outlining the final design and demon-
strating the sensing mechanism in performance can be found
at https://youtu.be/nInRaOlby9Q?si=kiG mpzaSpXqfw8S
Figure 2: Evolution of Bones: A) Measurements, B) Con-
cept Sketch, C) fitted toile, D) final design, E) V1 proto-
type, and F) V2 revised design
with both practical and aesthetic considerations. Observa-
tion also revealed that Reed’s back, below her ribcage, also
physically moves during vocal breathing. This sensation is
absent from Reed’s own sensory awareness; yet, the body’s
presence is visible. Freire’s design honour the unconscious
movement and the body’s presence in its own right, placed
a secondary focus on the back.
Reed, drawing inspiration from Cotton et al. [8], envis-
aged a ‘corset’ to capture this physical movement; however”the design and restriction of a corset seemed antithetical to
the dynamic qualities of the abdomen. Freire envisaged a
design to balance the body’s presence against a powerful
visual silhouette and the collaborative notion of a support
garment to devise Bones. The design is more an anti-corset,
inverting the usual notion of a garment that sculpts and
controls the body by restriction. Using a combination of
stretch and non-stretch panels and leveraging the architec-
tural engineering of a corset, the construction frames the
body so that movement is localised in specific areas, to sup-
port rather than restrict the movement of Reed’s breathing.
4.2 Shearing Sensor
We created a mechanical capacitive eTextile sensor using
two layered straps of opposing stretch and non-stretch ma-
terials. The sensor comprises two panels of silver plated
conductive material (Techniktex P130b), stabilised with a
bonded film (Bemis Sewfree), aligned and centrally mounted
on the straps. One of the conductive panels is addition-
ally covered with a powermesh layer and Bemis to isolate
the panels for capacitive sensing (Figure 3). The sensor
uses the tension of the body during inhalation to create a
shearing motion. The selected materials respond to gentle
pressure without being restrictive or changing the body’s
shape. Capacitance between the conductive layers is mea-
sured as they shift apart, facilitated by opposing strips of
stretch (grey) and non-stretch (ecru) fabrics (Figure 4). The
aim was to keep the sensor as minimal as possible and for
the material to disappear within the overall garment de-
sign. Bones contains three custom shearing sensors, two
across each side of the lower back ribcage and one across
the mid-section of the abdomen at the hip line, where we
felt Reed’s breath. The capacitive sensing was done using
an off-the-shelf FDC2214EV board from Texas Instruments,
connected through I2C to the micro-controller, a TinyPico.
4.3 V1 Toile (Month 1)
The design process began as a flat paper pattern made by
Freire from a series of Reed’s precise body measurements
(Table 1). For a corset, this includes a small calculated re-
duction in Reed’s natural measurements to create a snug fit.
A toile is then made: the first physical iteration with which
a design can be fitted onto Reed’s body (Figure 6). The
toile serves as a physical conversation to draw style lines on
the body, tweak proportions, and to initially place active
components according to the body’s movement. Often a
toile will be made knowing some proportions to be incor-
rect, purposefully creating a way to make corrections more
accurately once on the body. The same garment rendered in
different materials may be a completely different experience,
so toiling materials should closely resemble the structure,
stretch, and movement intended for the final design. Toil-
ing and iterating is important because small changes often
require a rebalancing of the entire garment and each person
may experience materials differently. It is an opportunity
to present materials in a physical form to understand what
will best serve the overall design.
Figure 3: Sketches of the shearing sensors: two separate
fabric layers, with opposing stretch and non-stretch panels,
control the movement of conductive fabric in the centre.
Figure 4: Layers in the shearing sensor, showing the corre-
sponding layers of conductive fabric in the centre in gold,
lower one with an added a layer of pink powermesh to iso-
late the two conductive panels.
4.4 V1 Prototype (Month 3)
The intial pattern was refined using alterations physically
sketched on the toile during fitting. The proportions changed
more than expected, due to the accurate placement required
for the sensor on the abdomen. Additionally, Reed’s body
shape had dramatically shifted. When the toile was fitted
and the body constrained within materials, we found that
most breath-movement happened at a lower point on the
abdomen than the initial measurements and unconstrained
body had indicated. This is partially due to how the soft-
ness of the body works around the corset as an additional
actor, controlling stretch in specific areas of the body, com-
bined with the shape changes of Reed’s body. The pattern
was revised and the V1 prototype constructed to a stage
suitable for another fitting. The main body of the garment
and sensors were constructed and fitted again before com-
pletion, due to the influence of changes in materials when
moving from toile to prototype (Figure 7).
4.5 V1 Prototype, refitted (Month 7)
After some months, we met again to finalise the V1 pro-
totype in preparation for a performance. Reed’s body had
again shifted in shape (comparisons in Table 1), meaning
Figure 5: Toile fitting: Substantial changes in the overall
placement (left) from initial intended fit (right).
the corset had to again be reduced and refitted to her body
(Figure 8). The shape of the design was also adapted to take
into consideration future fluctuations in size. The ‘corset’
had developed into what could be alternately described as a
‘belt’, removing some of the shaping and making the over-
all design more refined and subtle, without losing any func-
tionality. Prototyping over an extended time period gave
valuable information as to how Reed’s body changes, al-
lowing this to become part of the design development. In-
terestingly, weight changes are often viewed as monolithic
increases or decreases; as seen in the comparison of mea-
surements, we see that some measurements have increased
while others have decreased. After refitting the corset, the
garment edges were bound and reinforced to create a fin-
ished garment for Reed’s body at the time (Figure 9).
5. DISCUSSION
We here share and discuss our personal reflections of the
design process. Further, we outline design rationale for a
future V2 prototype of Bones and propose how future de-
signers can use Body Lutherie to generate empathy and
understanding in the design of DMIs and broader HCI.
5.1 Who Wears Who
We approached the more-than-human aspects of voice in
our design of Bones as structure and collaborator. This
framing allowed us to remove some of Reed’s experiential
embodiment, just for a moment, to see how the body itself
contributes in vocal interaction. Namely, we see how this
agential cut to separate the physical body from the expe-
riential body can help to counteract some of the negative
dispositions or worries about the body. Reed’s initial mind-
set was rooted in tension between societal expectations of
women’s bodies and bodies in vocal performance [16].
Engineering such a garment can give us useful informa-
tion (e.g., in V1, the prototype began by controlling areas
of stretch). A typical approach from a systems design per-
spective might aim to get as much from the sensor as pos-
sible. From our Body Lutherie standpoint, the V1 garment
was most useful to inform how much control is needed for
the garment to work optimally. Small changes and layering
of materials can drastically change the effectiveness of the
sensor mechanics. The garment does not and cannot exist
Figure 6: Annotated toile-in-progress: Implementing the
abdominal (top) and back (bottom) shearing sensors around
areas of expansion in Reed’s body into the unfitted toile.
as the control point of the dynamic body; this approach is
largely antiquated. Once we have a design which can indi-
cate movement, comfort, and the effectiveness of controlling
or allowing these physical aspects, the best solution may be
a completely new approach and redesign, treating the ini-
tial prototype simply as a complex/laborious but essential
measuring tool.
Where a corset is typically designed to give support (med-
ical) and shape (fashion/aesthetic), these features have not
always been sympathetic to the wearer, instead conforming
to trends which negatively contort the body, the external
influence of what the body should be. This is not new from
garment design; the Playtex corsetry and lingerie factory
made the Apollo spacesuits using complex techniques from
this area of expertise: “a triumph of intimacy over engi-
neering,” as the epic tagline from the publishers synopsis
highlights [9]. In this sense, utilising corsetry as a conversa-
tion and collaboration with the wearer is a relatively mod-
ern approach. Utilising Freire’s treatment of the body as
a flexible, dynamic material from a costuming perspective,
the physical mobility of the diaphragm became a power-
ful force for interaction. The anti-corset emphasises these
shape-changes; rather than conforming the body to the gar-
ment (e.g., the garment wearing you), the garment adapts
to the body as it is, with all its dynamic messiness [34].
5.2 Cutting Apart, Cooperation & Empathy
The Body Lutherie approach is helpful to recognise the
body as independent from our expectations of it. Especially
in vocal performance, performer experience and expecta-
tions are often misaligned with actuality; disrupting the ex-
perience from the body can drive us to examine unconscious
processes and our own behaviour [50]. Reed describes this
relationship as revolving on trust and cooperation, as is seen
in vocal pedagogy: “The way I understand my body is not
Figure 7: V1-in-progress: Remaking the corset and adjust-
ing the sensor placements, fitting the garment with pins to
Reed’s abdomen (top) and back (bottom) after weight loss.
the same way I understand a person — we do not have a
direct, spoken communication, but I know and trust that
we understand each other.” Through acknowledgement of
the things we cannot change, we learn to listen to what is
there and grow, adapt, and create with it. In this sense,
the self and body, one element from an embodiment per-
spective [38], can be viewed as two separate-yet-entangled
entities with this different agential cut [18]. The body does
have agency and a right to exist as it is; tuning our musi-
cal interaction and using the more-than-human aspects of
singing as a positive aspect can shape this trust and collab-
oration in performance and instrument design.
Narrating from Reed’s point of view: “One thing that
struck me in testing Bones is that I realised I am not so
aware of these state shifts in my boy. Not to say that my
action is not without intention, but rather that I let my
body and internal awareness guide the process. I don’t try
to force movement. Over time and with more experience,
I stopped paying so much attention to my breath. It’s just
there at times. I didn’t realise how much my body was
working and how this, especially from its physical presence,
is visible and alive within me. Measuring this changeability
was our goal, but at a small scale, in the changing of the
abdominal and back muscles over a performance. However,
in the design process, there were several-month-long periods
where I did not see [Freire] in-person. In this time period, in
my life outside of my music had changed, I had been looking
after my health and started breaking unhealthy habits. As
a result, I had lost about 7 kg between the first fitting of
Bones and the next (between Months 1-3) and then 4 kg
Figure 8: V1-in-progress: Re-pinning the corset shape (top)
and fitting the shearing sensor (bottom) to a account for
further changes in Reed’s body.
Figure 9: Finalised V1 corset, fitted to the (latest) shape of
Reed’s abdomen (top) and back (bottom).
Figure 10: Measurement guidelines to map the shape of the
body and fit the corset over the eight-month design period.
measurement toile (M0) v3 (M8)
underbust 36” 32 1/2”
waist 35” 31”
high hip (bone) 37” 37 1/2”
low hip (widest) 42 1/2” 39 1/2”
underbust to waist (front) 3” 2 1/2”
underbust to waist (side) 2” 2 1/2”
underbust to hip (front) 8” 7”
waist to high hip 2 1/2” 3 1/2”
waist to low hip 5 1/2” 5”
across front (underbust) 13” (s2s)∗ 16 1/2” (actual)
hip bone to hip bone 8” (s2s)∗ 13” (actual)
centre to hip bone (1/2) 6 1/4” 6 1/4”
Table 1: Differences between Month 0 (M0) M8. ( ∗seam to
seam, across front panel, as opposed to actual hip bone to
hip bone.)
beyond that before the most recent fitting (Month 8). Of
course, none of the sensors worked as they had before and
the garment and Freire’s construction of it had to react to
this change in my physical instrument. This will happen
again and again, as our bodies are constantly changing.”
This Body Lutherie perspective furthers the feeling of em-
pathy and collaboration with the body; rather than some-
thing to be controlled and mastered, vocal practice and in-
strument design might benefit from allowing the body, as a
material, guide the way [20, 61]. Recognising our sphere of
control and limitations of our physical bodies can lead to
embracing uniqueness and variability [34]. This deference
to the more-than-human can offer insight for new designs
and interactions, such as depicted here. In the end, this
can lead to deeper connection and appreciation of the body
itself in addition to our experience of it [25].
5.3 Developing Body Lutherie
Drawing on material-discursive approaches [61], we pro-
posed the practice of Body Lutherie for the NIME commu-
nity and interaction designers more broadly. Our design of
Bones demonstrates how conscious focus on the body itself,
beyond our experience of it, can guide the design of vocal
controllers. In order to adopt this practice more broadly,
we suggest the incorporation of costume practices as done
here. Body-mapping strategies for experiential aspects cap-
tured in somaesthetic appreciation design [40], sketching,
photography, and pattern-making for the physical body can
be used to highlight the role the body plays in instrument
design. Often these elements are performed but not doc-
umented. Given stigmas around the changing body, such
as those felt in cycles of weight-shift, it is crucial to ac-
knowledge and empathise with the body in musical inter-
action. Documentation and dialogue around the body can
shift from conforming to sensors and wearables [62], to hon-
ouring bodies and their contribution to musicking. Future
work in this space should continue to share these practice,
potentially resulting in the development of a framework for
Body Lutherie or a “work-book” style approach to foster
creative conversations and approaches to working with the
more-than-human aspects of instrument design.
In the space of vocal bodies, there are many other more-
than-human, physiological aspects to explore through Body
Lutherie. The hidden physiology of the larynx [48] and
other internal organs in singing are wordlessly understood
through singer experience [49, 50]. Applying a body-focused
design to complement the somatic approaches previously
used by vocalists has the potential to highlight vocal inter-
action by comparing and contrasting these distinct agential
cuts. Body Lutherie as an approach is applicable to other
body-based musical control; for instance, gesture-based re-
lationships in performance have been explored through the
messiness of sEMG [57] can be further examined through
these post-human perspectives of the body. Perhaps most
excitingly, we hope Body Lutherie will generate new cre-
ative and experimental perspectives through working with
the input of the body and its noisy, uncontrollable influence
[57, 49] as a full collaborator in musical performance.
5.4 V2 Revised Design (Beyond Month 7)
Through the toile, prototype, and work with Reed’s chang-
ing body, we assessed the benefits of controlled structural
design and identify a new approach for further development:
making the whole garment stretch, rather than enabling
movement in specific areas. If it works as effectively, this
design approach benefits from its potential to fit more bod-
ies, as well as natural fluctuations in individual bodies. A
hybrid approach may be optimum for specific bodies and an
assessment to compare designs will give us this information.
A ‘one size fits all’ approach is often a necessity for a de-
sign to accommodate multiple bodies, but this often results
in quite the opposite, with the average of people falling in
between a sensible designation of sizes. However, using ele-
ments of this design approach is beneficial to factors such as
the body changing over time, small fluctuations in weight,
differing comfort levels due to hormonal cycles, injury, fa-
tigue or emotion. Such changes are present for most, but
not all people. The revised design goes to the opposite ex-
treme and focuses on accommodating the changing body.
The next assessment will be to see at what cost: Are the
sensors as effective? The original design works well. It is
stable, comfortable and aesthetically pleasing, but is heav-
ily engineered. While our design development process made
it less specific to one unique body shape, it is still specific to
body measurement i.e., size, in regards to the range of opti-
mum functionality. The intention is to streamline the con-
struction, but we hypothesise that ultimately a hybrid ap-
proach will be optimal. To achieve this requires realisation
and comparison of both design concepts to find the balance
between the two. A living design, like a living document,
requires a liminal approach which builds in the capacity for
change. Sometimes there is a need to go backwards to move
forwards - exploring and subsequently consolidating seem-
ingly very different branches of an idea - which is not always
an obvious trajectory when designing, iterating and refining
a complex design concept. Future work with Body Lutherie
can provide a strategy for embracing the more-than-human
in designing for the body, reacting to the materials as they
change unexpectedly, without forcing an outcome.
6. CONCLUSION
We present a breath-based vocal wearable, Bones, and our
approach through Body Lutherie to design this new instru-
ment. We collaborate with the more-than-human voice and
its shifting characteristics to inspire our design process. The
paper demonstrates how agential cuts to selectively and con-
sciously distinguish the body from our experience can reveal
new open new collaborative opportunities and instrument
creation. We discuss Body Lutherie’s future in NIME and
HCI research, proposing strategies for others to apply this
perspective to their own instruments and bodies.
ACKNOWLEGEMENTS
We would like to thank our colleagues and friends Paul
Strohmeier and Valentin Martinez-Missir for their inspira-
tion and musical explorations during our design process.
We would also like to thank our physical bodies, for work-
ing with us during this research and design process.
ETHICAL STANDARDS
We have no conflicts of interest nor sources of funding be-
yond our listed affiliations to declare. We have sought to
develop NIME’s environmental values by re-purposing fab-
rics and off-cuts during prototyping to reduce textile waste.
7. REFERENCES
[1] M. A. Achey, M. Z. He, and L. M. Akst. Vocal
Hygiene Habits and Vocal Handicap Among
Conservatory Students of Classical Singing. Journal
of Voice, 30(2):192–197, 2016.
[2] M. Alfaras, V. Tsaknaki, P. Sanches, C. Windlin,
M. Umair, C. Sas, and K. H ¨o¨ok. From Biodata to
Somadata. In Proc. CHI, page 1–14. ACM, 2020.
[3] J. Armitage, T. Magnusson, and A. McPherson.
Studying Subtle and Detailed Digital Lutherie:
Motivational Contexts and Technical Needs. pages
1–9, 2023.
[4] K. Barad. Posthumanist Performativity: Toward an
Understanding of How Matter Comes to Matter.
Signs, 28(3):801–831, 2003.
[5] K. Barad. Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum
Physics and the Entanglement of Matter and
Meaning. Duke University Press, 2007.
[6] K. Barad. Diffracting Diffraction: Cutting
Together-Apart. Parallax, 20(3):168–187, 2014.
[7] F. Bell, M. Ramsahoye, J. Coffie, J. Tung, and
M. Alistar. µMe: Exploring the Human Microbiome
as an Intimate Material for Living Interfaces. In Proc.
DIS, page 2019–2033. ACM, 2023.
[8] K. Cotton, P. Sanches, V. Tsaknaki, and
P. Karpashevich. The Body Electric: A NIME
designed through and with the somatic experience of
singing. In NIME. PubPub, 221.
[9] N. De Monchaux. Fashioning Apollo, 2011.
[10] K. N. Dew and D. K. Rosner. Lessons from the
Woodshop: Cultivating Design with Living Materials.
In Proc. 2018 CHI, page 1–12. ACM, 2018.
[11] M. Donnarumma, B. Caramiaux, and A. Tanaka.
Muscular Interactions. Combining EMG and MMG
sensing for musical practice. In Proc. NIME, pages
128–131. Graduate School of Culture Technology,
KAIST, 2013.
[12] P. Dourish. Where the action is: the foundations of
embodied interaction. MIT Press, 2001.
[13] A. Drazin and S. K ¨uchler. The Social Life of
Materials: Studies in Materials and Society.
Bloomsbury Publishing, 2015.
[14] N. S. Eidsheim. Sensing Voice: Materiality and the
Lived Body in Singing and Listening. The Senses and
Society, 6(2):133–155, 2011.
[15] N. S. Eidsheim. Sensing Sound: Singing and Listening
as Vibrational Practice. Duke University Press, 2015.
[16] N. S. Eidsheim. Maria Callas’s Waistline and the
Organology of Voice. The Opera Quarterly,
33(3-4):249–268, 2017.
[17] L. Forlano. Posthumanism and design. She Ji: The
Journal of Design, Economics, and Innovation,
3(1):16–29, 2017.
[18] C. Frauenberger. Entanglement HCI The Next Wave?
ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., 27(1), 2019.
[19] R. Freire, V. Martinez-Missir, C. N. Reed, and
P. Strohmeier. RaveNET: Connecting People and
Exploring Liminal Space through Wearable Networks
in Music Performance. In Proc. TEI. ACM, 2024.
[20] E. Giaccardi and E. Karana. Foundations of Materials
Experience: An Approach for HCI. In Proc. CHI,
page 2447–2456. ACM, 2015.
[21] J. Hawkins. What Happens When You Destroy Your
Voice?! In Justin Hawkins Rides Again. 2023.
[22] S. Homewood. Designing for the Changing Body: A
Feminist Exploration of Self-Tracking Technologies. In
CHI EA, page 1–4. ACM, 2018.
[23] S. Homewood, M. Hedemyr, M. Fagerberg Ranten,
and S. Kozel. Tracing Conceptions of the Body in
HCI: From User to More-Than-Human. In Proc. CHI.
ACM, 2021.
[24] K. H ¨o¨ok. Designing with the body: Somaesthetic
interaction design. MIT Press, 2018.
[25] K. H ¨o¨ok, M. P. Jonsson, A. St˚ ahl, and J. Mercurio.
Somaesthetic Appreciation Design. In Proc. CHI,
page 3131–3142. ACM, 2016.
[26] N. Howell, L. Devendorf, R. K. Tian, T. Vega Galvez,
N.-W. Gong, I. Poupyrev, E. Paulos, and K. Ryokai.
Biosignals as Social Cues: Ambiguity and Emotional
Interpretation in Social Displays of Skin Conductance.
In Proc. DIS, page 865–870. ACM, 2016.
[27] T. Ingold. The textility of making. Cambridge Journal
of Economics, 34(1):91–102, 2009.
[28] A. R. Jensenius. Microinteraction in Music/Dance
Performance. In E. Berdahl and J. Allison, editors,
Proc. NIME, pages 16–19. Louisiana State University,
2015.
[29] A. R. Jensenius, V. G. Sanchez, A. Zelechowska, and
K. A. V. Bjerkestrand. Exploring the Myo Controller
for Sonic Microinteraction. In Proc. NIME, pages
442–445. Aalborg University, 2017.
[30] E. Karana, B. Barati, V. Rognoli, and A. Zeeuw
van der Laan. Material driven design (MDD): A
method to design for material experiences.
International Journal of Design, 9(2):35–54, 2015.
[31] P. Karpashevich, P. Sanches, R. Garrett, Y. Luft,
K. Cotton, V. Tsaknaki, and K. H ¨o¨ok. Touching Our
Breathing through Shape-Change: Monster, Organic
Other, or Twisted Mirror. ACM Trans.
Comput.-Hum. Interact., 29(3), 2022.
[32] O. Kilic Afsar, Y. Luft, K. Cotton, E. R. Stepanova,
C. N´ u˜ nez Pacheco, R. Kleinberger, F. Ben Abdesslem,
H. Ishii, and K. H ¨o¨ok. Corsetto: A Kinesthetic
Garment for Designing, Composing for, and
Experiencing an Intersubjective Haptic Voice. In
Proc. 2023 CHI. ACM, 2023.
[33] J. Kirby. Approaches for Working with the Body in
the Design of Electronic Music Performance Systems.
Contemporary Music Review, 42(3):304–318, 2023.
[34] S. R. Klemmer, B. Hartmann, and L. Takayama. How
Bodies Matter: Five Themes for Interaction Design.
In Proc. 6th Conference on Designing Interactive
Systems, page 140–149. ACM, 2006.
[35] T. Lapointe. The Art and Soul of Dune. Simon and
Schuster, 2021.
[36] G. Lepri and A. McPherson. Making Up Instruments:
Design Fiction for Value Discovery in Communities of
Musical Practice. In Proc. DIS, page 113–126. ACM,
2019.
[37] L. Loke and T. Robertson. Moving and making
strange: An embodied approach to movement-based
interaction design. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum.
Interact., 20(1), 2013.
[38] P. Marshall and E. H. Necker. Theories of
Embodiment in HCI, page 144–158. SAGE
Publications Ltd, 2013.
[39] C. P. Martin, A. R. Jensenius, and J. Torresen.
Composing an Ensemble Standstill Work for Myo and
Bela. In T. M. Luke Dahl, Douglas Bowman, editor,
Proc. NIME, pages 196–197. Virginia Tech, 2018.
[40] J. P. Martinez Avila, V. Tsaknaki, P. Karpashevich,
C. Windlin, N. Valenti, K. H ¨o¨ok, A. P. McPherson,
and S. Benford. Soma Design for NIME. In R. Michon
and F. Schroeder, editors, Proc. NIME, pages
489–494. Birmingham City University, 2020.
[41] M. Merleau-Ponty and C. Smith. Phenomenology of
perception, volume 26. Routledge London, 1962.
[42] T. J. Mitchell, S. Madgwick, and I. Heap. Musical
interaction with hand posture and orientation: A
toolbox of gestural control mechanisms. 2012.
[43] L. Nijs, M. Lesaffre, and M. Leman. The Musical
Instrument as a Natural Extension of the Musician.
In H. Castellengo, M. Genevois and J.-M. Bardez,
editors, Music and Its Instruments, pages 467–484.
Editions Delatour France, 2013.
[44] C. Nordmoen and A. P. McPherson. Making Space
for Material Entanglements: A Diffractive Analysis of
Woodwork and the Practice of Making an Interactive
System. In DIS, page 415–423. ACM, 2022.
[45] J. O’Bryan. “We ARE our instrument!”: Forming a
singer identity. Research Studies in Music Education,
37(1):123–137, 2015.
[46] B. Petreca, S. Baurley, N. Bianchi-Berthouze, and
A. Tajadura-Jim´ enez. Investigating nuanced sensory
experiences in textiles selection. In Proc. UbiComp,
page 989–994. ACM, 2016.
[47] V. Rallabandi, A. C. Haynes, C. N. Reed, and
P. Strohmeier. Base and Stitch: Evaluating eTextile
Interfaces from a Material-Centric View. In Proc.
TEI. ACM, 2024.
[48] C. N. Reed and A. P. McPherson. Surface
Electromyography for Direct Vocal Control. In
R. Michon and F. Schroeder, editors, Proc. NIME,
pages 458–463. Birmingham City University, 2020.
[49] C. N. Reed and A. P. McPherson. Surface
Electromyography for Sensing Performance Intention
and Musical Imagery in Vocalists. In Proc. TEI.
ACM, 2021.
[50] C. N. Reed and A. P. McPherson. The Body as
Sound: Unpacking Vocal Embodiment through
Auditory Biofeedback. In Proc. TEI. ACM, 2023.
[51] C. N. Reed, S. Skach, P. Strohmeier, and A. P.
McPherson. Singing Knit: Soft Knit Biosensing for
Augmenting Vocal Performances. In Augmented
Humans 2022, page 170–183. ACM, 2022.
[52] N. Renney, B. Gaster, T. Mitchell, and H. Renney.
Studying How Digital Luthiers Choose Their Tools.
In Proc. 2022 CHI. ACM, 2022.
[53] M. Schoeser. Textiles: the art of mankind. 2012.
[54] R. Shusterman. Somaesthetics: Thinking through the
body and designing for interactive experience. The
Encyclopedia of Human-Computer Interaction,, 2011.
[55] J. Snape and G. Born. Max, music software and the
mutual mediation of aesthetics and digital
technologies, pages 220–266. UCL Press, 2022.
[56] D. Svanæs. Interaction design for and with the lived
body: Some implications of Merleau-Ponty’s
phenomenology. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum.
Interact., 20(1), 2013.
[57] A. Tanaka. Intention, Effort, and Restraint: The
EMG in Musical Performance. Leonardo:
Transactions in Live Interfaces, 43(8):298–299, 2015.
[58] A. Tanaka, B. Di Donato, M. Zbyszynski, and
G. Roks. Designing Gestures for Continuous Sonic
Interaction. In M. Queiroz and A. X. Sed´ o, editors,
Proc. NIME, pages 180–185. UFRGS, 2019.
[59] A. Tanaka and B. Knapp. Multimodal Interaction in
Music Using the Electromyogram and Relative
Position Sensing. In Proc. NIME, pages 171–176,
2002.
[60] C. S. Tapparo and V. Zappi. Bodily Awareness
Through NIMEs: Deautomatising Music Making
Processes. In Proc. NIME, 2022.
[61] J. Tholander, M. Normark, and C. Rossitto.
Understanding agency in interaction design materials.
In Proc. CHI, page 2499–2508. ACM, 2012.
[62] V. Tsaknaki, K. Cotton, P. Karpashevich, and
P. Sanches. “Feeling the Sensor Feeling you”: A Soma
Design Exploration on Sensing Non-habitual
Breathing. In Proc. CHI. ACM, 2021.
[63] V. Tsaknaki, T. Jenkins, L. Boer, S. Homewood,
N. Howell, and P. Sanches. Challenges and
Opportunities for Designing with Biodata as Material.
In Proc. NordCHI. ACM, 2020.
[64] K. Tuuri, J. Parvainen, and A. Pirhonen. Who
Controls Who? Embodied Control Within
Human–Technology Choreographies. Interacting with
Computers, pages 1–18, 2017.
[65] S. Waters. The entanglements which make
instruments musical: Rediscovering sociality. Journal
of New Music Research, 50(2):133–146, 2021.