TENORI-ON 
Yu Nishibori 
YAMAHA  Center for Advanced Sound Technology 
Music & Human Interface Group 
203 Matsunokijima Iwata Shizuoka Pref. 
YAMAHA #12/4 CAST MHG 
TEL : +81-539-62-6448 
E-mail : nishibori@beat.yamaha.co.jp 
Toshio Iwai 
Media Artist 
E-mail : iwai@gol.com
 
ABSTRACT 
Development of a musical interface which allows people to play 
music intuitively and create music visibly. 
Keywords 
Human Interface,  
1. INTRODUCTION 
Media artist Toshio Iwai and YAMAHA have collaborated to 
develop a new digital musical instrument for the 21st century, 
TENORI-ON ( See Figure 1 ). A 16x16 matrix of LED switches 
allows everyone to play music intuitively, creating a “visible 
music” interface [1]. 
 
Figure 1.  TENORI-ON 
In the past, there were some musical interfaces with a new point 
of view to music, which allow everyone to play music intuitively 
and visibly like Audio Pad [2] and Block Jam [3], but the new 
point of TENORI-ON is the interface with the inevitable design 
that makes you understand the musical structure visibly and the 
high quality feeling made by YAMAHA that has been 
manufacturing various kinds of traditional musical instruments for 
120 years [4]. 
The interface of TENORI-N is completely unique and consists of 
a 16x16 matrix of light emitting switches. These switches, 
however, are not mere input switches, like the keys on a keyboard, 
but function as individual displays that emit light that emulates 
intuitively the related sound. When you push a switch for a short 
time, a ripple of light spreads out from switch that corresponds 
with sound you have chosen. If a switch is held down slightly 
longer, a dot of light remains on the panel indicating that the light 
and the sound will be played repeatedly. One remarkable effect of 
this sound and light synergy is that people seem to quickly 
understand the relationship between the sounds and switches such 
that even non-musicians can enjoy improvising and even 
composing almost immediately. 
2. EXPOSITION 
2.1 System 
This interface is an embedded system operated by the real-time 
OS called ITRON that mainly controls the sound output, LEDs 
and the 256 switches. The core technology making this interface 
unique is the algorithm we developed to make music visibly with 
the 256 switches including LEDs inside. 
Below are the main technical functions of TENORI-ON. 
1. Analyze how long a switch among 256 switches has been 
touched 
2. Analyze the direction of the finger touching the switches 
continuously 
3. Analyze the angle of the interface with the acceleration 
sensor embedded in the interface 
Those elaborate and highly developed technologies make it 
possible to give us a lot of information simultaneously, which we 
can't get with our eyes, and we can expand the possibility of our 
expression by controlling the sound and the light with those 
information. 
2.2 Interface 
2.2.1 Features Of TENORI-ON 
Below are the main features of TENORI-ON. 
1. Interface that anybody can play easily 
When you push the switch, the light is emitted and you’ll 
have the points to generate the sound. 
2. Create Music with the various kinds of loops 
 : When the scan bar moves one by one from left to right, 
it generates the sound at the point where the switches 
were pushed and loops. 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
Nime06, June 4-8, 2006, Paris, France. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
172
 : Making some figures like triangle and rectangular by 
pushing switches, the light runs on the line of the figure 
and when it gets to the vertex, it generates the sound. 
And TENORI-ON has more loop modes besides 2 examples 
mentioned above. 
3. Session with another machine 
When you connect your machine to another machine, it    
synchronizes with another one and it enables you to play the 
session with another person. It will be another interest that 
you can never experience when you play by yourself. 
2.2.2 Construction Of The Interface 
2.2.2.1 Surface 
The upper frame has 2 speakers and 1 switch as the clear function 
between the speakers. 
The left frame and the right frame have 5 function switches on 
each side. 
The lower frame has a dial, a LCD and 2 function switches. And 
the base side has 2 terminals for a headphone and a volume. 
The inside of the square frame has a 16x16 matrix of light 
emitting switches.  ( See Figure 2 ) 
2.2.2.2 Backside 
The backside of TENORI-ON controller has also a 16x16 matrix 
of light emitting button that is a dummy button not to be pushed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Interface of TENORI-ON (Surface) 
2.3 How To Play 
2.3.1 Several Modes To Play 
TENORI-ON has several modes to play like the following 3 
modes. Each mode should be selected from the menu written on 
the LCD. 
 Play Mode : A mode to play TENORI-ON 
 Remote Mode : A mode to control TENORI-ON by 
another MIDI instrument or PC 
 Save / Load Mode : A mode to save and load files 
( examples : a data file of the performance, a file of 
the state (pattern) of the layer, the function parameter 
set file, the firmware file (load only) and so on ) 
2.3.2 Panel Operation 
The performance of TENORI-ON should be done by pushing a  
16x16 matrix of light emitting switch on the TENORI-ON 
controller. Depending on how long you push the switch, the 
reaction of the panel button should be different. The following 
description is about the basic actions after pushing the button. 
 Pushing a switch for a short time :  Single tone is 
generated LED also emits light at a time 
 Pushing a switch for a long time:  You can set the 
points to generate the sound in each loop modeLED 
also continues to emit light with some varieties of 
animation 
 While you’re pushing a switch is pushed : Just the 
same as Pushing a switch for a long time  If the 
sound is the single tone ( not the continuous tone ), the 
tone should be just generated repeatedly.  
2.3.3 Master Function Set 
The following descriptions are about the data that effect to all 
layers. 
 Master tempo 
 Master volume 
 Layer selection 
 Page selection 
 Effect selection 
2.3.4 Layer Function Set 
The following descriptions are about the data that you can control 
on each layer.  
 Positions of the points where the switches are pushed 
on each layer 
 Loop Mode * 
 Tone * 
 Layer tempo * 
 Volume * 
 Sound length * 
 Octave * 
 Pan * 
The data with * cannot be set plurally in the same layer.  
2.3.5 Using As A MIDI Controller 
You can use TENORI-ON is to control other MIDI instruments or 
PC by sending MIDI data as the operation data generated from the 
TENORI-ON controller through the MIDI OUT interface of 
TENORI-ON. 
2.4 Software 
2.4.1 Several Loop Modes 
TENORI-ON has several loop modes. The following descriptions 
are about the main outlines of the loop modes in TENORI-ON. 
Function  
Switches 
(Right Side) 
Function  
Switches 
(Left Side) 
Speaker Speaker Switch for Clear 
16x16 matrix  
of light emitting  
button  
Dial LCD Function Switches 
(Lower Side) 
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
173
By multiplying these different loop modes, TENORI-ON 
generates more complex and interesting music. 
2.4.1.1 Score Mode 
The horizontal axis means the time and there’re 16 steps. And the 
vertical axis means the pitch and the 16 different pitches are 
assigned. 
When the scan bar moves one by one from the left side to the 
right side and hits the point where the switches were pushed, it 
generates the sound at the point. Simultaneously the point where 
the switch was pushed emits the light strongly and the animation 
should be played from the point. When the scan bar reaches the 
right side on the panel (16th bar), it gets back to the left side and 
moves toward the right side again. In Score Mode, this action 
should be continued.  ( See Figure 3 ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Basic Mode 
2.4.1.2 Random Loop Mode 
When you push the panel switch one by one, the point where the 
switch was pushed should be memorized as the order it was 
pushed. 
The light moves between the points where the switches were 
pushed and the sound should be generated when the light hits the 
point. Then it moves back to the first point that you pushed at first 
after the light hits the last point that you pushed. Therefore you 
can make a loop by making various kinds of figures in this loop 
mode. ( See Figure 4 ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Random Loop Mode 
2.4.1.3 Real Time Rec Mode 
The data of both the time and the position of the switch that you 
pushed are memorized during a loop time of the Score Mode, and 
your last performance should be reappeared and looped as it’s 
memorized. The memorized data of your performance should be 
repeated as the order that you operated 1 loop time before.  ( See 
Figure 5 ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Real Time Rec Mode 
2.4.1.4 Bounce Mode 
When you push the panel switch, a dot of the light moves down to 
the bottom line of the panel switch. It generates the sound when 
the dot hits the bottom line, after that, the dot moves up to the 
point which you pushed at the first time. And when the dot gets to 
the point which you pushed at the first time, it moves down again. 
In this loop mode, it repeats this up and down movement.  
In this mode, the horizontal axis means the pitch ( the left side : 
low pitch, the right side : high pitch ) and the vertical axis means 
the time.  ( See Figure 6 ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Bounce Mode 
2.4.1.5 Push Mode 
While the panel switch is pushed, the sound and the light are 
changed gradually. 
After pushing the panel switch for a short time, it stops to 
generating the sound and emitting the light. And after pushing the 
panel switch for a long time, it continues to generate the sound 
and emit the light until the switch for the clear function is pushed.  
( See Figure 7 ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Push Mode 
2.4.1.6 Solo Mode 
The sound is generated continuously while the panel switch is 
pushed, and after holding the switch that you pushed, it stops  
generating the sound and to emitting the light.  ( See Figure 8 ) 
 
High Pitch 
Low Pitch 
Time
Low 
Pitch
High 
Pitch
Time
Time
First 
Point 
Second 
Point 
Third 
Point 
Light running 
between the points  
High Pitch
Low Pitch
High Pitch
Low Pitch
High Pitch Low Pitch
Switches that eithe r 
you pushed for a 
long time or you’re 
pushing now 
Switches that you 
pushed before 
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
174
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Solo Mode 
2.4.2 Other Functions 
2.4.2.1 Session With Another Machine 
TENORI-ON can be connected to other TENORI-ONs with MIDI 
and play the session with other users. 
In the session, a TENORI-ON as a master role sends the system 
real-time message among the other TENORI-ONs. The Other 
TENORI-ONs should get the message from the master TENORI-
ON and synchronize the master’s timing.  
2.4.2.2 Save And Load The Data 
2.4.2.2.1 Save and Load the data of the performance 
TENORI-ON memorizes when and which panel switches were 
pushed from the start of the recording to the stop of the recording. 
The decision of the start and the stop of the recording should be 
done by the user’s operation. The recorded file will be saved in 
the memory card like SD memory card. 
Below are the main data to be saved.
 Positions of the points where the switches were 
pushed on each layer 
 Time stamps of the points where the switches were 
pushed on each layer ( The very first time stamps 
should be the beginning of the recording ) 
 Loop modes on each layer 
 Master function set 
 Layer function set 
 Other sets on the menu
2.4.2.2.2 Save the state of a layer 
You can save the data of the layer selected as a top layer.  
Below are the main data to be saved. 
 Positions of the points where the switches were 
pushed on the layer that’s selected as a top layer
 Layer function set 
CONCLUSION 
2.5 Message From Toshio Iwai  --  Musical 
Instrument For A New Age 
I want to handle both light and sound simultaneously and 
pleasantly, as we play music or draw pictures.  This is the theme I 
have been working on for a long time. Pursuing this idea further I 
have, in collaboration with YAMAHA, been developing 
TENORI-ON with particular attention being given to, the beauty 
of the light and sounds, the ease of performance, and as a musical 
instrument for the future, the design and the quality of the product 
as a whole. In days gone by, a musical instrument had to have a 
beauty, of shape as well as, of sound, and had to fit the player 
almost organically.( Instrument like the violin spring to mind. ) 
All of these elements were once considered indispensable. 
Modern electronic instruments don't have this inevitable 
relationship between the shape, the sound, and the player.  What I 
have done is to try to bring back these, once indispensable, 
elements and build them in to a true musical instrument for the 
digital age. TENORI-ON. 
2.6 Our Goal 
We developed this work with a new point of view to music. And 
we'd like to keep on thinking the musical structure and music with 
a new point of view. When we develop some work with the idea 
and the image gotten from this method and make the idea move, 
then you can catch a new image of music, which you've never 
seen before. And if you control the motion of the new image, the 
interface will be a brand new thing inevitably. Sometimes, you 
might have to develop some new basic technology at first to make 
it. In that case, you could develop a work that is exactly mixed art 
with science, and the possibility being a brand new work could be 
enhanced. We hope that people could get a new point of view to 
music and it could connect to the development and the expansion 
of the possibility of music by people using the interfaces like our 
work. 
Finally we hope this work would make it possible for many 
people ( including people who don't usually play any musical 
instruments ) to experience the pleasure of music more than 
before. And when our work that has a new point of view to 
musical structure helps to expand the possibility of music and to 
develop music, we would like to think that it would be our goal. 
3. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Our thanks to our friends and the musicians who gave us a great 
deal of valuable advice. 
4. REFERENCES 
[1] Toshio Iwai, Yu Nishibori. TENORI-ON. SIGGRAPH 2005 
(Aug. 2005) 
[2] James Patten, Ben Recht, Hiroshi Ishii. Audio Pad. Sonar 
2003 (May. 2003) 
[3] Henry Newton-Dunn, Hiroaki Nakano, James Gibson. Block 
Jam. NIME03 (May. 2003) 
[4] The chronology of YAMAHA 
http://www.yamaha.co.jp/pdf/cor/inf/his/cp01j.pdf
   
 
  
Low Pitch High Pitch 
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
175