EMdrum: An Electromagnetically Actuated Drum
David Rector
Dartmouth College
6242 Hallgarten Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
davrec@gmail.com
Spencer Topel
Dartmouth College
6242 Hallgarten Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
spencer.topel@dartmouth.edu
ABSTRACT
The EMdrum, a drum electromagnetically actuated in the
manner of a loudspeaker, is presented. Design principles are
established and implementation is described; in particular,
two alternative electromagnetic actuation designs,moving-
coil and moving-magnet, are discussed. We evaluate the
time-frequency response of the instrument and present a
musical application.
Keywords
EMdrum, actuated, drum, speaker, electromagnetic
1. OVERVIEW
Acoustic musical instruments extended via electromechan-
ical means have attracted considerable interest from re-
searchers and composers in recent years, notably [10, 12].
The electromechanical actuation of drum membranes would
seem to oﬀer particularly interesting sonic possibilities, very
distinct from those of other types of actuated instruments
and from the possibilities aﬀorded by simply striking or rub-
bing a drum membrane. However, such possibilities have
not been widely explored. We here present the “EMdrum”,
a design in which drum membranes are actuated in the same
manner as a loudspeaker cone. First we overview the artistic
history of membrane actuation and electromagnetic actua-
tors. We then present the design principles and implementa-
tion choices used to create the present instrument. Finally,
we evaluate the time-frequency response of the drum using
a synthesized frequency sweep and describe a composition
written for live performer and EMdrum.
2. BACKGROUND
Actuation of general acoustic resonating surfaces has been
ably explored. Electronic audio eﬀects applied to physical
instruments can be ﬁrst attributed to David Tudor’sRain-
forest [5], where the composer applied piezoelectric contacts
to instruments to both amplify and generate sound. More
recently, the motion of a vibrating string was modiﬁed using
electronic processing [3].
Electronic extensions of acoustic drums have included au-
tomated striking mechanisms (“robot drumming” [7]) and
voltage-based modiﬁcation of drum head tension [6]. Electro-
acoustic pseudo-drums have also been created, notably the
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’14,June 30 – July 03, 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Figure 1: The EMdrum with bass clarinetist
Heather Roche.
“Haptic Drum” [1], in which a rigid surface is adhered to
a loudspeaker cone and fed with a microphone signal such
that when struck it generates “haptic” (i.e. tactile) feedback
to the percussionist. Much of the other research in the area
of drums and electronics involvescontrollers rather than
instruments (e.g. [11]).
Many acoustic-electronic hybrid musical instruments that
have emerged in recent years use electromagnetic (EM) ac-
tuators. This technology was ﬁrst applied to the actuation
of piano keys [8], but more recently EM actuators were pro-
posed as a means of generating sound directly from ferro-
magnetic piano strings [2, 10, 9], and even more recently
to actuate the metal bars of a vibraphone (the EMvibe,
namesake of the current design [4]).
One advantage aﬀorded by EM actuation over mechanical
methods is the straightforward translation between contin-
uous voltage ﬂuctuations inputted to an EM actuator and
the physical motion it outputs, modiﬁed solely by the id-
iosyncrasies of the actuator and instrument. The input and
output of this technology may thus be considered funda-
mentally of thesame kind , and indeed the technology for
EM actuators is inherent in both loudspeaker design and
dynamic microphone design. The EMdrum attempts to ex-
ploit the creative possibilities thereby suggested.
3. MOTIV ATION
The design of an actuated instrument might be formulated
as responses to three questions. First, what will be the
acoustic propertiesof the instrument, distinct from its
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
395
mechanism of actuation? Second, what will be the mecha-
nism of actuationand its contribution to the sonic prop-
erties of the instrument? Third, what should characterize
the input signalsto the actuator?
The motivation behind the EMdrum was to create an ac-
tuated drum oﬀering the broadest potential for artistic use;
we thus focused on two objectives: a) adding a versatile
means of electromagnetic actuation to a drum while b) max-
imally retaining the acoustic properties of the unmodiﬁed
drum. That is, the mechanism of actuation and the man-
ner of input were designed so as to most strikinglyexplore
a drum’s natural acoustics without constraining them.
4. DESIGN
4.1 Maintaining Natural Acoustics
Two components deﬁne the acoustics of a drum: the shell
and the membrane(s). Two components also deﬁne an elec-
tromagnetic actuator: a heavy stationary component (e.g.,
the magnet assembly in a moving-coil design, discussed in
section 5.2.1) and a lightweight moving component (e.g. the
coil). In the EMdrum a stationary actuator component is
mounted to the shell, while the corresponding moving actu-
ator component is mounted to both membranes.
Both mountings require careful design if they are to min-
imize disruption of the drum’s acoustics. We identify three
design imperativesfor maintaining these acoustics. First,
the moving and stationary components of the actuator must
never touch. Second, dampening of the drum membranes
by the actuator (due to ﬂuid resistance, mass of the moving
component, etc.) must be minimized. Third, modiﬁcations
to the drum shell must not greatly impinge on its natural
resonances. These three imperatives circumscribe all sub-
sequent design choices.
4.2 Mechanism of Actuation
A mallet actuates a drum membrane by striking perpendic-
ular to it. A speaker coil actuates a speaker cone by apply-
ing a time-varying force perpendicular to it. The EMdrum
uses the latter method to accomplish the former task.
There are two primary ways a loudspeaker actuator may
be implemented. In a moving-coil design, the speaker cone
is attached to a bobbin around which wire is coiled and con-
nected to external leads. This bobbin is free to move along
a stationary magnetizedpole piece. Current sent through
the coil thus causes it to move relative to the magnetic ﬁeld
in accordance with electromagnetic induction. Present day
moving-coil designs oﬀer highly linear frequency response,
and their wide availability and economy make the moving-
coil design an ideal actuating mechanism.
A moving-magnet design is precisely the inverse of a moving-
coil design. A heavy duty coil is the stationary compo-
nent and a lightweight magnet or assembly of magnets is
the moving component. Alternating current sent through
the coil thus generates a changing magnetic ﬁeld that alter-
nately opposes or attracts the magnets, causing their move-
ment. This design permits the creation of variable mag-
netic ﬁelds, with points of stability and instability, through
unusual arrangements of individual magnets on the mov-
ing component. The response can thus be highly idiosyn-
cratic, oﬀering creative possibilities diﬃcult to achieve with
a moving-coil design.
4.3 Input Signals
In its simplest use, the drum requires no interface aside from
an audio cable. External signals may be inputted to an
ampliﬁer driving the actuator coil, and thereby “convolved”
with the character of the actuator and drum. This will yield
Figure 2: Moving-coil implementation, close detail
useful musical results for certain classes of external signals,
to be discovered through experimentation. However, the
instrument can be made more versatile, and its character
perhaps more thoroughly explored, by integrating a feed-
back mechanism into the instrument.
Our design couples a pickup coil and magnet (the essen-
tial components of a dynamic microphone) to the actuator
coil and magnet, respectively. The pickup components re-
semble those of the actuator but operate in reverse: while
(for moving-coil designs) a currentsent through the actua-
tor coil causes it to move relative to a magnetic ﬁeld, move-
ment of a pickup coil relative to a magnetic ﬁeld induces
a current in the pickup coil. Coupling the pickup and ac-
tuator components in this way oﬀers feedback possibilities
distinctive to the instrument, as the pickup coil moves in
sync and at zero lag relative to the drum membranes and
thus the properties of the feedback are determined primarily
by the internal dynamics of the instrument and not exter-
nal factors. This contrasts with typical microphone-based
feedback, the character of which is largely created by phase
lags introduced by the microphone’s physical distance from
the source/output.
Positive feedback, one may imagine, would be predictable
and uncontrollable in the present system. Negative feed-
back – achieved by reversing the polarity of the pickup coil
leads relative to the actuator coil leads, such that the pickup
outputs to the ampliﬁer a signal that opposes the move-
ment of the actuator coil – can however generate unusual,
even chaotic oscillatory responses via hysteresis (delayed
response) eﬀects. The EMdrum uses a negative feedback
circuit; the achievable eﬀects are described further in sec-
tion 6.3.
5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.1 Acoustics
A circa-1930 Leedy bass drum shell of diameter 28” and
depth 14” was obtained. A frame composed of 0.75” x 2.5”
pine boards was constructed and installed on the interior of
the drum shell to permit rigid mounting of the stationary
component of the actuator. Eight set screws were added
to a center housing (a square inner frame six inches on
end); the stationary actuating component would contact
the frame only at the tips of these eight screws. Calibration
of these screws allows precise translation and rotation of
the stationary actuating component, necessary to ensure
that the moving and stationary actuator components do not
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
396
come into contact, while nevetheless maintaining the narrow
clearances between them necessary for eﬃcient actuation.
5.2 Mechanism of Actuation
5.2.1 Moving-coil implementation
(Consult Figure 2 for this section.) The voice coil of a
Bowers and Wilkins ASW608 subwoofer was obtained. Its
speaker cone and“spider”were removed. Two now-separated
components remained: themagnet assembly (composed
of a magnet, plate, and vented pole piece, attached securely
together) and the bobbin/coil assembly. A rigid aluminum
cap was secured with epoxy to one end of the bobbin cylin-
der. A hole was drilled in the precise center of this cap.
Through this hole, an 8-32 stainless steel threaded rod was
inserted, and two lock nuts were used to secure the bobbin
to the rod (henceforth the bobbin/rod assembly).
The magnet assembly was placed in the frame’s center
housing, and the set screws were adjusted until the mag-
net axis aligned perfectly with the central axis of the drum
shell. The bobbin/rod assembly was then placed over the
magnet assembly and the coil leads were wired to an ampli-
ﬁer (discussed in section 5.4). Drum membranes were then
placed on the drum shell and holes were drilled in their pre-
cise centers. Two lock nuts and washers were then used on
each membrane to couple it to the bobbin/rod assembly.
5.2.2 Moving-magnet implementation
A 10 mH 18 AWG air core inductor (i.e. coil) was secured
in the center housing. A set of N48-strength ring magnets,
of outer diameter 0.5”, inner diameter 0.25”, and thickness
0.25”, were obtained. A 0.25” diameter carbon ﬁber rod was
also obtained, and several of the ring magnets were ﬁtted
over the middle of the rod (in an arrangement described
below) and secured into place via pins through drilled holes.
Threaded aluminum nuts were then epoxied to both ends of
the rod, such that screws could be used to couple the drum
membranes to the rod. The rod was then inserted through
the inductor and secured to the membranes, and the leads
of the inductor were attached to the ampliﬁer.
In the magnet arrangement used here, two ring magnets
facing opposite directions (thus resisting each other’s ﬁelds)
were placed so that in the equilibrium position they rested
at either edge of the inductor. This arrangement was chosen
after experimentation because it appeared to produce the
most eﬃcient actuation for a given total magnet mass.
5.3 Pickup/Feedback
A 600 Ohm pickup coil was created by winding 500 feet of 42
AWG enameled copper wire around a short 0.75” diameter
plastic tube using a sewing machine’s bobbin winder. This
coil was placed either on the rod (in the moving-coil design)
or on the frame (in the moving-magnet design), along the
axis of the actuator coil. This pickup outputted its signal
to both a) an external jack (allowing the drum to function
as a ﬁgure-8 microphone) and b) the system’s ampliﬁer, in
reversed-polarity conﬁguration, by way of an external gain
knob (see Figure 3).
In the moving-coil implementation (Figure 2), several ring
magnets identical to those described in section 5.2.2 were
secured onto the speaker’s magnet assembly such that the
bobbin would move alongside them, parallel to their ﬁeld,
as it was stirred to motion by either the actuator coil or
external blows to the drum membranes. In the moving-
magnet implementation, the coil was secured in the same
manner as the actuator coil, and additional ring magnets
were then placed on the rod relative to the pickup coil in
the arrangement described in section 5.2.2.
Figure 3: Moving-coil implementation, complete
5.4 Supporting Hardware
For maximum portability, a Boss AR1500M audio ampli-
ﬁer and 12V 30A DC power supply were integrated inside
the drum shell. A 1/4” TS input jack was installed on the
shell to access the ampliﬁer input. For improved perfor-
mance, a 2-Farad capacitor was wired in parallel between
the DC power supply and the ampliﬁer to prevent dynamic
compression or clipping during extreme transients.
6. EV ALUATION AND DISCUSSION
6.1 Time-Frequency Response
To test the frequency response and resonance characteris-
tics of the instrument, we synthesized a 30 second frequency
sweep (chirp) from 1Hz to 20kHz and played it back through
the drum at a moderate volume. We then recorded the
live output of the instrument in a research studio using an
Earthworks QTC50 microphone one meter away. Figure 4
shows a comparison between two spectrograms: the fre-
quency response of the actuated drum (top), and the “ideal”
response from the synthesized frequency sweep (bottom).
It is evident from these spectrograms that the frequency
response is heavily “colored” by resonances from the drum,
as one would expect. Notably, at low frequencies, between
3 − 25Hz, the actuator produces distinguishable impulses
that have the character of typical mallet strikes to the drum.
Source frequencies beyond 250Hz begin to “use” the drum
more as an acoustic space, with harmonics emerging as dis-
tinguishable resonances.
6.2 Musical Application
The ﬁrst composition for the EMdrum was Hot Mess fea-
turing solo bass clarinet [13]. Throughout the work the
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
397
Figure 4: Comparison between drum response (top
spectrogram), and source test (bottom spectro-
gram) consisting of a 30 second Frequency Chirp
from 1Hz to20kHz.
performer “plays” the drum using a microphone inputted
to the drum in one of two ways. First, the performer may
tap the microphone stand to produce a kick drum-like re-
sponse. Second, the performer plays into the drum, using
it as a resonator.
One observes in Figure 4 the particular broad responsive-
ness of the EMdrum to low to low-mid frequencies, while
higher frequencies provoke more sparse, unpredictable re-
sponses. This character is well suited to exploration by
the bass clarinet. Of particularly note is the EMdrum’s
coloration of multiphonics, or multiple overtones, from the
bass clarinet, which at times also produced sub-harmonics
in the drum.
The signal requires no other processing than ampliﬁcation
of the signal within the drum. The sound thus becomes an
acoustic hybrid of the bass clarinet and bass drum, merged
via electronics but without an electronic character.
6.3 Future Work
Two diﬀerent sonic characters were achieved via the two
experimental implementations attempted over the course
of this project. The moving-coil design oﬀers a smooth,
fairly broad frequency response of the actuating mecha-
nism, which we anticipated since the voice coil used was
taken from a commercially developed speaker. This charac-
teristic permits explorations of the high frequency response
of the drum. Conversely, the moving-magnet design has a
poor frequency response, rolling-oﬀ rapidly around 160 Hz.
However, this design permits one to easily “customize” the
dynamics of the actuator via unusual magnet arrangements
on the rod; these may create unstable oscillation patterns
that result in chaotically evolving feedback responses. Fu-
ture work would proﬁtably consider the feedback responses
created by such magnet arrangements, as well as how the
introduction of audio processing or mechanical performance
on the drumheads into the feedback loop modiﬁes these re-
sponses.
In addition, experimentation with special input signals
tuned to the acoustic response of the instrument, as ex-
plored in [4], also deserves consideration. In particular,
non-smooth input signals, such as half-wave rectiﬁed and
intermittent signals, may provoke acoustic responses of the
EMdrum not accessible with smooth signals.
7. CONCLUSION
We have presented the design and implementation of an in-
ternally actuated bass drum we call the EMdrum, and de-
scribed its use. Our evaluation suggests that the instrument
possesses an unusual character that is a hybrid of an acous-
tic and electroacoustic instrument. The primary challenge
of implementing this design is to prevent noticeable disrup-
tion of the natural resonance of the drum membranes due to
mechanical or ﬂuid resistance of the actuating mechanism.
Our implementation demonstrates that this is achievable
with suﬃcient care in construction. Future artistic work
using our implementation will consider how experimental
alterations to the actuator mechanism and input character-
istics interact with the acoustic response of the instrument.
8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Special thanks to Carlos Dominguez, Ezra Teboul, and Michael
Casey.
9. REFERENCES
[1] E. Berdahl. Expressively actuated percussion
instruments and interfaces. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 134(5):4157, 2013.
[2] E. Berdahl, S. Backer, and J. Smith. If i had a
hammer: Design and theory of an
electromagnetically-prepared piano. In Proc. of the
International Computer Music Conference , pages
81–84, 2005.
[3] E. Berdahl and J. O. Smith. Some physical audio
eﬀects. In Digital Audio Eﬀects Proceedings, pages
165–168, 2006.
[4] C. Britt, J. Snyder, and A. McPherson. The emvibe:
An electromagnetically actuated vibraphone. In Proc.
NIME, 2012.
[5] J. Driscoll and M. Rogalsky. David tudor’s rainforest:
An evolving exploration of resonance. Leonardo Music
Journal, 14:25–30, 2004.
[6] J. R. Fleming. Drum tensioning apparatus, Oct. 20
1992. US Patent 5,157,212.
[7] A. Kapur, E. Singer, M. S. Benning, G. Tzanetakis,
et al. Integrating hyperinstruments, musical robots &
machine musicianship for north indian classical music.
InProc. NIME, pages 238–241. ACM, 2007.
[8] K. Kawamura and S. Koseki. Electromagnetic
actuator used for keyboard musical instrument,
Apr. 9 1996. US Patent 5,506,369.
[9] A. McPherson. Techniques and circuits for
electromagnetic instrument actuation. In Proc.
NIME, 2012.
[10] A. McPherson and Y. Kim. Augmenting the acoustic
piano with electromagnetic string actuation and
continuous key position sensing. Proc. NIME, 2010.
[11] J. Oliver and M. Jenkins. The silent drum controller:
A new percussive gestural interface. In Proc. of the
International Computer Music Conference , pages
651–654, 2008.
[12] D. Overholt. The overtone ﬁddle: an actuated
acoustic instrument. 2011.
[13] S. Topel. Hot mess. https://soundcloud.com/
spencertopel/topel-hot-mess-feat-heather , 2014.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
398