RASPER: a Mechatronic Noise-intoner 
 
 
Mo H. Zareei 
Victoria University of Wellington 
New Zealand School of Music 
Wellington 6012, New Zealand 
mo.zareei@vuw.ac.nz 
 
Ajay Kapur 
California Institute of the Arts 
24700 McBean Parkway 
Valencia CA 91355 
akapur@calarts.edu 
 
 
Dale A. Carnegie 
Victoria University of Wellington 
School of Engineering  
Wellington 6012, New Zealand 
dale.carnegie@ecs.vuw.ac.nz 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Over the past few decades, there has been an increasing 
number of musical instruments and works of sound art that 
incorporate robotics and mechatronics. This paper proposes a 
new approach in classification of such works and focuses on 
those whose ideological roots can be sought in Luigi Russolo’s 
noise-intoners (intonarumori). It presents a discussion o n 
works in which mechatronics is used to investigate new ––and 
traditionally perceived as “extra -musical”––sonic territories, 
and introduces Rasper: a new mechatronic noise -intoner that 
features an electromechanical apparatus to create noise 
physically, while regulating it rhythmically and timbrally.  
 
Keywords 
Rasper, Noise-intoner, Mechatronic Soundsculpture  
1. INTRODUCTION 
From a conceptual perspective, it can be suggested that there 
have been two different approaches towards the integration of 
robotics, mechatronics, and automatic apparatuses in the design 
and construction of new musical instruments. The first one is an 
effort to replace the human performer with machines in order to 
explore the full potential and push the boundaries of 
conventional musical instruments, while the other tries to 
investigate the machine itself not only as a performer, but also 
as a source of new sounds. In other words, in the first scenario, 
electromechanical machines have been used to create 
augmented musical instruments with extended performative 
capabilities, and in the other, they are used as extra -musical 
sound-objects utilized in a musical context.  
 Although there is no rigid distinction between the two 
approaches and the dividing line here is blurry, in the context of 
this paper, such classifications help clarify the author’s 
motivation in highlighting certain works and artists in the next 
two sections. Therefore, while conceding that the terminology 
is somewhat indistinct, these two strands it represents are useful 
in clarifying differences between “musical robotics” and 
“mechatronic sound-objects”.  
 A brief overview of musica l robotics is presented in section 
2, and––considering the focus of this paper –– mechatronic 
sound-objects are discussed in more detail in Section 3, using a 
number of examples. Section 4 introduces Rasper, discussing 
the sound production mechanism, technical features, and some 
timbral and frequency characteristics of the instrument. Section 
5 is dedicated to a discussion on the future works.   
2. MUSICAL ROBOTICS 
Semantically, musical robotics is perhaps best explained via 
automatophonics: a term used by Charles Fowler to describe 
“mechanisms that replace the human performer, but not the 
instrument itself” [1]. According to Fowler, the production of 
these typ es of m echanical musical instruments ––which are as 
old as the  water organ built in 875 C.E. ––reached its climax 
after the Industrial Revolution, the player piano being most 
significant instrument within this domain. As Murphy argues, 
since these early generations of automatic musical instruments 
were primarily built as tools for the reproduction of music, they 
gradually died out in the early 20 th century with the advent of 
the phonograph [2]. However, during what Murphy calls “the 
1970s Renaissance” a new movement, which over the past 
decade has been led by forerunners like Eric Singer, Gil 
Weinberg, and Ajay Kap ur, was resurrected. According to 
Murphy, this movement was an effort to create “a reality 
consisting of real world production of sounds, forgoing the 
loudspeaker in favor of mechatronically facilitated actuation 
techniques capable of truly localized sound ”[2]. For instance, 
the founder of the League of Musical Urban Robotics 
(LEMUR), Eric Singer’s musical roboti c works “focus on 
augmented instruments and new instruments inspired by 
existing designs” [2]. As Murphy des cribes, among LEMUR’s 
numerous musical robotic projects [3],  Singer’s “Guitarbot”[4] 
is one of the most significant examples in the field. Other 
examples can be found in Weinberg’s work. In his article 
“Towards Robotic Musicianship”, he explains in details the 
design and constru ction of his robotic percussionist “Haile” 
from a musicianship perspective [5]. Furthermore, the Karmetik 
Machine Orchestra ––an ensemble of laptop performers and a 
set of networked robotic idiophones and membranophones 
designed by Ajay Kapur, Michael Darling, et al. [6]––is another 
example of robotic instruments that are capable of performance 
in areas (e.g. speed and pre cision) beyond human performers’  
abilities.  
 In addition to the significant examples above, Phil Dadson’s 
instruments1 (created in the 1980s), Jim Murphy’s recent works 
on robotic guitars [7], and the other works described in Kapur’s 
article “A History of Robotic Musical Instruments” [8] are 
among numerous other examples of the musical robotics field; 
one that was certainly inspired by groundbreaking works of 
Godfried-Willem Raes a nd Trimpi n whose diverse 
contributions––from musical robotics and electroacoustic 
instruments to kinetic soundsculpture s and mechatronic sound -
objects––are also responsible for blurring the boundary line 
                                                                    
1 See “From Scratch” archive  at www.sonicsfromscratch.co.nz  
(Retrieved on September 2, 2013) . 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on 
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME’14, June 30 – July 03, 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
473
between musical robotics and mechatronic sound -objects2.      
3. MECHATRONIC SOUND-OBJECTS 
It is reasonable to regard Luigi Russolo’s Art of Noises  and his 
intonarumori (noise -intoners) as the conceptual cornerstone of 
the mechatronic sound -objects trend. In his Futurist Manifesto, 
Russolo asserts that “the ev olution of music is comparable with 
the multiplication of machines” and calls for artistic 
investigation of the noises of the machines in order to expand 
the “limited variety of timbre” provided by the orchestra at the 
time [10]. As first instances of the conventi onally “extra -
musical” sounds of the machine integrated in a musical setting, 
his intonarumori continue to influence the artists and musicians 
in the realm of experimental and art music to this day.  One of 
the main precursors of the contemporary mechatronic sound art 
and the founder of the Logos Foundation, Gottfried -Willem 
Raes, openly expresses his fascination for Russolo’s 
instruments [11]. Influenced by the anti -authoritarianism of the 
day, Logos was founded in the late 1960s by Raes and a 
number of other artists and instrument designers. Raes’ goal 
was to defy what he regards as the authoritarianism of music -
production industries by pushing th e boundaries of music and 
sound art through design and construction of new instruments 
and integration of these instruments and electromechanical 
technologies in his various works of sound art [11]. Another 
key figure, whose contributions to the field of mechatronic 
sound art, according to Murphy, “either directly or indirectly, 
[…] significantly influence the majority of subsequent work in 
the field”, is Trimpin [2]. Murphy describes Trimpin’s work as 
a full “rejection of the loudspeaker through the use  of physical 
objects actuated mechatronically and placed throughout an 
installation space” [2]. A selected nu mber of Trimpin’s sound 
art works are presented in Trimpin: Contraptions for Art and 
Sound complied and edited by Anne Focke [12].  
 One of the main principles in Trimpin’s work has been the 
sonic recycling of found objects and  obsolete machines through 
mechatronics in order to create kinetic soundsculptures. 3 This 
practice can be traced through works such as Gordon 
Monahan’s Multiple Machine Matrix  in addition to a number of 
others cited in Murphy’s article [2]. Multiple Machine Matrix is 
a “multi -functional performance and installation environment 
of automated machine sculptures bui lt from electronic surplus 
and trash [in which] MIDI signals […] control the movement of 
mechanical/robotic devices such as voltage modulated steel 
sheets of various sizes, pulse -controlled bi -directional metal 
sheet Doppler spinners, and percussion -activated 
furniture”[14]. Peter Garland writes on this work ––which was 
also titled as Sounds and the Machines that Makes them ––that 
it is the sound that is “the source of amazement and pleasure”, 
and gives life to the machine, not vice versa [15].  
 Remarkable examples of using mechatronics as the source of 
sound itself can be found in works by the Swiss  artists Zimoun 
and Pe Lang. A significant majority of their solo works, as well 
as those that they create in collaboration with one another, are 
large-scale sound installations that comprise significant 
numbers of what they refer to as “prepared DC motors  or 
actuators” as sound -objects (see Figure 1) . According to 
Murphy, “Zimoun’s and Lang’s works have much in common 
with those of other artists who create their own instruments: 
                                                                    
2 Sound sculptors such as Jean Tinguelly, Joe Jones, and Martin 
Riches––whose works are discussed in Alan Licht’s Sound 
Art [9]––could also fall into this liminal space.  
3 In fact, as Jean St rouse writes, “He moved to the United 
States largely because Americans throw out a lot of more of 
the high-tech junk he uses in his work than Europeans do” 
[13].   
Many such works involve reductionist sculptures that pare 
sound-making element s down to their pure forms” [2]. By 
simultaneous sonification of a large number of sound -objects 
(i.e. small  actuators attached to cardboard boxes, wires, cotton 
balls, etc.), these artists immerse the space in a deep sonic sea 
that gently moves through pulsating timbral waves.  
 
Figure 1. 450 prepared pendulum motors on the wall by 
Zimoun and Pe Lang 
 
A direct homage to Russolo’s instruments is  La chambre de s 
machines: a project by a Canadian duo Nicolas Bernier and 
Martin Messier in which “ machines made of gears and cranks 
are manipulated to produce a sound construction at the 
crossroads of acoustics and electronics” [16]. The project is in 
fact a live act consisting of the duo and their mechanical noise 
instruments where “each performer approaches his app aratus 
like a technician” [17] (see Figure 2). 
 
 
Figure 2. La Chambre des machine by Nicolas Bernier and 
Martin Messier 
 
Both instruments are of course inspired by Russo lo’s 
intonarumori, and although they both generate sound physically 
and mechanically, the exclusive use of autonomy and 
mechatronics is not investigated here as it is in the artists’ solo 
projects. Bernier’s award -winning Frequencies (a) “is a sound 
performance combining the sound of mechanically triggered 
tuning forks with pure digital sound waves. The performer is 
triggering sequences from the computer, activating solenoids 
that hit the tuning forks with high precision. Streams of light 
burst in synchroni city with the forks, creating a not -quite-
minimal sound and light composition” [18]. Similarly, 
Messier’s Sewing Machine Orchestra  (see Figure 3)  is an 
audiovisual performance in which “computer processing 
transforms the functional s ounds of eight 1940s Singer sewing 
machines, mounted on stands, into a vivid, dancing weave of 
hums, whirrs, and beats, accompanied by suitably pulsating 
lights” [17]. The emphasis on the audiovi sual expressivity in 
these works is perhaps best explained by Fowler: “many of 
these mechanical instruments are clever gadgets and novelties –
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
474
–jewel boxes and the like ––intended for looks as much as for 
sound” [1]. 
 
Figure 3. Messier’s Sewing Machine Orchestra  
 
To summarize, even if we do draw a line to conceptually 
differentiate between the “mechatronic sound-object” trend that 
is rooted in Russolo’s The Art of Noises,  and the one devoted to 
the development of robotically augmented conven tional 
musical instruments, there still exists a strong connection 
between the two. After all, it cannot be denied that many of the 
technical developments of the “mechatronic sound-objects” 
trend have been induced by the intensive research and 
engineering that has been done on the works that, in the above 
classification, would fit among the “musical robotics” trend.       
4. RASPER 
The mechatronic sound -objects discussed above perhaps share 
an ideological ground with the modern laptop -based 
noise/glitch music. Regardless of the different mediums they 
employ, mechatronic sound -objects and glitch music both try ––
in some way ––to draw attention to the potential aesthetics of 
the “extra -musical” phenomena associated with the 
technologies they use, making “noise” acce ssible and part of 
the signal again 4. Mechatronic sound -objects accomplish this 
by emphasizing the bodily effect and the physicality of the 
noise production, using a significant degree of visual aid. On 
the other hand, a substantial portion of laptop -based glitch 
music uses pulse, beats, and grid -based rhythmic patterns as a 
framework to achieve such accessibility [20]. Using a hybrid of 
these two methodologies, Rasper is a new mechatronic noise -
intoner that somehow bridges the gap between the physically -
produced noise in works of mechatronic sound -object and the 
pulse-based digital noise of laptop -produced glitch music. It 
employs some basic mechatronic elements and converts their 
electromechanical energy into a “rasping” sound that is 
produced acoustically. The idea behind building Rasper was to 
bring the ignored and unwanted noises of the machine back to 
the domain of aural attention by regulating their irregularity 
through a rhythmic grid of pulses and metric rhythms, while 
preserving––and even highlighting––their physicality and 
corporality. Therefor e, mechatronics was chosen as the 
tool/mechanism to achieve the above objectives, considering 
that: 
1. Mechatronic machines are noisy in essence.  
2. They are perfectly capable of creating pulsating and 
recurring motions. 
                                                                    
4 In the eyes of information theory, noise is any information 
that is extraneous to the transmitting message [19].  
4.1 Design 
 
Figure 4. Rasper’s 3-D model 
As shown in Figure 4, Rasper  is comprised of a DC motor, a 
push solenoid, a 3D -printed plastic disk, a piece of spring steel, 
and an LED strip. These components are all held together in an 
open-faced enclosure made of clear acrylic (see Figure 5). As a 
result, all the parts, components, and the entire sound -
generating mechanism are completely visible. I n order to  
further boost the audiovisual expressivity, Rasper uses an array 
of LED strip,  which corresponds to the sound -generating unit, 
providing an immediate visual feedback to each aural event. 
The enclosure was designed using CAD and rapid prototyping 
workflow. 
 
 
Figure 5. Rasper 
 
The instrument’s sound -generation unit incorporates 
mechatronics and microcontroller programming  and the 
instrument is capable of functioning both automatically and 
interactively, i.e., with or without human real-time interference. 
Nevertheless, the sound generating mechanism itself was –– to 
some degree ––inspired by the on e used in several Russolo’s 
noise-intoners (e.g. Crackler). T he sound generating control 
system implements the two main principles that were used by  
his intonarumori:  
 
1. Controlling the speed of vibrations  
2. Controlling the tension    
 
Solenoid 
Spring steel 
DC motor 
LED strip 
Plastic disk 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
475
2      4     6      8     10    12     14    16    18   20   kHz  
In several of Russolo’s noise -intoners, the speed of vibrations 
was changed using a crank that was attached to a spinning disk, 
which was in contact with a string. The performer was in 
charge of the speed of string’s vibrations by turning the crank, 
while controlling the tension of the string by a lever, creating 
different tones and timbres.  In Rasper, the crank is replaced 
with a DC motor, the vibrating material––i.e. the string––with a 
small piece of spring steel, the lever with a solenoid, and the 
system is automated th rough microcontroller programming.  
The noise is produced when the spring steel makes contact with 
the spinning 3D -printed disk t hat is attached to the DC motor: 
as the solenoid pushes out and the sharp tip of the bent spring 
steel touches the spinning disk , it vibrates rapidly and generates 
a high frequency rasping sound  (see Figure 6).    
 
Figure 6. Noise-generating mechanism in Rasper (left) 
contrasted to the one used in a recent model of Russolo’s 
Crackler developed by New M usic Co-op5 (right).  
4.2 System Overview 
 
Figure 7. System Overview 
 
Figure 7 shows a flowchart of different parts of the system and 
demonstrates the process of sound production. A 12 V push 
solenoid is used to switch the contact bet ween the spring steel 
and the spinning disk on and off. Therefore, system’s rhythmic 
behavior––simple or sophisticated patterns, pulses, and pauses –
                                                                    
5 See www.newmusiccoop.org/index.php  (Retrieved on July 
31, 2013). 
–is determined by solenoid movements. The amount of force 
applied by the solenoid is the main factor in dete rmining the 
amplitude of each event, and modulation in the speed of 
rotation creates a timbral range and introduces a subtle and 
relative sense of variety to the pitch domain. The d isk’s 
revolutions are actuated by the rotary motion of the motor shaft, 
and the LED strip lights up the entire unit once there is an event 
(a contact between the spring steel and the disk). The 
luminosity of the LED strip corresponds to the loudness of each 
event.  The solenoid, the motor, and the LED strip are all 
controlled via  a microcontroller (an Arduino board) , driven  by 
a custom-designed PCB board that functions as an Arduino 
shield (see Figure 8). The board is capable of driving up to 16 
motors, solenoids, or LED strips once powered up by a 12V DC 
power supply. The code is  uploaded onto the Arduino board 
using Arduino programming. It is possible to interact with the 
instrument in two different modes:  
1. Client Mode: Flashing the Arduino board to a MIDI 
device using Hiduino firmware  [21]: Receiving 
MIDI messages from software/controller.  
2. Autonomous Mode: Uploading serial data onto the 
Arduino: Using generative algorithms  to create 
evolutionary patterns and generative compositions.  
 
Figure 8. Rasper’s driver board 
4.3 Evaluation 
The primary principle regarding the essence of sound 
production in these mechatronic instruments is to avoid a 
definite pitch and maintain the richness and noisiness of the 
signal. This is demonstrated in the figure below, where FFT 
analysis results of three different recordings of the instrument 
have been collected. These recordings varied in terms of the 
motor’s speed of rotation––i.e. the speed of vibrations ––and are 
ordered from a slow to a fast speed. 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Average FFT results of the recordings of Rasper 
at a slow, a medium, and a fast speed.  
2      4     6      8     10    12     14    16    18   20   kHz  
dB 
 
0 
 
-20 
 
-40 
 
-60 
 
-80 
 
-100 
2      4     6      8     10    12     14    16    18   20   kHz  
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
476
Figure 9 is of course a rough demonstration, e xtracted from 
average FFT analyse s of recordings of three different speeds, to 
negate the presence of a dominant pitch and verify the noisiness 
of the generated sound. Regardless of relatively different 
spectral distribution, there does not appear to be an y signs  of 
important peaks, periodicity, or harmonic distribution 6.  
 In a more detailed series of tests, a number of key feature 
extractions of the recordings of the instrument were complied 
in order to study the frequency domain characteristics of the 
instrument. During the recording process, in order to narrow 
down the study to frequency related features, the contact force 
between the vibrating spring steel and the spinning disk was 
kept constant by applying the same amount of power to the 
solenoid while  changing the speed of the disk’s rotations. 
Speed variation was achieved through applying different MIDI 
velocities to the motor. MIDI velocities less that 71 did not 
create a sufficient force to drive the motor as the solenoid’s 
contact was applied. Therefore, 29 recordings of different 
rotation speeds were collected by sweeping the MIDI velocities 
every two step s from 71 to 127. A small diaphragm cardioid 
condenser micro phone (Neumann KM 184) was used  to 
provide the  high-frequency response. Considering t he relative 
unpredictability and noisiness of the instrument, the feature 
extraction tests were carried out on average FFT data of one-
second-long recordings, with the following specifications:  
 
• Sample Rate: 44100 sample/s  
• Window Function: Hanning  
• Window Size: 1024 samples 
 
Each MIDI velocity value is therefore calculated as the average  
of approximately 43 samples (44100/1024 ≅ 43). 
 As demonstrated in the Figure 10, the spectral centroid and 
spectral roll- off graphs show the center of the mass and the 
power distribution of the audio signal in the high frequency 
domain. For the speeds extracted from  MIDI velocities higher 
than 90 , these features are limited within a relatively narrow 
band of high frequencies  (approximately between 11kHz and 
13kHz).   
 
Figure 10. Spectral Roll-Off and Spectral Centroid  
 
The zero-crossing graph displayed in Figure 11  can deliver a 
rough sense of the instrument’s pitch behavior. Again, except 
for the lower speeds ––where due to the inability of the sys tem 
                                                                    
6 Except for the local maxima in the middle of the slow graph, 
which is possibly due to the fact that at slow speeds the noise -
generating unit is relatively quiet and the sound of the motor 
buzzing becomes considerable.  
to create high amplitude vibrations, the sound of motor buzzing 
becomes considerable itself ––the number of zero -crossings is 
limited within a relatively narrow band of high frequencies. 
Although the audio signal is noisy and this number does not 
represent an absolute pitch, the  relatively unwavering number 
of zero- crossings at higher speeds can be interpreted as a 
“subtle sense of pitch ” that fluctuates between 11kHz and 
13kHz.  
Figure 11. Number of Zero-Crossings 
 
Lastly, the relative stability of the change of the audio signal in 
higher speeds can also be extracted from the spectral flux graph 
showed in Figure 12. As the speed goes higher, there can be 
noticed a threshold where the wavering flux of the s ignal is 
smoothed out. Therefore, for higher speeds, as the speed of the 
motor changes, the numeric derivative of the change of the 
audio signal becomes relatively consistent, i.e., the change is 
linear and somehow predictable.  
 
Figure 12. Spectral Flux 
 
The information extracted from these graphs verifies that: 
• Acoustically, the instrument is generating noise rather 
than pitches7. 
• The generated noise lies in the high frequency audio 
domain––especially for higher speeds.  
• Depending on the software settin gs specified by the 
user, relatively consistent results could be achieved  
                                                                    
7 Hermann Helmholtz argues that the differences between 
noises and musical tones are rooted in our aural perception, 
stating that musical tones are perceived as periodic, and 
noises are perceived as non-periodic motions [22]. 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
477
when working with MIDI velocities higher than a 
certain threshold.    
• Variations in the frequency of vibrations do not 
correspond to a significant or meaningful pitch 
behavior, but rather to a limited timbral variety.  
 
Considering that Rasper is a new instrument, the information 
provided by these kinds of analyses can be helpful for the 
users/composers to acquire a better understanding of the 
instrument.8  
5. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
This paper presents  a new mechatronic noise -intoner built to 
highlight the potential aesthetics of the mechanically produced 
noise and make the “extra -musical” accessible. In order to 
achieve this objective , an instrument was designed with the 
following strategies in mind:  
 
1. Structuring the noise rhythmically  
2. Flaunting the noise-production mechanism 
 
The instrument is a “noise” instrument and its pitch domain 
behavior is not of great consideration. However, its restricted 
variety of frequency range and timbre at higher speeds of 
rotation––where the more consistent results are achieved ––
might come as a limiting issue in certain compositional 
contexts or live-performances. Therefore, with respect to future 
works, the plan is to investigate the design and cons truction of 
other iterations of this  instrument in which different material 
and/or different vibrating mechanisms are used. Combining 
these different types of instruments will help broaden the 
resulting timbre  and frequency domains  and enrich the 
audiovisual expressivity . Considering the instruments’ inherent 
autonomy, it will be feasible to simultaneously engage multiple 
instruments in the format of an ensemble  with relatively wide 
timbral and frequency ranges : a mechatronic noise -ensemble 
that can be util ized in both interactive and automatic ––i.e. 
performance and installation ––modes.  
6. REFERENCES 
[1] C. B. Fowler, “The museum of music: A history of 
mechanical instruments,” Music Educ. J. , vol. 54, no. 2, 
pp. 45–49, 1967. 
[2] J. Murphy, A. Kapur, and D. Carnegie, “Musical 
Robotics in a Loudspeaker World: Developments in 
Alternative Approaches to Localization and 
Spatialization,” Leonardo Music J. , vol. 22 , pp. 41 –48, 
Jan. 2012. 
[3] E. Singer, J. Feddersen, C. Redmon, and B. Bowen, 
“LEMUR’s musical robots,” in Proceedings of the 2004 
conference on New interfaces for musical expression , 
2004, pp. 181–184. 
[4] E. Singer, K. Larke, and D. Bianciardi, “LEMUR 
GuitarBot: MIDI robotic string instrument,” in 
Proceedings of the 2003 conference on New interfaces 
for musical expression, 2003, pp. 188–191. 
[5] G. Weinberg and S. Driscoll, “Toward Robotic 
Musicianship,” Comput. Music J. , vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 28 –
45, Dec. 2006. 
[6] A. Kapur, M. Darling, D. Diakopoulos, J. W. Murphy, J. 
Hochenbaum, O. Vallis, and C. Bahn, “The machine 
orchestra: An ensemble of human laptop performers and 
                                                                    
8 Video documentation of Rasper can be found at the following 
URL: www.m-h-z.net/rasper 
robotic musical instruments,” Comput. Music J. , vol. 35, 
no. 4, pp. 49–63, 2011. 
[7] J. M urphy, J. McVay, A. Kapur, and D. Carnegie, 
“Designing and Building Expressive Robotic Guitars.”  
[8] A. Kapur, “A history of robotic musical instruments,” in 
Proceedings of the International Computer Music 
Conference, 2005, pp. 21–28. 
[9] A. Licht, B. Font ana, S. Roden, J. Dubuffet, A. Burr, C. 
Curtis, B. Gál, and D. A. Monsters, Sound art: Beyond 
music, between categories . Rizzoli International 
Publications, 2007. 
[10] L. Russolo and B. Brown, The art of noises , vol. 156. 
Pendragon Press New York, 1986.  
[11] G.-W. Raes, “A Personal Story of Music and 
Technologies,” Leonardo Music J. , vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 29 –
35, Jan. 1992. 
[12] A. Focke and Trimpin, Trimpin: contraptions for art and 
sound. Seattle, Wash.  : Univ. of Washington Press, 
2011. 
[13] J. Strouse, “Mus ic of the Spheres,” in Trimpin: 
contraptions for art and sound , Seattle, Wash.: Univ. of 
Washington Press, 2011.  
[14] G. Monahan, “Gordon Monahan - Multiple Machine 
Matrix - Sound Installation,” www.gordonmonahan.com .  
[15] P. Garland, “Gordon Monahan: Mac hines and the 
Sounds That Give Them Life,” www.gordonmonahan 
.com, 1993. 
[16] Nicolas Bernier and Martin Messier, “La chambre de s 
machines,” http://www.lachambredesmachines.com/ .  
[17] “Bernier and Messier.” Available: www.musicworks.ca/  
featured-article/featured-article/bernier-and-messier. 
[Accessed: 20-Aug-2013]. 
[18] Nicolas Bernier, “Frequencies (a),” www.nicolasbernier. 
com. 
[19] C. E. Shannon and W. Weaver, “The mathematical 
theory of communication (Urbana, IL,” Univ. Ill. Press , 
vol. 19, no. 7, p. 1, 1949. 
[20] M. H. Zareei, A. Kapur, and D.  A. Carneigie, “Noise on 
the Grid: Rhythmic Pulse in Experimental and 
Electronci Noise Music,” in Proceedings of the 
International Computer Music Conference, Perth, 
Australia, 2013. 
[21] D. Diakopoulos and A. Kapu r, “HIDUINO: A firmware 
for building driverless USB- MIDI devices using the 
Arduino microcontroller,” in Proceedings of the 
International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical 
Expression, Oslo, Norway , 2011. 
[22] H. L. Helmholtz, On the Sensations of Ton e as a 
Physiological Basis for the Theory of Music . Cambridge 
University Press, 2009.  
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
478