CHIMAERA - The Poly-Magneto-Phonic Theremin -
An Expressive Touch-Less Hall-Effect Sensor Array
Hanspeter Portner
Open Music Kontrollers
Altachenring 5, 4805 Brittnau, Switzerland
dev@open-music-kontrollers.ch
ABSTRACT
The Chimaera is a touch-less, expressive, polyphonic and
electronic music controller based on magnetic ﬁeld sensing.
An array of linear hall-eﬀect sensors and their vicinity make
up a continuous 2D interaction space. The sensors are ex-
cited with Neodymium magnets worn on ﬁngers. The device
continuously tracks position and vicinity of multiple present
magnets along the sensor array to produce event signals ac-
cordingly. Apart from the two positional signals, an event
also carries the magnetic ﬁeld polarization, a unique identi-
ﬁer and group association. We like to think of it as a mixed
analog/digital oﬀspring of theremin and trautonium. These
general-purpose event signals are transmitted and eventu-
ally translated to musical events according to custom map-
pings on a host system.
With its touch-less control (no friction), high update rates
(2-4kHz), its quasi-continuous spatial resolution and its low-
latency ( <1 ms), the Chimaera can react to most subtle
motions instantaneously and allows for a highly dynamic
and expressive play. Its open source design additionally
gives the user all possibilities to further tune hardware and
ﬁrmware to his or her needs. TheChimaera is network-
oriented and conﬁgured with and communicated by Open
Sound Control, which makes it straight-forward to integrate
into any setup.
Keywords
Chimaera, touch-less, polyphonic, hall-eﬀect, theremin.
1. INTRODUCTION
The main design goals of theChimaera were to have a versa-
tile, easy tunable and modiﬁable electronic music controller
that would give the player optimal control on musical ex-
pression. As a prerequisite for an expressive play there is
the need to have low-latency access to highly resolved mod-
ulation of pitch and timbre of generated sounds and their
temporal progression. Pitch and timbre thus would be con-
trollable over continuous ranges with high temporal resolu-
tion. Pitch needing a ﬁner control would require a higher
resolution and entail a linear controller design.
In its design phase, we required the music controller to be
fully hackable, designed for DIY production, entirely based
on and released as open source hardware. Setup and com-
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’14,June 30 – July 03, 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
munication would be driver-less and based on present net-
working infrastructure. A combination of distance-sensing
(theremin-like [10]) and position-sensing (trautonium-like
[8] and ribbon-like [6]) mechanisms served as archetypes for
a new digital oﬀspring.
For its musicality, it would be highly sensitive and respon-
sive, accomplished with fast responding sensors running at
high update rates (2-4kHz) and low latency (<1ms). We re-
quired it to be as expressive as the violin, the theremin and
the trautonium while seamlessly being integrable into to-
days schemes of digital audio synthesis. It would be playable
with ﬁngers, as those are among the body parts that we have
a very ﬁne grained control on and it would be touch-less and
thus circumvent complicating hardware manufacturing.
The design we have come up with that fulﬁlled all our
prerequisites is the Chimaera - the poly-magneto-phonic
theremin - an expressive touch-less hall-eﬀect sensor array.
It is as sensor array that is excitable by an arbitrary num-
ber of manually actuated magnetic ﬁelds. Depending on
where the magnetic ﬁelds are located along the array and
how near they are to the latter, the device outputs continu-
ous positional event signals which can ﬂexibly be mapped to
expressive musical events on a host to drive sound synthesis.
2. DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS
2.1 Interaction
Up to 160 linear hall-eﬀect sensors aligned on a straight
line form the sensory part of the device. Each sensor senses
its surrounding magnetic ﬁeld and outputs a linearly cor-
responding analog signal [7]. Manually actuated perma-
nent magnets (Neodymium) act as constant mobile mag-
netic ﬁeld sources. In our design, each hall-eﬀect sensor
thus acts as a miniature theremin and is used for distance-
sensing (Fig. 1). Alternative multi sensor theremin-like
instruments have previously been built, e.g. with infrared
sensors [2]. However, magnetic ﬁeld sensing has advantages
over light and capacitive sensing as it is less susceptible to
the surrounding electromagnetic spectrum due to the short-
ranged action radius and relative strength of permanent
magnets. Linear hall-eﬀect sensors have previously been
shown to be practical in building music controllers [3]. Con-
trasting to other touch-less motion-sensing controllers [11]
which are based on moving sensors in a stationary medium
(e.g. gravity), theChimaera uses stationary sensors with
mobile actuators. As the sensors are narrowly spaced apart,
a single magnetic ﬁeld source is sensed by several adjacent
sensors. With continuous tracking and inter-sensor inter-
polation, vicinity of the magnet to sensors and its exact
location along the array can be estimated to a high accu-
racy (< 1
100 of inter-sensor distance). The device thus out-
puts two positional signals for each magnetic ﬁeld source:
positionx and vicinity y. As sensors are sampled individ-
ually, multiple magnets can be tracked concurrently. With
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
501
magnets worn on ﬁngers (magnetic plectrum) as sources of
magnetic ﬁelds and varied in their position along and vicin-
ity to the sensor array, the player has touch-less control
over a continuous 2D space eventually mapped to a musical
expression scheme.
−500
Figure 1: Raw hall-eﬀect sensor dump: Response of two
diﬀerently polarized Neodymium magnets (144 sensors).
2.2 Hardware
The hardware of the Chimaera consists of two types of
printed circuit boards and an enclosure. Multiple sensor
units are daisy-chained to form the sensor array and con-
nected to a single digital signal processing (DSP) unit.
2.2.1 Sensor unit
A single sensor unit consists of 16 linear hall-eﬀect sensors
spaced 5mm apart and routed to a single output through a
16:1 multiplexer which is switched by the DSP unit. Down-
stream the multiplexer, the analog signal runs through an
ampliﬁcation circuitry (Fig. 2). To create an equally re-
sponding continuous sensor array, all units need equal tun-
ing at their trim potentiometers RV1-RV3.
Figure 2: Sensor unit ampliﬁcation circuitry.
RV3 is a voltage divider to set reference voltageVref from
Vee to Vcc. Sensors respond to both north and south polar-
ized magnetic ﬁelds and output ∼1
2 of their input voltage
(quiescent output) in a zero magnetic ﬁeld. In a south po-
larized magnetic ﬁeld, voltage linearly approaches Vcc and
Vee in a north polarized one. Reference voltage Vref is set
to the mean quiescent voltage of all 16 sensors.
RV1 is a varistor and sets the ampliﬁcation factor in con-
junction with resistor R1. The changeable ampliﬁcation fac-
tor A = 1 + RV1
R1
accommodates usage of diﬀerent magnetic
ﬁeld strengths.
RV2 attenuates the signal before handing it over to the
DSP unit, a necessity to talk to circuitry running at lower
voltages than the sensor unit.
2.2.2 Digital signal processing (DSP) unit
The DSP unit is a mixed-signal board and handles sensor
read out, event detection and host communication. It is
based on an ARM Cortex M4 microcontroller in combina-
tion with a hardwired 100Mbit IPv4/PHY chip taking care
of all low-level networking protocols via UDP/TCP.
The boards analog part features 10 analog inputs pro-
viding connection points for the sensor units, leading to
a maximally possible array of 160 sensors. Those analog
inputs connect directly to three in parallel running 12bit
analog-to-digital converters.
2.2.3 Enclosure
The enclosure (Fig. 3) was designed with diﬀerent playing
styles in mind: it can be put ﬂat on a table like a keyboard,
strapped around like a guitar or used standing upright like
a cello. For its ﬁngered playing style we chose wood for
an agreeable touch. The circuitry is embedded in a base
rib construction wrapped with a kerf-bent plywood sheet
giving a robust, ultra-light construction with rounded edges.
The underlying sensors are marked with engravings to ease
visual orientation.
Figure 3: Beech enclosure with guitar strap (128 sensors).
2.3 Firmware
2.3.1 Distance - magnetic ﬁeld relationship
The strength of magnetic ﬁeld B of a permanent magnet
along its magnetization axis decreases with increasing dis-
tanced and follows an inverse-cube relationship based on
an ideal dipole [7]. The decrease is non-linear dependent on
material and physical form.
As we are interested in how near the magnet is to a sensor,
we prefer the concept of vicinity (y n = 1 −d). Eqn. 1
adds room for deviations from an ideal dipole and deﬁnes
normalized vicinityyn based on normalized magnetic ﬁeld
Bn. Vicinity is mapped continuously from [0 −1]. y = 0
corresponds to threshold magnetic ﬁeld Bmin, y = 1 in turn
to the maximal to expect magnetic ﬁeld Bmax. Bn is the
measured absolute magnetic ﬁeld B normalized in respect
to the two extremes (Eqn. 2).
The parameters of the relationship can vary considerably
for diﬀerent types of permanent magnets. The Chimaera
therefore needs a ﬁrst calibration step done with a ﬁve point
least squares ﬁt (Fig. 4a) with points (0, 0), (b1, y1), (b2, y2),
(b3, y3) and (1 , 1) leading to an analytical solution for the
three function parameters c0, c1, c2 (Eqn. 3,4). The ﬁtted
distance-function then is applied to the sampled magnetic
ﬁeld strength to estimate the corresponding distance in real-
time.
yn = c0 ·
3√
Bn + c1 ·
√
Bn + c2 ·Bn (1)
Bn = B −Bmin
Bmax −Bmin
(2)
Bn =




0 0 0
3√
b1
√b1 b1
3√b2
√b2 b2
3√b3
√b3 b3
1 1 1




, Yn =



0
y1
y2
y3
1


 (3)
C =


c0
c1
c2

= (BT
n ·Bn)−1 ·BT
n·Yn (4)
2.3.2 Sensor comparability
An ideal linear hall-eﬀect sensor outputs a voltage Vs lin-
early dependent on its sensitivity S and magnetic ﬁeld B
oﬀset by quiescent voltage output Vq (Eqn. 5). However,
both Vq and S can vary considerably between sensors due to
manufacturing processes [7]. For a successful position and
distance interpolation along the sensor array, sensor val-
ues must be comparable. We thus need another calibration
across sensors to be applied in a normalization step after
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
502
●
●
●
●
●
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
B n  (rel. magnetic field)
y n  (rel. vicinity)
(a)
0.210 0.220 0.230 0.240
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
x n  (rel. position)
y n  (rel. vicinity)
● (b)
Figure 4: (a) Example distance magnetic ﬁeld relationship
(points) and its least-squares ﬁt (line). (b) Cubic interpo-
lation of positionxn and vicinity yn over four normalized
adjacent sensor values with Catmull-Rom splines [1].
sensor read out - a very important concept of Chimaera in-
ner workings. Ampliﬁcation of the voltage signal also needs
consideration as it varies across individual sensor units.
Ampliﬁed voltage output Vo depends on raw sensor volt-
age Vs, reference voltageVr and ampliﬁcation factorA (Eqn.
6, Fig. 2). Vo and magnet vicinity are the only variables we
can measure directly, all others have to be deduced in the
sensor comparability calibration routine. In the case of no
magnetic ﬁeld (B = 0), we can measure ampliﬁed quiescent
voltage Voq (Eqn. 7) of each sensor from which we can solve
for Vq and rewrite Vo (Eqn. 8).
Vs = Vq + S ·B (5)
Vo = Vr + (Vs −Vr) ·A (6)
Voq = Vr + (Vq −Vr) ·A (7)
Vo = Voq + A ·S ·B (8)
We deﬁne a new single parameter AS = A ·S which we
calculate over both ﬁeld polarizations for a higher robust-
ness. Output voltagesVo1, Vo2 (Eqns. 9-10) are measured
for an arbitrary absolute magnetic ﬁeld strength ( |B| =
|B1|= |B2|), once south polarized and once north polar-
ized (B2 = −B1). With measured Voq at B = 0 and Vo1, Vo2
at the arbitrary |B|, we can estimate AS for each individual
sensor (Eqn. 11).
Vo1 = Voq + AS ·B1 (9)
Vo2 = Voq + AS ·B2 (10)
AS = Voq ·(Vo1 −Vo2)
|B|·(Vo1 + Vo2) (11)
|B|cannot be measured directly, instead we approximate
it numerically with the inverse of the previously calibrated
distance - magnetic ﬁeld relationship (Eqn. 1, Fig. 4a).|B|
ultimately depends on three constantsVoq, U (Eqn. 12) and
W (Eqn. 13). Voq and U are speciﬁc to each sensor, W is
constant for the whole sensor array. Thus we directly get
from raw sensor voltage outputVo over normalized magnetic
ﬁeld strength Bn (Eqn. 14) to normalized vicinity yn (Eqn.
1). With vicinities being comparable over the whole sensor
array, only now we are able to interpolate positionxn of the
magnets along the array.
U = (AS ·(Bmax −Bmin))−1 (12)
W = Bmin ·(Bmax −Bmin)−1 (13)
Bn = (V o −Voq) ·U −W (14)
2.3.3 Blob event handling
A blob represents a recognized magnetic permanent mag-
net that is to be tracked over space and time. Blob event
handling is divided into the following stages:
Magnetic ﬂux polarity Firstly, we discriminate be-
tween the polarities of the potentially present magnetic ﬁeld
sources. For each raw sensor read outVo we subtract its
previously calibrated quiescent value Voq. The sign of the
diﬀerence corresponds to the polarity, the absolute value
|Vo −Voq|in turn to the strength of the magnetic ﬁeld.
Area of interest After each scan of the whole sensor
array, areas of interest are marked on the array where sensor
values exceed their thresholdBmin. The rest of the sensor
values are not of interest for further steps.
Blob detection A peak in the sensor read out marks
an individual magnetic ﬁeld source and is located around a
sensor with an absolute value greater than the values of a
given number of adjacent sensors in the same area of interest
(Fig. 4b).
Blob interpolation As always more than one sensor is
excited by an individual magnetic ﬁeld source, its real po-
sition can be deciphered by interpolation around the peak
sensor. We ﬁt linear, quadratic, cubic or spline curves (Eqn.
15, Fig. 4b) through adjacent sensor values and ﬁnd the cur-
rent positionXn along the sensor array and vicinity Yn by
ﬁnding the cross point of the curve’s derivative (Eqn. 16).
yn(xn) =
1,2,3∑
j=0
xj
n ·mj (15)
yn(Xn) = Yn , ∂yn(Xn)
∂xn
= 0 (16)
Group association Each blob additionally gets aﬃli-
ated to a group deﬁned by a range [ xmin −xmax] on the
sensor array and magnetic ﬁeld polarity south, north or
both. Only blobs with a position in the range of - and a
polarity corresponding to - a given group will be associated
with the latter. Groups may overlap but a given blob can
only be part of one group at a time.
Blob tracking To track blobs over time, we need to as-
sociate identiﬁed blobs in the current iteration step to blobs
found in previous iteration steps to decipher whether blobs
have newly appeared, need updating or have disappeared.
To link current blobs to previous blobs they are matched
by position on the sensor array across iteration steps. Each
new blob gets a unique ID, which persists over time as long
as the blobs position and ﬁeld polarity can be linked to itself
in a previous iteration step.
Out of the blob tracking we get a stream of event signals:
When a new blob has appeared, an ON event is triggered.
When a blob was present in a previous iteration step, aSET
event is triggered to update the blobs position and vicinity.
When a blob has disappeared, anOFF event is triggered.
All event signals will be triggered with a complete set of
current blob parameters including polarity (south or north)
and group association.
2.4 Communication
Networking technology in a zero conﬁguration setup [9] has
advantages in respect to long-distance transmission, oper-
ating system independence and inherent ability for network
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
503
performances. We thus use the Open Sound Control (OSC)
speciﬁcation [12] via UDP/TCP as low-level communica-
tion layer. UDP is preferable in simple setups due to its
better real-time performance, whereas we prefer TCP in
more complex and/or lossy (e.g. wireless) setups.
Depending on the robustness of the network connection
we provide diﬀerent higher-level protocols built on top of
OSC. Those are implemented as output engines of the blob-
tracking procedure. An arbitrary amount of engines can be
active concurrently as they are aggregated into one single
timestamped OSC bundle after each iteration step. Time
synchronization to the host is based on the precision time
protocol [4]. The user can implement custom protocols if
the existing ones should not ﬁt his or her needs. As main
protocol for lossy connections, we use theTUIO speciﬁca-
tion [5] because it is widely used and insusceptible to lost
network packets. Apart from a direct serialization of the
event stream and standard MIDI via OSC on lossless com-
munication channels, the device also supports a raw sensor
dump for further manual processing.
2.5 Musicality
The receiving host can reconstruct which blobs have ap-
peared, disappeared or need updating. These polyphonic
event signals can be combined in any way possible, it is up
to the host to map them to musical events.
A trivial mapping approach e.g. is to steer one sound
unit per blob and initiate it at an ON event, update its
properties at each SET event and stop the unit at an OFF
event. Position having a higher resolution than vicinity is
predestined to map to pitch. The event stream thus can
directly be translated to MIDI using position mapped to
note and pitch bend and vicinity mapped to MIDI controller
events (volume, modulation, polyphonic after touch, . . . ).
The two continuous signals need not be mapped directly
to a control parameter though, we can additionally derive
velocity and acceleration signals to derive augmented map-
pings or feed gestural responders. By aggregating multiple
blobs into compounds, a single sound unit can be controlled
with multiple degrees of freedom, giving the player an even
more ﬁne grained control on musical expression.
The high spatial and temporal resolution make it pos-
sible to play a subtle vibrato and tremolo and intermix a
percussive play with continuous (pitch) slides.
2.6 Ergonomy
For an expressive and melodic play, we prefer to play touch-
less by hovering along and perpendicular to the sensor array
similar to the theremin play, just with an additional dimen-
sion and polyphony. When playing percussive, it helps to
have a haptic feedback. To better coordinate rhythmic play,
we thus tap on the surface and adjust magnet vicinity by
ﬁnger curvature. While tapping, due to the touch-less de-
sign, events and thus sound synthesis are triggered before
reaching the surface, but we did not ﬁnd this to be distract-
ing and barely noticeable as the eﬀect is eventually oﬀset
by network and audio delays.
The device needs some practice to master. The continu-
ous scale demands a constant feedback between hearing and
positional micro adjustments. Muscle memory needs to be
trained like with fretless string instruments and coordina-
tion of multiple magnets even more so.
We consider two plectra as the maximum for one hand
and best to be worn on ﬁngers not adjacent to each other
as magnets tend to stick together. Although both magnets
have two degrees of freedom, the second one will be reduced
in its freedom to move along the sensor array as ﬁngers
can only be stretched apart for a ﬁxed distance and the
muscles involved usually are not well trained. The absolute
positional signal of the second magnet thus is of minor use,
it makes more sense to use its position relative to the ﬁrst
magnet instead. Two magnets on one hand can also be
combined to form a unit to decipher position, vicinity and
angle of the whole hand. Four concurrent plectra for a single
player with eight degrees of freedom are thus feasible with
the current design.
3. CONCLUSIONS
The Chimaera is an open, expressive, electronic music con-
troller combining both distance-sensing (theremin-like) and
touch-less position-sensing (trautonium-like) with a fully
digitized, portable, network-ready event output stream suit-
able for a dynamic and expressive play. By freely combin-
ing the polyphonic event signals, the player can create aug-
mented, multi dimensional musical mappings.
Our design could be extended to a third dimension by
interpolating across at least three parallel sensor arrays to
gain an additional degree of freedom per plectrum.
4. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank LeafLabs for their open hardware and software
designs this project is based on and our beloved ones for
their endless patience.
5. REFERENCES
[1] E. Catmull and R. Rom. A class of local interpolating
splines. Computer aided geometric design , 74:317–326,
1974.
[2] I. Franco. The AirStick: a free-gesture controller
using infrared sensing. In Proceedings of NIME’05,
pages 248–249, Singapore, 2005.
[3] L. Haken, E. Tellman, and P. Wolfe. An indiscrete
music keyboard. Computer Music Journal ,
22(1):30–48, 1998.
[4] IEEE Std 1588-2008. IEEE standard for a precision
clock synchronization protocol for networked
measurement and control systems, 2008.
[5] M. Kaltenbrunner, T. Bovermann, R. Bencina, and
E. Costanza. TUIO - a protocol for table based
tangible user interfaces. InProceedings of the
Workshop on Gesture in Human-Computer
Interaction and Simulation, Vannes, 2005.
[6] J. Paradiso. Electronic music: new ways to play.
IEEE Spectrum, 34(12):18–30, 1997.
[7] E. Ramsden. Hall-Eﬀect Sensors: Theory and
Application. Newnes, 2011.
[8] O. Sala. Experimentelle und theoretische grundlagen
des trautoniums. Frequenz, 3(1):13–19, 1949.
[9] D. H. Steinberg and S. Cheshire. Zero conﬁguration
networking: The deﬁnitive guide . O’reilly, 2010.
[10] L. Theremin. Method of and apparatus for the
generation of sounds, 1928. Patent. US1661058 A.
[11] G. Vigliensoni and M. M. Wanderley. A quantitative
comparison of position trackers for the development
of a touch-less musical interface. In Proceedings of
NIME’12, Vancouver, 2012.
[12] M. Wright. Open sound control: an enabling
technology for musical networking. Organised Sound,
10(03):193–200, 2005.
APPENDIX
The Chimaera is open source hardware released under CERN
OHL v.1.2. http://open-music-kontrollers.ch/chimaera/
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
504