Mobile Clavier: New Music Keyboard
for Flexible Key Transpose
Y oshinari TAKEGAWA
Osaka University, Japan
takegawa@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp
Masahiko TSUKAMOTO
Kobe University, Japan
tuka@kobe-u.ac.jp
Tsutomu TERADA
Osaka University, Japan
tsutomu@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp
Shojiro NISHIO
Osaka University, Japan
nishio@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp
ABSTRACT
Musical performers need to show oﬀ their virtuosity for self-
expression and communicate with other people. Therefore,
they are prepared to perform at any time and anywhere.
However, a musical keyboard of 88 keys is too large and
too heavy to carry around. When a portable keyboard that
is suitable for carrying around is played over a wide range,
the notes being played frequently cause the diapason of the
keyboard to protrude. It is common to use Key Transpose
in conventional portable keyboards, which shifts the diapa-
son of the keyboard. However, this function creates several
problems such as the feeling of discomfort from the mis-
alignment between the keying positions and their output
sounds. Therefore, t he goal of our study is to construct
Mobile Clavier, which enables the diapason to be changed
smoothly. Mobile Clavier resolves the problems with Key
Transpose by having black keys inserted between any two
side-by-side white keys. This paper also discusses how eﬀec-
tive Mobile Clavier was in an experiment conducted using
professional pianists. We can play music at any time and
anywhere with Mobile Clavier.
Keywords
Portable keyboard, Additional black keys, Diapason change
1. INTRODUCTION
Musical performers need to show oﬀ their virtuosity for
self-expression and communicate with other people. There-
fore, communication through music is encouraged if they can
perform not only in ﬁxed places, such as concert halls and
live halls, but anywhere outside, such as on streets and in
parks. We propose mobile electronic musical instruments we
developed that enable musicians to play music at any time
and anywhere[1]. However, many instruments are still too
large and heavy to carry. Portable instruments, on the other
hand, that are suitable for carrying, have several limitations
such as the narrow range of the diapason.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME07,June 7-9, 2007,New Y ork, NY
Copyright 2007 Copyright remains with the author(s).
Figure 1: Mobile Clavier
We focused on portable keyboards in this research that
are suitable for carrying. When we use such portable key-
boards to play music that has a wide diapason range, the
notes being played frequently cause the diapason of the key-
board to protrude. It is common to use Key Transpose in
conventional portable keyboards, which is a function to shift
the diapason of the keyboard. However, this function suﬀers
from several problems, such as the feeling of dis-comfortable
from the misalignments between keying positions and their
output sounds, the diﬃculty in understanding the note set
for each key, and the complexity of diapason changes.
Therefore, the goal of our study is to construct Mobile
Clavier, which enables the diapason to be changed smoothly,
making good use of the techniques acquired from conven-
tional keyboards. It solves problems with Key Transpose
by having black keys inserted between any two side-by-side
white keys. The remainder of this paper is organized as fol-
lows. Section 2 explains the design of Mobile Clavier, and
Section 3 describes its implementation. Section 4 describes
our evaluation and related work. Finally, Section 5 presents
conclusions and our plans for future studies.
2. DESIGN
2.1 Diapason-change Functions
We generally use Key Transpose and Octave Shift for play-
ing notes that extend beyond the diapason range of the key-
board. Key Transpose slides the diapason by halftones with
the equipment on the keyboard. If users set “Key Trans-
pose + 2”, the relations between all keys and their output
sounds are those shown in Figure 2. Octave Shift slides the
diapason by octaves.
Key Transpose suﬀers from problems. First, it creates
feeling of dis-comfort from the misalignment between the
keying position and its output sounds. A musician with per-
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
82
C# D#
DEF
F#
GC
G# A#
AHC
D# F
EF #G
G#
AD
A# C
HC #D
Key Transpose + 2
Figure 2: Change in sound through Key Transpose
C# D#
D E F
F#
GC
G#A #
AB C
N
U
L
L
N
U
L
L
D#
E FG
G#
AD
A#
B CD
N
U
L
L
N
U
L
L
F# C#
Key Transpose + 2
Figure 3: Key Transpose in Mobile Clavier
fect pitch feels special dis-comfort due to this misalignment.
Therefore, musicians cannot play smoothly because of this
dis-comfort. The second problem is that we cannot under-
stand note sets of keys. This problem stands out especially
when musicians frequently change the diapason. Finally,
they cannot immediately change to the diapason they want
because Key Transpose is not supposed to be frequently used
when music is being played. Although Octave Shift does not
encounter the ﬁrst and second problems, on the other hand,
it increases the frequency of transpose operations.
2.2 Additional Black Keys
We propose Mobile Clavier to resolve these problems, which
is a compact keyboard that was black keys inserted between
any two side-by-side white keys, as shown in Figure 3. More-
over, Mobile Clavier has NULL notes added to the deﬁnition
of the 12-note scale, which we deﬁne as silent notes. The
NULL notes are placed between the E and F notes, and
between H and C notes, called “NULL keys”.
For example, when a user operates “Key Transpose + 2”
from the state at the top of Figure 3, the assignment of keys
changes to the state at the bottom of the ﬁgure. If there
were no NULL keys in Figure 3, the keys would be arranged
like on conventional keyboards which are laid out with the D
note on the left. The misalignment between keying positions
and their output sounds is removed in this way.
One unit of Key Transpose in Mobile Clavier is a natural
tone, because if we had allowed a halftone unit, all black
notes would be assigned to white keys and all white notes
would be assigned to black keys.
Musicians must be able to recognize the position of NULL
MIDI Messages
Note On/Off
Footpedal
Mouse
(moving sensor)
PIC16F873
Information on 
diapason 
changes
Information on diapason changes
Information of 
diapason 
changes
Figure 4: System structure
keys visually to play notes smoothly. Therefore, we propose
that NULL keys are lit up in diﬀerent colors from the others.
In this way, we can understand the note sets of all keys.
2.3 Diapason Changes
Since conventional interfaces achieve Key Transpose by
halftones or octaves, it is diﬃcult for musicians to change the
required diapason quickly. Therefore, they have to stop per-
forming to do this. Additionally, the more portable the key-
boards, the more frequent the number of diapason changes.
We propose hardware and software approaches to diapa-
son changes operation without interrupting musical perfor-
mances. The hardware solution uses buttons mounted on
the keyboard. The software solution enables musicians to
preset points to change the diapason. When the piece being
performed reaches these given points, the system automat-
ically changes the diapason. The advantage of the software
solution is that musicians do not have to learn additional
operations to change the diapason. However, they cannot
change it freely, and the audience cannot understand how
the diapason is changed visually. We therefore focused on
the hardware approach in our study. We propose the follow-
ing four approaches to changing the diapason:
1. Keyboard equipment
A keyboard generally has several items of equipment, such as
switches and wheels. We can use these as part of an interface
to change the diapason. Musicians do not need to have
new hardware to change the diapason with this method.
However, if there is too great a distance between keys and
the equipment, musicians has to remove their hands from
the keys and stretch their arms to reach the equipment to
change the diapason.
2. NULL key
We can use NULL keys to change the diapason. Musicians
can change it without removing their hands from the key-
board with this method. Since the positions of the NULL
keys change frequently on the other hand, it is diﬃcult for
musicians to change the diapason.
3. Foot device
We can use a foot device, such as a foot mouse or a foot
controller. Although they enable smoother operation, users
must carry these devices around.
4. Sensor
We attached a movement sensor to the keyboard. When
the musician moves the keyboard itself to the right or left,
the diapason of the keyboard changes higher or lower. This
method does not require any hardware to be carried around,
and we can change the diapason intuitively while using both
hands. The sensor on the keyboard, on the other hand,
needs to be suﬃciently accurate and the area for using it is
restricted to an even surface.
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
83
ON OFFOFF
NULL
Key
Figure 5: Completely lit up black keys
3. IMPLEMENTATION
We implemented a prototype of Mobile Clavier using Roland’s
OXYGEN8 as the basic keyboard. OXYGEN8 is equipped
with 25 full-size keys and 8 assignable rotary controllers that
are assigned diﬀerent MIDI pa rameters. Figure 4 outlines
the structure of the prototype system.
The interface to change the diapason, such as the NULL
keys and movement sensor, sends the information for chang-
ing the diapason to the PC.
The PC sends then the lighting information to a pro-
grammable integrated circuit (PIC) microcomputer via se-
rial communication. The PIC controls the lighting for the
black keys. The software on the PC was programmed with
Microsoft Visual C++ 6.0 on Windows XP, and the software
on the PIC was programmed in C language on Microchip
Technology’s MPLAB.
3.1 Additional Black Keys
Since we can easily detach keys and attach them to OXY-
GEN8, we detached all keys at once and laid out white key
and black key in turn. The total number of keys was as
the same as it was before. There is a photograph of Mobile
Clavier in Figure 1.
An octave in the prototype is wider than that on conven-
tional keyboards, and there is a space between the white
keys, because the prototype has two newly black keys in-
serted into the conventional octave. As a result, when feel-
ing playing the prototype is diﬀerent to that when playing
conventional keyboards. Although novices play some incor-
rect notes, they eventually solve these problems by feeling.
This problem did not occur on the next version of the pro-
totype, which had additional black keys inserted with the
same octave range the conventional keyboards.
We need a distinct method of distinguishing NULL keys
from other black keys. We created clear black keys of silicon
resin (Figure 5) for the prototype. The sides and bottoms
of the clear black keys were black, and white LEDs were
inserted in the clear black keys. The NULL keys become
white when the LEDs lit up.
3.2 Diapason Changes
We implemented the diapason changes explained in Sec-
tion 2.4. In this section, we will explain the implementation
of the foot controller, which can make good use of the tech-
niques acquired on conventional keyboards. We use Rol-
land’s GFC-50 as the foot controller. It has ﬁve pedals and
one shift switch mounted that enable a maximum of 10 di-
apason change patterns to be set. Although it took some
time to adjust the changes, we could change it smoothly
Table 1: Procedure for experiment
No
 Content
1
 Play sub instrument. 1st Full Execution
2
 Play main instrument. 1st Full Execution
3
 Train main instrument. Practice
4
 Play main instrument. 2nd Full Execution.
5
 Train main instrument. Practice
6
 Play main instrument. 3rd Full Execution
even while using both hands.
4. EVALUATION
We evaluated the availability of the Mobile Clavier through
subjective evaluation by the ﬁrst author and an objective
evaluation by six pianists.
4.1 Subjective Evaluation
The ﬁrst author practiced and played several pieces of
music with the prototype. He has been playing the piano
for over twenty years. He can also play these pieces with
acoustic pianos.
This paper reports the usability of Mobile Clavier based
on BWV846 (Figure 6) composed by J. S. Bach. The width
of the diapason for the prototype is one octave and ﬁve de-
grees as the prototype has twenty-ﬁve keys. The width of the
diapason for BWV846, on the other hand, is three octaves
and four degrees, more than twice that of the prototype.
Figure 6 shows the musical score for BWV846. The num-
bers in the score are the pedal numbers for GFC-50. The
player pushes the foot pedal at the numbered point in the
score1 . Additionally, the top left of Figure 6 shows the pedal
conﬁguration for this score. “Up number” means that the
conventional diapason set in the prototype becomes a higher
“diatonic *number”. For example, when the musician en-
gages “Up 1” at the top of Figure 3, the notes set for all
keys become those at the bottom of the ﬁgure.
The test subject took sixty minutes to acquire the ability
to play BWV846 in allegro, which is directed in the score.
Moreover, the more he practiced and familiarized himself
with the prototype, the more he solved the problem with
octave width.
However, when he was unfamiliarize with the prototype,
serious problems occurred with the timing of pedals and
their mis-selection. The timing of pedals with Mobile Clavier
is diﬀerent to the pedalling of an acoustic piano, because pi-
anists generally only use two pedals (damper and soft pedal).
He concentrated on operating the pedals and neglected his
keying to avoid making mistakes while getting used to op-
erating the pedal.
When he had familiarized himself with the prototype, he
could improvise and calculate the amount of shift in pitch
in real-time.
4.2 Objective Evaluation
We did an experiment where pianists evaluated Mobile
Clavier. We examined the ease of use in the early stages and
the changes in the degree of progress in operating the Key
Transpose of Mobile Clavier compared with a conventional
portable keyboard.
4.2.1 Experimental Procedure
1You can see a demonstration video at
http://www-nishio.ise.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp/˜takegawa/
DownLoad/MobileClavier/top.html
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
84
5
1
1
3 4 2 4 5
1
1 3
4 2 4 2
5 1 5 1 5 1 5
5 1 5 1 5 1 5 4 2 4 2
4 2 4 2 5 1 5 1 5 1 5 3
10 6 10 6 9
7 8
1 3
4 2 4 2
5 1 5 1 5 1 5
5 1 5 1 5 1 5 4 2 4 2
4 2 4 2 5 1 5 1 5 1 5 3
10 6 10 6 9
7 8
Pedal number and diapason variation
Down1 Down 4
Down 2                         Down 6 
Down 3                         Up 13
Up 2 Up 6
Up 1                            Up 4
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Figure 6: Sscore for BWV846
The trial piece was the First half of BWV846 (left of Fig-
ure 6). Six people who could play the trial music well took
part in this experiment. They belonged to a college of mu-
sic, their major was piano playing, and they always practiced
with acoustic pianos. They were not familiar with conven-
tional portable keyboards or Key Transpose. None of them
had any experience with the prototype. We used Roland’s
SP-1 as a foot controller in this experiment to change the di-
apason, which has only one pedal. The pianists could easily
change the diapason with using the foot pedal and this did
not interfere with their playing. We used IBM’s ThinkPad
X30 whose platform was Windows XP as the PC, Roland’s
SC-8820 as the MIDI sound generator, Bose’s MM-1 as the
speaker, OXYGEN8 as the conventional portable keyboard,
and the prototype. Additionally, two white keys and one
black key were cut into the far right of the conventional key-
board to make the diapason width uniform between the con-
ventional keyboard and the prototype, we also constructed
an application (Figure 7) to support this evaluation experi-
ment. The left of Figure 7 indicates the BWV846 score, the
timing for diapason changes, and the note set in the left most
key. The top right of Figure 7 indicates the present diapa-
son number. Since we preset diapason variations to simplify
diapason changes for the pianists, they did not need to pay
attention to the position but only the timing. When a pi-
anist pushed the SP-1 button, the diapason change number
increased by one.
All participants played a piece with both instruments to
evaluate ease of use in the early stages. They next selected
one of two instruments and practiced with it to evaluate
changes in the degree of advancement. We ﬁrst allowed
pianists to play with both instruments for ﬁve minutes to
practice Key Transpose. We then allocated main/sub instru-
ments to all pianists. The pianists then did their evaluations
following the procedure in Table 1.
They had two time periods, i.e., full execution and prac-
tice in this experiment. In the former, they played the trial
piece from the beginning to the end and the system logged
MIDI Note On/Oﬀ and the timing for diapason changes.
We also instructed the pianists to “play a smooth tempo of
more than 70 beats per minute.” In the latter, we asked to
them “practice freely for ﬁve minutes”.
4.2.2 Results and Considerations
The pianists, who used the prototype, played it naturally
with few errors at the requested tempo after the experiment.
Those who used the conventional portable keyboard, on the
other hand, made many ﬁngering errors.
We will now discuss the details of this experiment.
Error: Figure 8 plots the n umber of errors during Full
Execution time. The horizontal axis means the ﬁrst, second,
and third Full Execution times, and the vertical axis means
the number of mean errors. The bar chart is the average
number of errors and the line segment is the extent of the
standard deviation. The ﬁrst number of errors is the average
for the six musicians, and the second and third numbers are
the averages for three participants.
The prototype had far fewer errors than the conventional
portable keyboard. Moreover, both keyboards decreased the
number of errors when the pianists repeatedly practiced with
their own instrument. The reason the conventional keyboard
had so many errors is that the musicians could not recognize
the note set in each key after the diapason changes. More-
over, the fewer the diapason variations, the fewer the errors.
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
85
Middle C
Diapason 
Change Buttons
Figure 7: Screen snapshot of application used for
evaluation
Conventional
keyboard
Prototype Conventional
keyboard
Prototype Conventional
keyboard
Prototype
First 
full execution time
Second 
full execution time
Third
full execution time
Number of mean errors
Figure 8: Evaluation results for errors
The reason for this is that they could easily anticipate a set
note on each key with few diapason variations.
Because participants, who used the prototype, on the
other hand, could visually recognize the note set on each
key, there were fewer errors than that with the conventional
keyboard. As a result of analyzing the errors for the pro-
totype, we found few mistakes for interpreting the NULL
keys and the main reason for them were large diapason vari-
ations and frequent diapason changes. These problems are
dissolved as participants became more familiar with the pro-
totype.
Velocity and Tempo: The constancy of tempo and the
velocity were important factors in the evaluation. Our sub-
ject ﬁndings suggest that pianists, who used a conventional
keyboard, played at unstable tempo and velocity. They es-
pecially could not control the tempo after diapason changes
because they could not push the next key immediately. They
could also not control the velocity because they concentrated
on right keying and became frustrated. However, the veloc-
ity of musicians who used the prototype was stable. Their
tempo was unstable at the beginning but they improved
their constancy at the end.
Asymmetry vs Visual Assistance: Musicians can use
the asymmetry of the black keys or visual/optical assistance
to assess the position of their ﬁngers and hand placement.
However, Mobile Clavier has NULL keys and is not asym-
metrical. Therefore, users have to assess the position of their
ﬁngers with the visual/optical assistance of Mobile Clavier.
We think that visual assistance is more important and
intuitive for beginners because using asymmetry requires
suﬃcient experience in playing and musicians then usually,
F#
F3 G3E3
N
U
L
L
G# C# D#
D4 E4 F4
F#
G4C4
N
U
L
L
334 4 4
Left area Right area
Width = 6
Figure 9: Example of split diapason
5
1
3 4
2
6 7 8 9 10 11
12 13 14 15 16
Figure 10: Score for Turkischer Marsch
frequently, and visually check the keyboard and the score.
Therefore, beginners can assess the position of their ﬁngers
with our proposed mechanism. However, skillful players do
not need visual assistance as much as beginners, because
they can play without looking at the keyboard as much.
However, this does not mean the asymmetry of the black
keys is of direct tactile importance, but they enable mul-
tiple manipulations to assess hand placement, such as the
relative position of the keys, of course, this includes visual
assistance. Therefore, the tactility of asymmetry impacted
by the black keys is not especially important even for skillful
players.
However, since the asymmetry of the black keys helps
players to assess hand placement, we plan to construct a
physical approach to shade the NULL keys by pushing them
physically into their keying state.
4.3 Splitting Diapason Function
Mobile Clavier can adapt problems with changing diapa-
son functions by inserting black keys between any two side-
by-side white keys. However, a problem still remains in that
we cannot play keys that are located over the diapason of
the keyboard at the same time. To resolve this problem we
suggest splitting the diapason function. Figure 9 has an ex-
ample of a split diapason function. The left-most key starts
from E3 and the right-most area starts from C4. Width
means the number of keys in one area. The left and right
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
86
Table 2: Map of diapason-setting information in
Turkischer Marsch
Diapason setting
 Left area
 Right area
number
 Left note
 Width
 Left note
1
 A3
 16
 H4
2
 A3
 10
 C5
3
 E3
 16
 E5
4
 H2
 16
 E5
5
 C3
 10
 A4
6
 C3
 16
 A4
7
 C3
 10
 A4
8
 C3
 14
 C5
9
 C3
 16
 D5
10
 C3
 10
 A4
11
 A2
 14
 A4
12
 A2
 16
 H4
13
 A2
 10
 F4
14
 A2
 14
 A4
15
 A2
 16
 H4
16
 A2
 10
 F4
areas played with the left and right hands.
We can play Chopin’s Turkischer Marsch by using this
function. Figure 10 shows the musical score for Turkischer
Marsch. Each number in the score is the state for the dia-
pason setting state as listed in Table 2, which indicates the
left-most note for each area and the width of the area of
left. The ﬁrst author practiced and played the score, and
used SP-1 with one pedal to change the diapason settings
number2.
4.4 Related Work
There has been little research whose main goal has been
the simultaneous pursuit of playability and mobility at the
keyboard.
Key Transpose and DTXPL’s[2] multi-zone input are ex-
amples of functions that improve playability. Key Transpose
is a function that shifts the diapason to cover the decrease
in the number of keys. We expanded the concept of Key
Transpose in our study. Moreover, DTXPL’s snare pad as-
signs three sounds: head to the head, a rim shot to the
up-rim, and a cross stick sound to the down-rim. It can
therefore sound like a real snare pad.
There have been several studies on changing a diapason
smoothly. CHROMA’s CHROMATONE[3] does not has dis-
tinguish between white or black keys. It only has white keys
and has 12-note scale white keys assigned. Moreover, But-
ton Accordion[4] has the same concept as CHROMATONE.
Moreover, there are diﬀerent keyboard layouts that are used
as electronic music controllers[5, 6, 7, 8].
These instruments are in fact designed to enable easy di-
apason changes. However, these instruments do not make
good use of the techniques acquired through conventional
keyboards and it is diﬃcult to master them because of their
diﬀerences to conventional instruments.
There are Rollup Piano[9] and Foldup Keyboard[10]. Rollup
Piano is made of rubber. It is extremely portable because
users can roll it up. However, it has ﬂat embedded keys and
zero tactile feedback making it diﬃcult to use. Although
Foldup Keyboard can be folded, it does not enable notes to
be played when the diapason of the keyboard is protruding.
There are musical instruments whose underlying concept
is to enable music to be played at any time and anywhere[11,
2You can see a demonstration video at
http://www-nishio.ise.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp/˜takegawa/
DownLoad/MobileClavier/top.html
12, 13, 14]. They are not keyboard but percussion instru-
ments, and do not have devices to improve playability.
5. CONCLUSIONS
We have proposed and implemented Mobile Clavier, which
is aimed at increasing the playability of portable keyboards.
It resolves the problems of Key Transpose by having addi-
tional black keys inserted. Using our system, musicians can
smoothly play a wide range of music with Key Transpose.
Moreover, we evaluated the availability of additional black
keys.
We intend to evaluate a splitting function for the diapa-
son and propose a smoother method of operating diapason
changes in the future.
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported in part by The 21st Century
Center of Excellence Program “New Information Technolo-
gies for Building a Networked Symbiotic Environment.”
7. REFERENCES
[1] Terada, T., Tsukamoto, M. and Nishio, S.: “A portable
Electric Bass Using Two PDAs,” Proc. of International
Workshop on Entertainment Computing (IWEC2002), pp.
286–293.
[2] Home page of DTXPL.
http://www.yamaha.com/yamahavgn/CDA/ContentDetail/
ModelSeriesDetail/0%2C%2CCNTID%2525253D37681%2
C00.html
(visited Jan 2007)
[3] Home page of CHROMATONE.
http://www.chroma.jp/
(visited Jan 2007)
[4] Home page of Button Accordion.
http://www.buttonbox.com/newba.html
(visited Jan 2007)
[5] Home page of Chordboard.
http://www.chordboard.com/
(visited Jan 2007)
[6] Home page of MicroZone.
http://www.starrlabs.com/keyboards.html
(visited Jan 2007)
[7] Home page of Monolith.
http://www.keyboardmuseum.org/ar/m/mono/mono.html
(visited Jan 2007)
[8] Home page of ZBoard.
http://www.starrlabs.com/keyboards2.html
(visited Jan 2007)
[9] Home page of Rollup Keyboard.
http://www.dansdata.com/rup.htm
(visited Jan 2007)
[10] Home page of Foldup Keyboard.
http://news.harmony-central.com/Newp/2006/Foldup-
Keyboard.html
(visited Jan 2007)
[11] Bromwich, M. A. and Wilson, J. A.: “”BODYCODER”: A
sensor Suit and Vocal Performance Mechanism for Real–Time
Performance,” Proc. of International Computer Music
Conference (ICMC1997), pp. 292–295.
[12] Maekawa, T., Nishimoto, K., Mase, K. and Tadenuma, M.:
“A Wireless, Networked Musical Environment Consisting of
Wearable MIDI Instruments,” Proc. of International
Conference on Telecommunications (ICT2003), Vol.II, pp.
1731–1734.
[13] Paradiso, A. J. and Hu, E.: “Expressive Footwear for
Computer-Augmented Dance Performance.,” Proc. of
International Symposium on Wearable Computers
(ISWC1997), pp. 165–166.
[14] MIT Media Lav. Musical Jacket Project.
http://www.media.mit.edu/hyperins/levis/
(visited Jan 2007)
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
87