The Lambent Reactive: 
An Audiovisual Environment for Kinesthetic Playforms
Noah H. Keating
USC School of Cinematic Arts
University Park, LUC-310B
Los Angeles, CA 90089-2211
1-323-252-2368
noah@coercive.org
ABSTRACT
In this paper, design scenarios made possible by the use of an 
interactive illuminated floor as the basis of an audiovisual 
environment are presented. By interfacing a network of pressure 
sensitive, light-emitting tiles with a 7.1 channel speaker system 
and requisite audio software, many avenues for collaborative 
expression emerge, as do heretofore unexplored modes of 
multiplayer music and dance gaming. By  giving users light and 
sound cues that both guide and respond to their movement, a rich 
environment is created that playfully integrates the auditory, the 
visual, and the kinesthetic into a unified interactive experience.
Keywords
Responsive Environments, Audiovisual Play, Kinetic Games, 
Movement Rich Game Play,  Immersive Dance, Smart Floor
1. INTRODUCTION
The Lambent Reactive is a project that explores the interaction 
design factors involved in designing games and experiences for a 
multisensory immersive dance environment.  Historically, 
luminous design has enhanced the immersion value of  large 
group music and dance events, from the visual music displays of 
oil swirls and film strips at the psychedelic rock concerts of the 
1960’s to the disco light shows of the 1970’s, all the way through 
the electrified neons of 1990’s rave culture. These days, with the 
inclusion of interactive design elements such as pressure 
detection, position sensing, and adaptive displays, the possibilities 
for such audiovisual environments expand rapidly. Games 
designed for such systems have taken the party out of the club and 
moved it into the arcade and living room, bridging gaps between 
performance and recreation. Participants can play the part of both 
artist and audience, creating music and dancing to it as part of the 
same action. Players can take on both lead and backup roles, play 
by themselves or with others, and  either collaboratively or 
competitively game. Using an 8’ x 8’ responsive floor provided by 
the Lightspace Corporation, a number of experiments were 
undertaken to push the limits of the confluence of interactive 
dance, music and gaming. Descriptions of these and future 
investigations are detailed below.
Figure 1. Lightspace Corporation’s Interactive Floor
2. PRIOR ART
In previous and current research into reactive floors and 
responsive environments, attention has been paid to advanced 
position tracking, audio feedback, illuminated visuals, and 
interactivity. Joseph Paradiso’s Responsive Environments group at 
MIT has addressed a number of these issues in the interfaces they 
have created, such as “Expressive Footware” [1], a sensor rich 
shoe that enables musical performance through the dance 
movements of a single wearer, “Magic Carpet” [2], an interactive 
rug that modulates parameters of a participatory soundscape with 
a user’s steps and arm movements, and ZTiles [3], a network of 
sensate tiles that create an extensible perceptive floor space.  
Other non-visual interactive floors that have been created are  the 
University of Limerick’s “LiteFoot” project [4], aimed at 
recording traditional ethnic dances electronically, and Georgia 
Tech’s “Smart Floor” [5], used to identify individual users by 
footstep patterns. Both Tobi Delbruck’s “Ada” project, an 
illuminated reactive floor with behaviors modeled after a sentient 
organism [6], and the current iterations of  software written for the 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
-NIME ’07, June 7-9, 2007, New York, NY, USA.
Copyright remains with the author.
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
338
Lightspace system [7] are excellent examples of tactile, luminous  
and programmable interactive environments. The collaboration of 
artist Toshio Iwai and the Klein Dytham architecture group on the 
Bloomberg ICE in Tokyo [8] is a beautiful example of how  a 
responsive interior with visual cues can help to define a  thought 
provoking and visually spectacular interactive space, and the 
installation done by the United Visual Artists in the London club 
Kabaret’s Prophecy is a great example of the way an illuminated 
interactive environment can integrate into a club setting [9]. 
Electroland’s Enteractive is another grid-based floor tile system, 
in which the interactions of an indoor illuminated grid are 
displayed on a matrix of neon squares mounted to the exterior of 
an office building in downtown Los Angeles [10].  In the games 
arena, the Nintendo Wii [11], with games like Wii Sports and 
Wario Ware, and Dance Dance Revolution [12] are wildly popular 
examples of the kinds of physical gaming that are gaining renown 
as both a social  and an exercise phenomenon. 
Each of the non-visual projects enables foot based musical 
performance, but none of them provide illuminated feedback or 
visual cues, important in the creation of spaces that can guide a 
user’s movements, and necessary for crafting a meaningful 
gaming environment. In research done into illuminated surfaces, a 
parallel situation exists in that the work has included visual, 
gaming and kinetic aspects, but has never fully integrated musical 
elements into the space. The goal of this project was to explore the 
entertainment possibilities afforded when multiple discrete 
cognitive modalities were merged into a space. The hypothesis 
was that by synergistically combining all of these elements - 
audio, visual, kinesthetic, and game - into one immersive 
environment, the result would be a more highly rewarding and 
flow inducing state of play. [13]
3. SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
The hardware system for the Lambent Reactive consists of a grid 
of 36 networked 16”x16” square tiles fabricated by the Lightspace 
Corporation, a 7.1 channel Creative Labs surround sound system, 
and a computer simultaneously running Ableton Live, Native 
Instruments’ Battery, and proprietary Lightspace software. Each 
tile of the reactive floor surface is composed of 16 individually 
addressable 4”x4” pixels, and is capable of transmitting pressure 
data from four sensors embedded in the intersections between  the 
central and outer layers of pixels. In this way, individual position 
and pressure can be detected down to a resolution of two pixels, 
or 8”, less than the length of all but a child’s foot. The Lightspace 
software was retrofitted to convert each tile’s sensor data into 
MIDI signals, which were routed to the audio software to trigger 
the sound sources.
Figure 2: Location of pressure sensors on floor tile
A timing system was also built on top of the Lightspace software 
to enable linear sequencing of visual and audio events, as well as 
rhythmic detection  and recording of dance steps. To implement 
audience feedback in the Dance Off mode, a phone based Voice 
XML (VXML) system was programmed to take calls from 
audience members, read their DTMF keypad presses and tally the 
results in an online database that the Lambent Reactive accesses. 
Additionally, two Happ “Mega Button” pushbuttons were 
interfaced with the Lambent Reactive using the Arduino  platform   
[14] to provide a more tactile audience feedback mechanism.
4.  INTERACTION DESIGN
Multiplayer dance gaming, as evidenced by the popularity of  
arcade games like Dance Dance Revolution, has won support due 
to the positive social and physical interactions that it reinforces. 
Players who were not necessarily previously proficient in dance 
enjoy getting together and dancing in a structured environment, 
and not just for the competition alone [15]. Dancing is a freeing 
act, one that flows with music and causes transcendence and 
joyfulness for those involved in it, but one that can cause anxiety 
in more uncomfortable and timid participants. The idiom of dance 
gaming has combatted this facet of amateur dancing with 
structures that allow any user to move on their feet and work up to 
more difficult challenges. 
With this in mind, a group of low-level interaction modalities 
were defined for the Lambent Reactive, such as “repeat after me,”    
“keep the rhythm,” “cover the board,” and “stand in a zone.” 
These were then configured in various combinations to construct 
the higher level playforms that were tested by players of this 
system. The final application designs encompassed both 
structured system-based approaches and open-ended playground 
modes. It was instructive to explore the breadth of experience 
made possible by this  system, as it brought to light some of the 
social factors exhibited by alternate styles of interaction. Users 
behave very differently when they are collaborating versus 
competing - likewise, when they are following guided steps versus 
inventing their own. By crafting varying experiences that would 
embody these opposing mechanics, a more detailed look at the 
interaction modes of multiplayer immersive dance and music 
gaming was made possible. In this paper, four conceptual 
interaction modes will be discussed: MetaSimon, Dance Off, 
Drum Machine, and Freestyle.
4.1  MetaSimon
This playform was inspired by the 1970’s puzzle game Simon, 
which used a four button hand held board to play random 
sequences of lights and tones that players tried to memorize and 
repeat. The game would start with one tone, which would 
correspond to a lit button, and would build longer and longer 
patterns on top of that, as long as the player continued to input the 
correct sound combinations to the buttons [16].
                             
Figure 3. Milton Bradley’s Simon Game - 1978
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
339
For MetaSimon, each button, instead of corresponding to a single 
tone, is represented by an area of nine tiles on the board - the play 
area of a single participant - eight of which emit tones. The center 
tile in each area is the designated null tile for players to stand on. 
Each player - up to four - stands on this center tile in one  of these 
zones, and watches as the system plays a sound, accompanied by 
the illumination of a specific shape on the corresponding tile. 
When the system cues them to start, the player on whose area that 
audiovisual prompt occurred will attempt to stomp on the tile that 
lit up. If they do so correctly, the system will respond by playing 
the sound that already occurred, followed by a new tile/sound 
combination in a different location on the board, in any of the four 
quadrants. Each sound is spatially positioned to be heard as if it 
were coming from a specific player’s area, to aid in memorization 
of the game patterns, and the quadrants have individual color 
schemes to provide differentiation between them. As long as 
players continue pressing the tiles in the correct order, MetaSimon 
will continue providing longer and longer sequences, up to a set 
number of steps chosen by players in advance of the start of the 
game. 
Figure 4. MetaSimon Floor Layout in String Quartet Mode
Success in a game of MetaSimon is attained by memorizing not 
only the pattern and location of the tiles in a player’s individual 
zone, but also their temporal relation to the audio cues of the other 
players’ movements. Each quadrant of the floor functions as both 
its own Simon board and a button in the larger board, which 
fosters a collaborative game mechanic between players wherein 
they must depend on and encourage each other in order to 
progress farther in the game. In more advanced modes of 
MetaSimon, two or more sounds occur simultaneously on 
different sections of the board. This mode, unlike the standard 
mode, requires players to keep  to a beat whilst stepping on their 
tiles, which adds difficulty but significantly increases the reward 
of hearing a successfully executed pattern. While the beat-based 
form makes the system much more complex, it serves to 
strengthen player relations and create an almost band-like 
dynamic between them. As well, the rhythmic aspect provides an 
additional mnemonic device to aid players in the recollection of 
their required steps. Further functionality of MetaSimon allows 
players to record their own patterns for others to play back during 
later game sessions, allowing a high degree of customizability and 
personalization. 
4.2 Dance Off
Dance Off is a two player competitive activity in which each 
participant tries to  one-up their opponent by executing complex 
and stylish dance moves to the beat of different pieces of music.   
One by one, each player trades off the roles of “attacker” and 
“defender” for eight measures of a song.   The attacking player 
aggresses by pulling off a sequence of steps, each of which 
triggers a white illuminated  square that moves down the board to 
the  other player’s side,  becoming more saturated and colorful as 
it travels. The square will become most colorful and stop traveling 
at the point when it is halfway across the board from where it was 
stepped on, after which it fades out and disappears. The defender’s 
job is to step on all the  squares sent out by the attacker  at their 
most colorful point, thereby replicating the movements of the 
attacker, but in a manner that provides for strategy and creative 
interpretation. Feedback for correct steps is provided by 
explosions and horizontal lines spreading from the point of 
contact, the color and size of which is determined by the closeness 
of the step to the ideal timing. Points are likewise assigned in this 
manner, and are shown in a score bar on the side of the floor.  
Scoring is also tallied by an “applause meter” mechanism, which 
consists of a system that allows audience members to vote for 
their favorite dancer by either pressing a large colored button 
placed by the side of the board, or by using a phone to call in to 
the VXML voting system. In this way, style and poise are 
integrated as game mechanics, making the play of the system 
more open ended and encouraging of creativity and improvisation, 
as dancing is in clubs and parties. In addition, the  expressive and 
performative aspects of the play are emphasized in this mode, 
making it not only a recreational activity for players but an 
interactive spectacle that anybody nearby, or even those watching 
remotely, can participate in.
The  Dance Off references street  and Freestyle dance culture in 
that it is a competitive dance forum that exists outside of the 
influence of traditional studio forms [17]. As in street dance, the 
winner of the Dance Off is largely determined by the audience 
witnessing the show. Much like breakdancers and Krumpers try to  
one-up each other by pulling off complex and difficult maneuvers, 
players of Dance Off try to make complex steps that will be 
difficult to replicate, while maintaining a sense of poise and style 
in their movements.  Thus it is not only physical prowess, but 
individuality and originality that will net a victory in the Dance 
Off. 
Figure 5. Sketch of step schema and layout in Dance Off mode
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
340
4.3 Drum Machine
In Drum Machine, the tiles are illuminated like a traditional 8-step 
sequencer, with squares of 3x3 pixels representing each step to 
comprise a total programming matrix of 64 buttons.  Each row 
represents a different drum sound or sample, and each column 
denotes one of the eight beats in the rhythm. Six of the rows are 
used for samples, and the bottom two are used for global controls. 
Players step on the buttons of the drum machine to activate a 
certain sample at a specific place in the rhythm, as indicated by its 
horizontal position. As the beat plays, the activated instruments 
light up and play their sounds, thus visually representing the 
rhythmic pattern with moving spatial and temporal patterns of 
illumination. Users can affect the rhythm in real time by pressing 
each button on or off with a footstep,  which results in the creation 
of a fully functioning, multiplayer, 8’x8’ square drum machine. 
Rhythms can be started and stopped by stepping on the play and 
stop zones, and the overall volume of the track can be affected by 
stepping on the volume arrows. The music’s rhythm speeds up and 
slows down  in time to a player’s footsteps as they step on the tap 
tempo zone. Drum Machine is a collaborative musical experience 
that   does not require proficiency to enjoy, just a rhythmic 
sensibility and a playful approach.
Figure 6. Drum Machine Floor Layout
4.4 Freestyle
Many of the various MetaSimon sound sets prove entertaining 
when presented to players for  freestyle improvisation. Not 
entirely unlike a two dimensional and reprogrammable version of 
the FAO Schwarz Dance-On Piano [18], the freestyle mode 
functions equally well with a single player or with many. As a 
multiplayer instrument, it functions as a an accessible interface for 
collective musical expression that can provide even the most 
novice user with a satisfying creative and social experience [19]. 
The MetaSimon sound layouts are arranged so that no musical 
knowledge or skill is required to create basic melodies, which 
makes it an excellent interface for amateurs to playfully explore 
the act of musical composition in a social forum.
5.  SOUND DESIGN
As the sound design of the Lambent Reactive is completely 
modular and programmable, multiple sound sets were created for 
MetaSimon to encourage different modes of play and expression. 
The essential game mechanic does not change with the 
replacement of sound layouts, but the user experience differs 
wildly as the content of the audio landscape modulates. It was 
constantly a question in the design of the MetaSimon game modes 
whether it would be best for the system to choose the note patterns 
algorithmically or from pre-written scores. Some of the game 
modes function well stochastically, wherein the next sound to be 
played is chosen at random from any square on the board, whereas  
in other modes this approach did not produce any kind of 
meaningful result. It was advantageous to choose algorithmic 
patterning when possible, as this allowed for infinitely variable 
and replayable level design, but it was not feasible for all sound 
sets.
The color palette was also an important consideration for each 
sound set. As different sonorities evoke certain feelings or 
responses from listeners, it was necessary to design the board 
layouts to express this. Thus, on a preliminary level, sound sets 
like Dance Music and Rock Band contain more vibrant colors, 
due to the youth culture associated with them, whereas String 
Quartet and the Pythagorean Lambdoma are more subtle and 
muted. For Dance Off, the color set changes with the song chosen 
to dance to - a Dance Off to Michael Jackson’s “Billie Jean” is 
much starker than one based around an emotive Chopin waltz. In 
further iterations, color schemes can be designed around certain 
social groups - for example, an 80’s synth rock sound set could 
contain neon pink, black and white, to visually represent the 
popular culture trappings associated with this style.
5.1  2-D Tuning Systems
In an effort to define a tonal arrangement that would be  sonically 
meaningful across the 36 tiles of the board, various 2-Dimensional 
tuning schemes were researched. The most successful result is 
described below.
5.1.1 Pythagorean Lambdoma
The Pythagorean Lambdoma is a tuning system, originally 
developed by the greek mathematician Pythagoras over 2500 
years ago. Its harmonic resonances are alleged to provide feelings 
of wholeness and well-being, and are used by some as musical 
therapy [20]. It consists of a fundamental frequency which is 
placed in the upper left hand corner of the grid, for example 440 
Hz (middle A). The next square to the right will be 2 times the 
original frequency, the square after that 3 times, and so on until 
the upper right square is 6 times the upper left (2640 Hz). The 
square below the fundamental is one half its frequency, the one 
below that one third, and so on down to one sixth. Each square’s 
frequency ratios are defined by its place in the matrix - the row 
number divided by the column number represents its relation to 
the fundamental frequency. This tuning scheme produces a range 
of tonalities that remain consonant with each other in almost any 
combination, making it an ideal layout for a multiplayer 
interactive instrument.
                            
Figure 5. Lambdoma Matrix with C as Fundamental
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
341
5.2  Electronic Dance Music
The percussive and non-melodic musical structure of electronic 
dance music is particularly well-suited for both stochastic and 
programmed implementations on a 2-D game board. Many drum 
machines and samplers, such as the Akai MPC-2000 [21], already 
group sound triggers in a grid-based pattern, thus their structure  
naturally transitions to a mapping on the Lambent Reactive. Each 
quadrant of the board has a set of the core instruments in a techno 
track - bass, kick drum, snare, hi-hat, synth - but spatialized 
differently to provide sonic distinction among players. The sonic 
resemblance of the instruments creates a high level of difficulty 
for players, but makes the structure of the game extremely 
interesting, as each player contributes smaller rhythmic blocks to 
the creation of a large percussive structure. A player can 
concentrate on executing their own individual moves and also 
witness their sounds weaving together with those of the other 
players, as do musicians in polyrhythmic ensembles like that of 
the Batá players of Yorubá and Cuba.
5.3 Band-based structure
To simulate the feeling of playing in a rock band, each quadrant of 
the board in this design mode represents a specific instrument - 
guitar, bass, drums and keyboard. Depending on the score of the 
song, the guitar and keyboard sections will have anywhere from 
three to five of the tiles representing chords, and the remaining 
tiles triggering individual notes. The tiles in the drum and bass 
sections  each trigger individual samples in the case of the drum 
section, and notes in the case of the bass. The bass notes 
correspond to the chords played by the guitar and keyboard 
sections, so as to provide a template for the creation of typical 
rock and pop song structures. This sound layout only functions in 
the pre-programmed mode, but many popular songs can be 
mapped to it, making it both easier for players to remember the 
individual parts, and entertaining if they are already familiar with 
that particular song. 
5.4 String Quartet
In this mode, each quadrant plays the sound of a single instrument 
of a string quartet - two violins, a viola and a cello. In a specific 
level design, either stochastic or scored, a player’s area  contains 
three tertian chords, with one square representing each  of the 
three notes of the chord. In this way, either consonant or dissonant 
sonorities can arise, and arpeggiated harmonic structures can be 
played. The layout does not allow for the construction of complex 
classical pieces, but rather allows the user to playfully approach 
the music of a string quartet in a simple and accessible manner.
6. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Future work with the Lambent Reactive will codify the interaction 
modalities and success metrics of designing for an audiovisual 
kinesthetic gameplay environment, and will explore the different 
play styles afforded by interfacing alternate technologies with this 
already established system. The addition of a Nintendo Wii 
controller or similar device will allow gestural input to define play 
modes, such as scrolling and panning through screens in a sound-
based puzzle game, or the combination of swing-based attacking 
and step-based dodging to the Dance Off game. The addition of a 
wireless microphone opens possibilities of voice-based commands 
and “diva” style gameplay, in which the player is dancing and 
singing in the model of familiar rock and pop celebrities. 
Additionally, the further development of the mobile phone 
interface will allow remote players to both view and interact with 
the action occurring on the board, which will broaden the locative 
scope of the experience, and hopefully raise questions of situation, 
control and omniscience in the space of player interactions.
To conclude, the Lambent Reactive provides a highly immersive 
experience for its users, and allows for a plethora of innovative 
game forms to be written for it. As interfaces advance, a more 
holistic integration of multisensory experiences is seen as the path 
to more rewarding computer interaction. As evidenced by the 
popularity of both the Nintendo Wii and Dance Dance Revolution, 
the full use of one’s body in controlling an interactive experience 
is showing itself to be what people are looking for in their play 
experiences. This project hopes to better define the methodology 
involved in creating physical game play by breaking down into  
its composite elements the nature of audiovisual and kinesthetic 
interaction design.
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks goes out to Gary Florindo, Ernest Woo and the Lightspace 
Corporation for their generous assistance in this project. I would 
also like to thank Julian Bleecker, Scott Fisher, Perry Hoberman, 
Ben Cerveny, Michael Naimark, Chris Swain, and Marientina 
Gotsis for their  guidance and support.
8. REFERENCES
[1] Paradiso, J., Hsiao, K. Y., and Hu, E. Interactive Music for 
Instrumented Dancing Shoes. Proceedings of the 1999 
International Computer Music Conference, October 1999, 
pp. 453-456.
[2] Paradiso, J., Abler, C., Hsiao, K. Y., Reynolds, M. The Magic 
Carpet: Physical Sensing for Immersive Environments. In 
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI ‘97), Extended Abstracts, ACM 
Press, NY, 1997, pp. 277-278. 
[3] Richardson, B., Leydon, K., Fernstrom, M., Paradiso, J. Z-
Tiles: Building Blocks for Modular, Pressure-Sensing 
Floorspaces. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’04), Extended 
Abstracts, Vienna, Austria, April 27-29, 2004,. pp. 526-531. 
[4] Fernstrom, M., Griffith, N. LiteFoot - Auditory Display of 
Footwork. In Proceedings of ICAD 1998, University of 
Glasgow, UK, November 1-4, 1998.
[5] Orr, R., Abowd, G. The Smart Floor: A Mechanism for 
Natural User Identification and Tracking. In Proceedings of 
the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI ‘00), The Hague, Netherlands, April 1-6, 2000.
[6] Eng, K., Mintz, M., Delbruck, T., Douglas, R., Whatley, A., 
Manzolli, J., Verschure, P. F. An Investigation of Collective 
Human Behavior in Large-Scale Mixed Reality Spaces. 
Presence (MIT Press), Vol. 15, No.4, August 2006, pp. 
403-418.
[7] Lightspace Corporation, http://www.lightspacecorp.com
[8] Bloomberg ICE, http://www.klein-dytham.com/interior/
bloomberg_ice.php
[9] United Visual Artists - Kabaret’s Prophecy - http://
www.uva.co.uk/index.php/archives/10
[10] Electroland, http://www.electroland.net
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
342
[11] Dance Dance Revolution, Konami Corporation, http://
www.konami.com
[12] Wii Console, Nintendo Corporation, http://
www.nintendo.com
[13] Csikszentmihalyi, M. Flow: The Psychology of Optimal 
Experience. New York, Harper and Row, 1990.
[14] Arduino, http://arduino.cc
[15] Hoysniemi, J. International Survey on the Dance Dance 
Revolution Game. Computers in Entertainment (CIE), 
Section: Games, User Interface and Performing Arts, Article 
No. 8, 2006.
[16] Simon, Milton Bradley Corporation, http://www.hasbro.com/
miltonbradley/
[17] FAO Schwarz, http://www.fao.com/catalog/boutique.jsp?
categoryId=402
[18] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Street_dance  - Referenced April  
14, 2007
[19] Blaine, T., Fels, S. Contexts of Collaborative Musical 
Experiences. In Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression, Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada, 2003, pp. 129-134.
[20] Hero, B., Foulkrod, R. M. The Lambdoma Matrix and 
Harmonic Intervals. In Engineering in Medicine and Biology 
Magazine, IEEE, May/Apr 1999, Vol. 18, Issue 2, pp. 61-73.
[21] MPC-2000, Akai Corporation, http://www.akai.com
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
343