Sonictroller
David Hindman, Spencer Kiser
Interactive Telecommunications Program
New York University
721 Broadway
New York, NY 10003
dh905@nyu.edu, spencerk@nyu.edu
ABSTRACT
The Sonictroller was originally conceived as a means of
introducing competition into an improvisatory musical
performance. By reverse-engineering a popular video game
console, we were able to map sound information (volume,
pitch, and pitch sequences) to any continuous or momentary
action of a video game sprite.
Keywords
video game, Nintendo, music, sound, controller, Mortal
Kombat, trumpet, guitar, voice
1. INTRODUCTION
Sonictroller is a prototype interface used to control existing
video games with sound.   The interface connects directly to
the console and is flexible enough to map sounds to any
existing video game.   Incoming sound is converted to midi,
midi data is used to trigger a PIC microcontroller that sends
information to the video game console.
Figure 1. Keyboard Rampage
In our first version, we were successful in mapping notes from
classical guitar and trumpet to actions in the game Rampage.
We took advantage of the sound producing capabilities of
each instrument to control the monster in the game:  since it
can sustain notes more easily, the trumpet controlled direction
and the guitar used staccato notes to trigger punch/jump and
start/pause buttons.  We were able to quickly master Rampage,
and were excited to try out our prototype in a more
competitive situation.
Figure 2. Trumpet Rampage
In a public demo version of the Sonictroller at the ITP Winter
Show 2004, a control interface comprised of midi keyboard
and microphone controlled combatants in Mortal Kombat
Trilogy.  The keyboards were divided into four regions, each
region mapped to the directional buttons on the controller,
and audio signal from the microphones triggered punches by
the respective fighters.  Playing the keyboard caused the
characters to dance on the screen,  and the louder one shouted,
the more fiercely the  fighter attacked.
We employed this simple mapping structure in order to
encourage participation by as many players as possible,
regardless of musical ability.  “Keyboard/Vocal Kombat”
provided for an extremely entertaining and engaging
experience for both the user and the audience.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work
for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that
copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial
advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on
the first page. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers
or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or
a fee.
NIME'05, May 26-28, 2005, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
254
Figure 3. Keyboard/Vocal Kombat
Figure 4. Keyboard/Vocal Kombat Choreography
2. APPLICATIONS
Sonictroller has potential applications in the fields of music
performance, music education and assistive technology.
The most recent application of the Sonictroller is a
composition featuring two competing guitarists mapped to
opposing characters in the two-player fighting game Mortal
Kombat Trilogy. The piece, entitled Modal Kombat, features
virtuoso classical guitarists David Hindman and Evan
Drummond, and takes the concept of dueling banjos to an
entirely new level.  The guitarists play an original
composition that is translated into choreographed action in
the game.
There are rich opportunities in the field of music education.
By mapping meaningful button-pushing patterns to musical
phrases or scales, students learn to play music while immersed
in their favorite game.  We are in the process of developing an
original video game in which users need to master musical
exercises in order to progress in the game.
There are also possible applications in game accessibilty.
Using the voice as a controller would provide users with motor
impairment or disabilities a challenging musical interface for
existing video games.
3. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Special thanks to Tom Igoe, Jeff Gray, Jamie Allen, and Chih-
Yi Chou for visual consultation and editing, camera work and
much-needed support during the many late nights. David
Hindman plays a hand-built classical-electric guitar by Chris
Carrington (chriscarrington.com).
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
255