Expression and Its Discontents: Toward an Ecology of 
Musical Creation
Michael Gurevich 
CCRMA, Stanford University 
Department of Music 
Stanford, CA   94305 
+1 (650) 723-4971 
gurevich@ccrma.stanford.edu 
Jeffrey Treviño 
Center for Research in Computing and the Arts 
University of California at San Diego 
9500 Gilman Dr., La Jolla, CA 92307 
+1 (661) 428-3816 
jeffrey.trevino@gmail.com 
 
ABSTRACT 
We describe the prevailing model of musical expression, which 
assumes a binary formulation of “the text” and “the act,” along 
with its implied roles of composer and performer. We argue that 
this model not only excludes some contemporary aesthetic values 
but also limits the communicative ability of new music interfaces. 
As an alternative, an ecology of musical creation accounts for 
both a diversity of aesthetic goals and the complex interrelation of 
human and non-human agents. An ecological perspective on 
several approaches to musical creation with interactive 
technologies reveals an expanded, more inclusive view of artistic 
interaction that facilitates novel, compelling ways to use 
technology for music. This paper is fundamentally a call to 
consider the role of aesthetic values in the analysis of artistic 
processes and technologies. 
Keywords 
Expression, expressivity, non-expressive, emotion, discipline, 
model, construct, discourse, aesthetic goal, experience, 
transparency, evaluation, communication 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Recent discourse has established a prevailing view of musical 
expression, the stated goal of NIME, one that relies heavily on the 
paradigm of western instrumental music. In this tradition, a 
composer creates a piece of music and notates it in a symbolic 
way. A performer then interprets the symbolic notation, thus 
rendering the piece as a performance to be experienced by a 
listener. 
1.1 Musical Expression  
It is a commonly held view that there is something other than 
sound itself to be communicated in music [11, 22, 29]. The study 
of performance practice addresses “deviation” from the ideal of a 
score [23]. It is in this deviation or “deformation” that many 
authors locate expression by a performer [25, 35]. Music is 
therefore conceptually divided into a predetermined part and a 
part contributed by the performer. Musicological literature 
distinguishes between “the text”, the notated symbolic artifact of 
the piece; and “the act”, the active interpretation of the text [37]. 
1.1.1 The Content of Musical Expression 
As important as the concept of deviation from the text is the 
notion that there exist extrasonic artifacts that are somehow 
transmitted along with or through the music. “Performers 
communicate musical expression to listeners by a process of 
coding. Listeners receive music expression by decoding” [29]. A 
consequence of this model is a search for standardized encodings 
of expressive or emotional artifacts within music [18, 32]. These 
encodings can be alternately conceived as natural mappings of 
musical cues to biological and/or psychological processes [28] or 
as belonging to a kind of language of expression, with its own 
syntax and semantics, that exists partly by convention and partly 
by design [33]. 
The encoded content of musical expression is normally considered 
to be “emotion” [29]. Psychologists and philosophers have 
debated whether emotional expression in music is necessarily a 
reflection of the inner-emotions of the composer/performer, or if 
emotional meaning can be “composed” [7]. A profound 
philosophical question is how music can cause emotions in a 
listener without an explicit object for these emotions [8]. For 
example, we can describe music with terms such as anger or love, 
without being angry or in love with anyone or anything in 
particular.  
With few exceptions [29], NIME has been conspicuously silent on 
what the expressive content of music should be. From the 
literature, we gather that it is not necessarily emotion that is the 
goal, but rather articulation of what Bill Verplank calls “style”: 
the ability to perform a prescribed act (e.g. play a melody) in a 
unique and personal way [Verplank, Pers. comm.].  
1.2 Musical Control of Expression and the 
Conflation of an Undefined Expressive 
Content with the Means of Expression 
Whatever this undefined expressive content in our community’s 
discourse may be, its mention frequently elicits a discussion of the 
specific ways in which musical performance countenances this 
expressive content: Scholars enumerate features of musical styles 
or consider strategies for performer-gesture-interface-sound 
mappings [3, 27, 39]. In proceeding directly to the means of 
expression, this kind of argument conflates an ambiguously 
defined expressive content with the means by which it is 
expressed. A variation on this approach locates expression in the 
range of output sets that an interface can afford, contextualizes 
this range conventionally as a set musical styles, and opposes 
 
 
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
106
itself to the discussion first described through the dichotomy 
macrodiversity: microdiversity [1, 19]. However, both of these 
discussions implicitly locate expression as a quantity in the 
interface.  
1.3 Evaluation of New Interfaces 
In the NIME discourse, there appears to be a desire to preserve the 
text/act paradigm described above, to replace the performer’s 
instrument with a “new interface” while retaining the expression. 
A further stated goal of the NIME is the development of means 
for evaluating these new interfaces [29]. This goal posits 
implicitly the existence of an absolute set of evaluative criteria 
whereby interfaces can be comparatively assessed without regard 
to aesthetic context. 
2. THE CORE OF THE DOMINANT 
MODEL 
The dominant model assumes that musical creation involves a 
unidirectional flow of commodities between the creator, 
interpreter and listener; in this process, expression is a quantity 
that may be injected by the composer or performer, either by 
addition or deformation [11, 18, 22, 29]. According to this model, 
an expressive performance should cause the listener to experience 
the intended emotions or at least understand the expressive 
intentions of the composer and performer. The role of the listener 
in this model is important, as it is the listener— in whom emotions 
should be stirred— who is the ultimate arbiter of expressiveness.  
The NIME literature tends to focus on expression by the 
performer, maintaining this model but replacing the performer’s 
instrument with what we call a “controller”. The purpose of the 
field according to its internal discourse is therefore often taken to 
be the maintenance of this model of musical expression and 
paradigm of performance using a new repertoire of electronic 
sounds and devices. 1 
2.1 Communication of Expression by 
Performers 
According to this model, the performer has a repertoire of musical 
cues with which to encode expression. While the composer 
determines the sequence of pitches and general features of timing 
and loudness, the performer has “subtle control over aspects such 
as timing, volume, timbre, accents, and articulation” [22]. There 
has therefore been significant effort invested in decoding the 
expression that has been embedded in music [5]; however, this 
discourse exceeds the scope of NIME. The focus of the field 
appears to be on the mechanisms for conveying expression; on 
“those characteristics of the live performance that enhance 
expressive communication beyond that which is contained in the 
materials on a notated page or a pre-programmed algorithm” [11]. 
2.2 Implications of the Accepted Model of 
Expression 
Implicit in the described model is the ability of the listener to 
subtract the “score” from the “perceived sounds” in order to arrive 
                                                                    
1 To be sure, NIME certainly makes valuable contributions in 
encouraging practices that are alternative or underrepresented in 
the larger musical landscape. However, the topic of the present 
argument is not the nature of NIME's practice, but the nature of 
NIME's internal discourse. 
at the expressive difference, and that this difference between text 
and performance is audible. If deviation or addition manifests 
expression, the listener must have a concept of what is being 
deviated from. With respect to instrumental music, some of the 
obvious shortcomings of this model have been evaded by 
assuming a “qualified listener” who is “capable of detecting and 
appreciating music’s expressiveness” and is furthermore “at home 
with the type of music in question, with its genre, style and idiom” 
[8]. Long-established conventions in many traditional note-based 
instrumental genres enable listeners to do this without specific 
knowledge of the score, whereas the inclusion of electronic 
sounds and the ambiguity between pre-recorded and generative 
material regularly confound this process in electronic music 
performance.  
3. DEMANDS FROM CONTEMPORARY 
AESTHETIC POSSIBILITIES 
A discussion of recent novel approaches to creation makes clear 
that the assumptions of the dominant model are unnecessarily 
exclusive. Artistic contexts that call into question these 
assumptions demand new boundary conditions for models of 
musical creation.     
3.1 Experimentalism as Non-Expressive 
Artistic Creation 
One of the most prominent artistic developments in the 20th 
century is the creation of art without determined expressive 
content. This development is plainly described through analogy to 
the visual arts: it is commonplace for a visual artist to designate a 
constructive material, as opposed to an emotional complex or 
expressive agenda, as the starting point of a work. The 
development of the work is then an exploration of the artistic 
exigencies of the chosen material. The artist accepts a multitude 
of emotional reactions to the work created, as there is no 
determined expressive content to be passed through the chosen 
medium. Paul DeMarinis’s art “often traverses the untrodden 
areas of communication technology” and seeks “to ask how 
material devices weave their way into our personal relationships, 
our understanding of the physical universe and our origins” [9]. 
His creations often use music and sound technologies in intimate 
ways, but his art “has nothing to do with expression” [DeMarinis, 
Pers. Comm.].  
Equivalent contemporary practices in western musical 
composition are legion. John Cage’s use of chance operations, 
Edgard Varèse’s “sound sculpting,” and Morton Feldman’s 
assertion that he “doesn’t push the sounds around” are all highly 
influential creative practices that explicitly abandon determined 
expressive content in order to respond to the exigencies of a 
deliberately interposed medium, be it fabricated (Cage) or 
inherent in the designed experience or work (sound, in the case of 
Varèse and Feldman) [2, 15, 24]. Thus, contemporary aesthetic 
possibilities demand a model that addresses musical creation 
without necessary recourse to a discourse that assumes a 
determinate expressive content. As Susan Sontag puts it, “Though 
the actual developments in many arts may seem to be leading us 
away from the idea that a work of art is primarily its content, the 
idea still exerts an extraordinary hegemony” [34]. 
3.2 Improvisation and Open Form 
Graphically represented and improvised approaches to music have 
intermingled and fruitfully inform one another. Non-visual, 
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
107
improvised traditions and their corresponding non-graphic 
interfaces of performance organizations (performance practices) 
[16] collapse text and act into a unity and paralyze the current 
model of musical creation, while visually notated works have 
invented a variety of indeterminate formal and notational 
constructs that invite the interpreter to transgress the conventional 
boundaries of composition and interpretation [12]. It is therefore 
necessary that a model of musical communication address modes 
of musical creation that lack clear distinctions between composer 
and interpreter. It is both aesthetically and— given that many of 
these improvisational constructs’ practitioners are of cultural 
backgrounds underrepresented in the upper echelons of society, 
the academic community, and the NIME community— culturally 
reprehensible to allow the persistence of a model of musical 
creation that refuses to address these contexts.  
It is correspondingly reprehensible to suggest that electronic 
music practice can be made more expressive by adhering more 
closely to a conventional text/act model, i.e. by fostering multiple 
unique interpretations of the same text in order to clarify the 
“expressive difference signal” between text and act [11, §5.2]: In 
addition to arbitrarily conflating comparative evaluation with the 
perception of expressive performance, this prescription insists that 
praxes change in order to align with hegemonic theoretical models 
and values. The same criticism has been made of our approach to 
older musical traditions; as Richard Taruskin points out, “The 
whole trouble with Early Music as a ‘movement’ is the way it has 
uncritically accepted the post-Romantic work-concept and 
imposed it anachronistically on pre-Romantic repertories” [37]. 
Models of musical creation should change in order to 
accommodate novel practices; however, the literature 
recommends the opposite, that musical praxes conform to 
established models.  
3.3 Inspirations from New Interfaces for 
Musical Creation 
Novel technologies created specifically for music have suggested 
and will continue to suggest both novel and verified artistic 
possibilities. “Music instruments are not only in charge of 
transmitting human expressiveness like passive channels. They 
are, with their feedback, responsible for provoking and instigating 
the performer through their own interfaces” [19, §7.14.5]. Yet we 
continue to uphold a model of musical creation that treats 
instruments as passive channels for an undefined expressive 
commodity. A model of artistic creation demands that we consider 
the potential artistic exigencies of new media. 
3.4 The Glitch Aesthetic 
Contemporary aesthetics might embrace values that either confirm 
or deny the transparency of the medium. As described by Cascone 
[4], the laptop or post-digital music that grew out of the 1990s’ 
chill-out and ambient electronic music is a prime example of a 
distinctive aesthetic context that constructs its basic musical 
grammar from musical events that would in other contexts be 
considered mistakes or failures (pops, hisses, glitches, bugs, and 
other medium-specific digital noises). But the current dominant 
discourse assumes that increased medium transparency is 
synonymous with the “improvement” of an interface’s musical 
capabilities. It is clear from this example that contemporary 
aesthetics demand an evaluative model that considers interfaces in 
their artistic context and tailors to this context any prescriptions 
regarding technological development. 
4. AN ECOLOGICAL VIEW OF MUSICAL 
CREATION 
As an alternative to the traditional model of composer, performer 
and listener as monolithic individuals, each inhabiting a 
predefined context, an ecological2 approach to musical creation 
focuses on the relationships between composers, performers and 
listeners as a part of a system that includes external factors such as 
genre, historical reception, sonic context and performance 
scenario. Any number of configurations may exist, each with its 
own unique makeup of forces and particular ecological balance.  
4.1 Consequences of Decommodification of 
Music and Expression  
In a relational model, expression does not inhere in any specific 
medium or stage in a chain through which it is passed. The 
content of music is therefore no longer limited to the text and the 
expression; rather it becomes a fluid and dynamic outgrowth of 
the ecology of a given performance. Expression is an optional 
modality or intention of creation.  
4.1.1 Music Exists in the Mind 
Human actors dynamically form mental representations of that 
which they are experiencing and creating. Contemporary research 
in neuroscience shows that sensory-motor integration, the way 
humans process sensory information in order to perform physical 
actions (to use tools or play instruments, for example) relies on 
tunable parametric models in the cerebellum [17, 40]. This is to 
say that when we interact with a physical object, we form a 
mental model that allows us to predict how it will respond to our 
actions. This model is then tuned based on continuous sensory 
feedback. This mechanism is now believed to be at work in 
human cognition in general, such that we are constantly forming 
and refining models of all that which we experience [20, 40].  
In an ecological framework, the performer’s actions are the result 
of dynamic internal models of the composer and score (if it 
exists), as well as the instrument, performance environment, 
audience, and a wealth of prior experience. To the composer, 
performer, and every listener, the music is therefore unique.  
4.1.2 Creation is a Distributed Process 
Recasting music from an assembly-line commodity to a 
networked dynamical system means the burden of creation no 
longer necessarily rests solely on the composer, and the role of the 
performer is elevated from “interpreter” or “deviator”. Absent a 
singular entity to be passed around, creation becomes relativistic; 
that is, everyone creates a different, individually nuanced version 
of the music, drawing on all the available resources and 
capabilities, which are not uniformly distributed.  
The example in §4.1.1 shows that although he or she may be 
reacting to notes on a score, the performer is drawing on the entire 
complex ecology to create the music as it sounds. Even within the 
text/act paradigm, music would not exist as sound without the 
action of the performer. Similarly, each listener creates a unique 
musical experience upon hearing a performance, based on the 
perceived sound, the spectacle of performance, stylistic or cultural 
                                                                    
2 We are not talking about environmentally friendly electronic 
music. Ecology, outside of the biological sciences refers generally 
to the study of complex interrelationships between individual 
agents and external or environmental factors.    
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
108
norms, and any other prior or external knowledge of the 
composer, the performer or the piece.  
4.1.3 Analysis is Difficult 
The auteur theory of cinema advanced by Andrew Sarris [31] 
posits that a film has a single author, usually the director. This is 
in spite of the fact that even if we only count “creative” (versus 
“technical”) contributors to a film, at least dozens of people 
(actors, writers, cinematographers, editors, composers, costume, 
set and sound designers) are involved in a film’s creation. Auteur 
theory has since been widely rebuked, but it exists in part because 
of economic incentive; it makes films easier to analyze and 
therefore to assign and distribute credit. Likewise, there is no 
reason to say that the composer, performer, or listener is any more 
or less responsible for that which we call music. Assigning the 
roles of creator and interpreter simplifies the analysis but is not 
applicable in a wide variety of musical traditions, such as 
improvisation. 
4.2  Problematizing and Reconsidering Local              
Description in an Ecological Model 
An ecological framework without the assumption of a commodity 
or a singular creator makes it admittedly difficult to unify or relate 
the experiences of the individual actors in system. Don Norman’s 
[26] formulation of three levels of processing in the human brain 
and associated modes of experience facilitates a meaningfully 
descriptive but inclusive consideration of the musical experience 
from variety of points of view. The three levels of processing are 
visceral, automatic and pre-wired reactions to sensory stimuli; 
behavioral, involved in the subconscious control of learned 
everyday actions (driving a car, typing, playing a violin); and 
reflective, the highest-level conscious thought in which we form 
opinions, plans, and abstractions. Organized in a hierarchy, 
adjacent levels can inform one another, but control acts 
downward. The reflective level tries to influence behavior based 
on conscious thought, and the behavioral level can in turn try to 
“enhance and inhibit” the visceral. While Norman argues that 
good design requires a balanced appeal on all three levels, it is 
also clear that all three levels are engaged in creating music.  
This formulation can be applied to a diversity of musical contexts 
and traditions, as the model can accommodate shifts in the relative 
contributions of the three levels according to context. In the 
text/interpreter tradition, Norman describes the skilled 
performer’s ability to play a piece unconsciously (behavioral) 
while simultaneously considering matters of the large-scale form 
(reflective). The listener reacts viscerally to the sound and may 
also contemplate meaning. In a collaborative improvisation, the 
performer’s behavior is as likely to be informed by visceral 
responses to other sounds as by higher-level ideas. The 
instruction-based conceptual art of Henry Flynt and other first 
generation Fluxus artists functions on almost an exclusively 
reflective level. As Flynt puts it, ideas are the arranged material in 
conceptual art, as sound is the arranged material in music [14]. 
4.3 More Meaningful Interface Evaluations 
Rather than definite, immutable roles, an ecological approach 
allows for a diversity of participants in a variety of configurations 
within the process of musical creation. In place of a singular, 
prescriptive, static model of this process, the relational scheme 
admits a wealth of aesthetic contexts and imperatives. It is 
certainly true that qualities of the instrument or interface 
significantly contribute to the nature of the musical interaction. 
An ecological approach allows us to consider not just the 
interface’s causal effect on the narrowly-defined notion of 
expression, but rather its place within the complex 
interrelationship of style, genre, and sonic/cultural contexts. 
Tanaka [36] has similarly acknowledged the mutual constitution 
of spatial or distribution channels of sound and the music that 
resides in them. Ecological thinking extends this idea to include 
the interface along with the medium and any other relevant 
factors.    
The previously assumed singular model of creation was probably 
motivated in part by a need for a constant context in order to 
venture a comparative evaluation of the inherent expressive 
properties of music interfaces, as described in §1.2. In the face of 
a robust ecological model, such a comparative evaluation seems 
nonsensical unless we grossly limit the definition of music. 
Mental representations and Norman’s three levels of processing 
offer a new currency for describing the experience of music 
creation that places the electronic music  interface appropriately in 
context. This framework has three distinct advantages: 1) it admits 
a broader range of aesthetic concerns; 2) it provides a more 
meaningful way to ‘evaluate’ an interface; and 3) it expands the 
scope for the consideration of novel interfaces.  
5. APPROACHES TO MUSICAL 
EXPRESSION WITH TECHNOLOGY 
We identify at least four possible approaches to musical 
expression with interactive technologies. Below, we review these 
approaches with respect to the dominant model of musical 
creation and to our proposed ecological approach.  
5.1 Imitation of Expression by Machines 
The notion of programming or training computers with rules that 
would allow them to render performances that would be perceived 
as expressive has historically been an important direction in 
computer music research [30]. This approach largely relies on a 
text/interpreter paradigm in which the performer is a machine that 
the audience should ideally perceive as equally expressive as a 
human.   
Considering this from an ecological perspective, it is clear that the 
machine is unable to accumulate nearly as much input from the 
entire system of the musical creation as a human performer, let 
alone synthesize it in order to render an expressive performance. 
In this musical tradition, a human performer depends heavily on 
behavioral processing, informed by dynamic input from the 
reflective and visceral levels, a degree of sophistication that is far 
outside of what can be programmed or learned by a machine. 
Machines can at best model the expressive cues that are manifest 
in the sound, but not the significant visceral and reflective 
processing that inform the behaviors that generate these cues. 
Expressive composition by machines is equally problematic 
because, while a machine can be programmed to imitate rule-
based behaviors of composers or styles [6], it is unclear how a 
computer could model or predict the visceral and emotional 
responses of a listener (as many composers do), or more 
importantly engage in reflective thought about the artwork.  
From the listener’s perspective, machines are still conspicuously 
poor at imitating instrument timbres, thus detracting from the 
visceral experience. It is important here to highlight that the 
ecological approach also considers the listener’s models of the 
composer and performer as dynamical human agents. It is 
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
109
problematic to expect a listener to perceive a computer performer 
or composer as expressive if his or her cognitive model of the 
computer precludes expression. Machine expression may be 
reflectively alluring because of its concept, associated with 
science fiction and future myths. However, this admits a change in 
aesthetic context: We are no longer dealing with the 
text/interpreter paradigm, but rather with conceptual art. 
In the ecological formulation, it is simply unimportant to assign 
expression to an individual actor within the system, therefore the 
question of whether a machine can be expressive is moot. A 
machine can most certainly be a part of an expressive system. For 
example, Jorda’s assertion that the perception of his robot JoAn as 
expressive no longer relies on the tenuous transference of the 
expressive intentions of the creator “through” the robot [19]. The 
perceived expression exists because the audience member creates 
it by participating in the artistic process. 
5.2 Interfaces and Mappings to Facilitate 
Traditional Expression 
This is one of the main areas of research in NIME. It is assumed 
that good design can solve the problem of musical expression 
under the text/interpreter paradigm with new interfaces and sonic 
repertoire [3, 27, 39]. 
Regardless of whether this is feasible, the ecological approach 
allows consideration of aesthetic contexts in which the impedance 
of traditional expression is the most communicatively meaningful. 
The glitch aesthetic described in §3.4, as well as the artworks of 
Paul DeMarinis cited in §3.1, circumvent and contradict the 
evaluative criteria of traditional modes of expression but are 
nonetheless effective artistic experiences that can be meaningfully 
assessed through comparison with other similar endeavors [10]. 
5.3 Develop New Expressive Cues While 
Maintaining the Listener’s Text/Act Model  
Subtly distinct from §5.2, an alternate approach admits new 
sounds, interfaces and even configurations, but still demands that 
the listener be able to separate the text from the act. As before, 
such an approach requires the text/act paradigm to be made 
explicit and/or medium to be transparent. Whereas §5.2 assumes 
an existing grammar of expressive cues, this approach invites the 
codification of new languages of expression that satisfy a 
prefabricated set of ecological axioms. Artists seek new ways in 
which the old distinction can be communicated to the audience. 
This approach is certainly valid within an ecological framework 
but can be excessively limiting in an alternative aesthetic context. 
5.4 Questioning Expression as the Goal 
Based on the values and trends described in §3, as an alternative 
to the above approaches, we question expression in its 
conventional sense as the goal of the incorporation of new 
electronic interfaces in music, although we acknowledge this 
direction as a valid approach to the use of technology in music. 
An ecological model of musical creation embraces this approach, 
while an expression-centered model denies its validity.  
6. FUTURE DIRECTIONS FOR THE 
DESIGN OF NEW INTERFACES 
As an ecological model of musical creation prohibits the isolation 
of musical interfaces from their artistic contexts, it is meaningless 
for the authors to make prescriptive statements regarding 
technological developments at this time. 
7. CONCLUSION   
Two of the most prominent stated or implied goals of NIME are 
1) to “place … this music in the great trajectory of Western 
European art music composition” [38] by using computers to 
create new sounds, but to leave the text/act paradigm intact such 
that the computers are at best transparent, at worst appear as 
musical instruments; and 2) to make the performance of music 
with electronics ‘easy’, ‘palatable’, and ‘transparent’ for the 
audience [13]. 
These views are analogous to the restriction of visual art to its 
representational manifestations. While visual art does not 
necessarily follow the text/act paradigm, representational art relies 
on the artist’s ‘interpretation’ of familiar symbols; i.e., eight 
people can paint The Last Supper, and the expression is in the 
difference between their individual renditions of the scene. 
Aesthetic values of at least the past 100 years have encouraged 
numerous alternatives to representational art. Abstract and 
conceptual art invite the viewer to form an individual reaction 
based on the work presented. In these contexts, it is not 
necessarily the artist’s responsibility to make the experience 
‘easy’ for the viewer to understand or to ‘read’.  
It makes sense, based on the assumptions behind these goals, that 
the literature advances a model of musical creation that privileges 
their achievement. It is possible, however, to envision a model of 
musical creation that both accommodates and questions this 
existing model by facilitating the consideration of alternative 
aesthetic contexts on equal ground to that of the hegemonic. An 
ecological model of musical creation is such a model. With such 
an approach in mind, the development of new interfaces, artworks 
and aesthetics can occur with mutual constitution, responding and 
adapting to their component exigencies. 
“From a certain perspective this  [composer-performer-
listener] view describes a very rigid social structure. It is 
highly conservative in that it provides a conceptual 
framework which discourages evolution and promotes 
institutional stability. The degrees of passiveness and 
activeness of the individual nodes are relatively fixed and the 
environments in which they behave are designed to 
accommodate their habits without much fuss or bother. 
 
“When we repaint our view of the present and the future only 
by coloring our consistent habits and perceptions with fancier 
paints, we are being definitively conservative. History is 
replete with such pathetic prediction. To be revolutionary 
means to fundamentally change the bases of understanding so 
that whatever it is that we formerly understood to be true, is 
not now necessarily false, but perhaps is rather no longer 
even a question, or an issue, or susceptible to the same 
logic.” –Paul Lansky [21] 
8. REFERENCES 
[1] Arfib, D., Couturier, J-M., and Kessous, L. Expressiveness 
and digital musical instrument design. Journal of New Music 
Research 34,1 (Jan. 2005), 125-136. 
[2] Cage, J. Silence. Wesleyan University Press, Middletown, 
CT, 1961.  
[3] Camurri, A. et al. Multimodal Analysis of Expressive 
Gesture in Music and Dance Performances. In Camurri and 
Volpe, G., eds. Gesture-Based Communication in Human-
Computer Interaction. New York, Springer-Verlag, 2004, 
20-39. 
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
110
[4] Cascone, K. The aesthetics of failure: 'post-digital' tendencies 
in contemporary computer music. Computer Music Journal 
24, 4 (Winter 2000), 12-18. 
[5] Cooke, D. The Language of Music. Oxford University Press, 
London, 1959. 
[6] Cope, D. Experiments in Musical Intelligence. A-R Editions, 
Madison, WI, 1996. 
[7] Davies, S. Musical Meaning and Expression. Cornell 
University Press, 1994. 
[8] Davies, S. Philosophical perspectives on music’s 
expressiveness. In Juslin, P. N., and Sloboda, J. A., eds. 
Music and Emotion. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2001.  
[9] DeMarinis, P. Firebirds: Exhibition notes for show at 
"Singuhr" Berlin, Summer 2004. Available at: 
http://www.well.com/~demarini/Firebirds.htm 
[10] Derno, M. and Washburne, C., eds. Bad Music: The Music 
We Love to Hate. New York, Routledge, 2004, III. Noise, 
Malfunction, and Discourses of (In)Authenticity, 235-333. 
[11] Dobrian, C., and Koppelman, D. The ‘E’ in NIME: musical 
expression with new computer interfaces. In Proceedings of 
the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for 
Musical Expression (NIME06) (Paris, France, 2006), 277-
282. 
[12] Eco, U. The Poetics of the Open Work. In Cox, C. and 
Warner, D., eds. Audio Culture: Readings in Modern Music. 
Continuum Press, New York, 2004, 167-175. 
[13] Fels, S., Gadd, A., and Mulder, A. Mapping transparency 
through metaphor: towards more expressive musical 
instruments. Organised Sound 7, 2 (Aug. 2002), 109-126.  
[14] Flynt, H. http://www.henryflynt.org/, 2007. 
[15] Friedman, B. H., ed. Give My Regards to Eighth Street: 
Collected Writings of Morton Feldman. Exact Change Press, 
Cambridge, 2000. 
[16] Hindley, Geoffrey. Keyboards, Crankshafts and 
Communication: The Musical Mindset of Western 
Technology. In Braun, H., ed. Music and Technology in the 
Twentieth Century. Johns Hopkins University Press, 
Baltimore, 2002, 33-42. 
[17] Huang, F., Gillespie, R. B., and Kuo, A. D. Visual and haptic 
feedback enable on-line tuning to resonant dynamics. 
Journal of Motor Behavior (submitted). 
[18] Juslin, P. N. Emotional communication in music 
performance: a functionalist perspective and some data. 
Music Perception 14, 383-418. 
[19] Jordà, S. Digital Lutherie: Crafting musical computers for 
new musics’ performance and improvisation. Ph.D. Thesis, 
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 2005. 
[20] Kawato, M. Bidirectional theory approach to consciousness. 
In Ito, M., Miyashita, Y., and Rolls, E. T., eds. Cognition, 
Computation and Consciousness. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, 1997. 
[21] Lansky, P. A view from the bus: when machines make 
music. Perspectives in New Music 28, 2 (Summer 1990), 
102-110. 
[22] Marrin, T.  Inside the Conductor’s Jacket: Analysis, 
Interpretation and Musical  Synthesis of Expressive Gesture. 
Ph.D Thesis, Massachussets Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA, 2000. 
[23] Mayer Brown, H., et al. Performing practice. In Macy, L., ed. 
Grove Music Online, http://www.grovemusic.com. 
[24] Meyer, F., and Zimmermann, H., eds. Edgard Varèse: 
Composer, Sound Sculptor, Visionary. The Boydell Press, 
Woodbridge, 2006.  
[25] Müller, S., and Mazzola, G. The extraction of expressive 
shaping in performance. Computer Music Journal 27, 1 
(Spring 2003), 47-58. 
[26] Norman, D. A. Emotional Design. Basic Books, New York, 
2004. 
[27] Paradiso, J. New ways to  play:  electronic music interfaces. 
IEEE Spectrum 34, 12 (Dec. 1997), 18-30. 
[28] Peretz, I. Listen to the brain: a biological perspective on 
musical emotions. In Juslin, P. N., and Sloboda, J. A., eds. 
Music and Emotion. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2001. 
[29] Poepel, C. On interface expressivity: a player-based study. In 
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05) (Vancouver, 
BC, Canada, May 26-28, 2005), 228-231. 
[30] Rowe, R. Machine Musicianship. The MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA, 2001. 
[31] Sarris, A. Notes on the auteur theory in 1962. Film Culture 
27 (Winter 1962-63), 1-18. 
[32] Scherer, K. R., and Zentner, M. R. Emotional effects of 
music: production rules. In Juslin, P. N., and Sloboda, J. A., 
eds. Music and Emotion. Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford, 2001. 
[33] Sloboda, J. A. Empirical studies of emotional response to 
music. In Jones, M. R., and Holleran, S. Cognitive Bases of 
Musical Communication. American Psychological 
Association, Washington, DC, 1992. 
[34] Sontag, Susan. Against interpretation. In Against 
Interpretation and Other Essays. Picador Press, New York, 
2001, p. 5. 
[35] Sundberg, J. Computer synthesis of music performance. In 
Sloboda, J., ed.  Generative Processes in Music. Clarendon 
Press, Oxford, 1988, 52-69. 
[36] Tanaka, A., Tokui, N., and Momeni, A. Facilitating 
collective musical creativity. In Proc. 13th ACM Intl. Conf. 
on Multimedia, ACM Press, 2005, 199-208. 
[37] Taruskin, R. Text and Act. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 
1995. 
[38] Taylor, T. D. Strange Sounds: Music, Technology & Culture. 
Routledge, New York, 2001. 
[39] Wanderley, M., Depalle, P., and Warusfel, O. Improving 
Instrument Sound Synthesis by Modeling the Effects of 
Performer Gesture. In Proceedings of the 1999 International 
Computer Music Conference (San Francisco, USA), 1999,  
418-421. 
[40] Wolpert, D. M., Miall, R. C., and Kawato, M. Internal 
models in the cerebellum. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 2, 9 
(Sept. 1998), 338-347. 
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
111