El-Lamellophone - An Open Framework for Low-cost, DIY,
Autonomous Lemellophone Based Hyperinstruments
Shawn Trail
University of Victoria
Computer Science
shawntrail@gmail.com
Duncan MacConnell
University of Victoria
Computer Science
johnnyzithers@gmail.com
Leo Jenkins
University of Victoria
Electrical Engineering
leonardo.jenkins@gmail.com
Jeff Snyder
Princeton University
Music
jeff@scattershot.org
George Tzanetakis
University of Victoria
Computer Science
gtzan@cs.uvic.ca
Peter Driessen
University of Victoria
Electrical Engineering
peter@ece.uvic.ca
ABSTRACT
The El-Lamellophone (El-La) is a Lamellophone hyperin-
strument incorporating electronic sensors and integrated
DSP. An embedded Linux micro-computer supplants the
laptop. A piezo-electric pickup is mounted to the under-
side of the body of the instrument for direct audio acquisi-
tion providing a robust signal with little interference. The
signal is used for electric sound-reinforcement, creative sig-
nal processing and audio analysis developed in Puredata
(Pd). This signal inputs and outputs the micro-computer
via stereo 1/8th inch phono jacks. Sensors provide ges-
ture recognition aﬀording the performer a broader, more dy-
namic range of ”musical human-computer interaction”(MHCI)
over speciﬁc DSP functions. The instrument’s metal tines
(conventionally used for plucking- traditional lamellophone
sound production method) tines have been adapted to in-
clude capacitive touch in order to control a synthesizer. Ini-
tial investigations have been made into digitally-controlled
electromagnetic actuation of the acoustic tines, aiming to
allow performer control and sensation via both traditional
Lamellophone techniques, as well as extended playing tech-
niques that incorporate shared human/computer control of
the resulting sound. The goal is to achieve this without com-
promising the traditional sound production methods of the
acoustic instrument while leveraging inherent performance
gestures with embedded continuous controller values essen-
tial to MHCI. The result is an intuitive, performer designed,
hybrid electro-acoustic instrument, idiomatic computer in-
terface, and robotic acoustic instrument in one framework.
Keywords
NIME, proceedings, LATEX, template
1. INTRODUCTION
Lamellophones have a series of tines that are ﬁxed at one
end and free on the other. The musical tone is produced by
depressing and releasing the free end with the thumb allow-
ing the tine to freely vibrate. They are ideal instruments
for augmentation being handheld, compact and ergonomic.
The instruments design facilitates uninterrupted traditional
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’14,June 30 – July 03, 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
playing while allowing the performer to engage various spe-
ciﬁc sensors with broad or minute arm/hand gestures or
explicitly with the free ﬁngers. The unused surface area of
the body is ideal for intuitive sensor placement, while direct
audio acquisition is simple and robust via a piezo trans-
ducer. Lamellophones are typically sheerly acoustic folk
instruments, however, augmentations, such as ours, equip
the instrument for contemporary settings where audio pro-
cessing and sound reinforcement are commonplace as well
as oﬀering experimental, novel sound design and interactive
multi-media performance practice capabilities.
Figure 1: El-la: Tines are capacitive touch sensors
Previous work in lamellophone hyperinstruments can be
reviewed in [9]. Our design is meant to be adaptable, eas-
ily replicable [5], and open-source so that any lamellophone
performer could render their own version with little engi-
neering background. El-La utilizes relatively easily sourced,
low-cost components drawing from Konono No. 1′s [3] spirit
of using salvaged electronic components to develop new
electro-acoustic instruments, analog signal processing and
ampliﬁcation systems for their neo-traditional lamellophone
based music.
The instrument in its native state is made from wood
which is hand carved with an eﬃgy at the top for ornamen-
tation. The tines are mounted to the body in the conven-
tional method with a bridge. Additionally, small metal rings
have been added to the tines to create a desired sustaining
buzz when the tines are plucked. This is typical of many
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
537
traditional African instruments [4]- which is interesting that
it is a type of acoustic distortion ﬁlter. The body has been
carved out on the inside creating a resonant chamber. The
instrument is tuned to a single diatonic scale. Since the
instrument is non-western, and therefore doesn’t conform
to the tempered chromatic scale, the suggestion of the oc-
tave is only relative to each preceding note when ascending
the scale. Meaning, the instrument is tuned by ear and not
by mathematically uniformed spaced intervals. The exact
frequencies of each tine can be reviewed in[9].
2. HARDWARE : SENSOR INTERFACE
El-La incorporates a capacitive touch sensor controller, a
three-axis gyroscope, a force sensitive resistor (FSR), 6 switches,
2 rotary Potentiometers, a membrane slider potentiometer,
an xy axis joystick, and LEDs for visual feedback. To fa-
cilitate easy sensor acquisition, all sensors interface with
an Arduino Nano. The capacitive touch sensor controller
interfaces with the Arduino using an I2C interface, while
the IMU outputs all sensors processed by its onboard AT-
mega328 via a serial stream (UART). All other sensors (but-
tons, pots, joystick, and FSR) interface by way of the Ar-
duino Nanos analog and digital inputs. The Nano plugs
directly into and is powered by the Beaglebone and com-
municates via USB. The whole system is modular, easily
removable and packs into a case for transport.
Figure 2: ﬂow chart of modularity of componants
2.1 Piezo
A contact microphone, mounted on the body of the El-
Lamellophone, is connected straight to the 1 /8” audio jack
of the Beaglebone board to acquire the audio signal. The
signal is then processed in Pure Data.
2.2 Arduino and Sensors - HCI
The Arduino Nano is a small, complete, and breadboard-
friendly board based on the ATmega328 (Arduino Nano 3.0)
and works with a Mini-B USB cable1.
2.2.1 Switches, Pots, FSR, Joystick, Membrane
The HCI components of the El-Lamellophone are strate-
gically located so that they don’t interfere with the per-
former’s playability of the instrument in the conventional
sense [8]. Six Pushbuttons and two (47k - the value cho-
sen was arbitrary) rotary potentiometers are mounted on
the upper back panel- accessed by the left and right index
ﬁnger respectively. One Force Sensing Resistor (FSR) is lo-
cated on the lower right front panel, below the tines, easily
reachable by the right middle ﬁnger. The value of 2kΩ was
1http://arduino.cc/en/Main/ArduinoBoardNano
chosen for the resistor in series with the Force Sensitive Re-
sistor (FSR) by connecting the FSR circuit to the gain CV
of an analog synthesizer while viewing the output voltage
on an oscilloscope. This value gave the best compromise
between music expressiveness and full-scale reading on the
oscilloscope. Also mounted on the back panel is one XY
resistive analog joystick accessible by the left middle ﬁn-
ger. On the side panel one SoftPot resistive membrane is
mounted. The pushbuttons connect to the digital pins of
the Arduino board, while the rest of the components con-
nect to the analog pins.
Figure 3: sensor interface (l) and Beaglebone (r)
2.2.2 Capacitive Touch
For this implementation we use 20 AWG wire soldered to
the eight (8) tines on the El-Lamellaphone as electrodes.
Each wire was then connected to the MPR121 Capacitive
Touch Sensor Controller2 from Freescale. This package is
capable of controlling twelve (12) electrodes and interfaces
via I2C protocol. It also includes a three-level ﬁltering pro-
cess to eliminate any noise-induced detection. The max-
imum response time is 32 µsec and its output byte con-
tains touch/release status for all tines. An advantage of
this package is that it allows simultaneous touch detection
of the eight tines- which in this case is used for polyphony.
2.2.3 9DOF
For the gyroscope implementation we use an InvenSense
ITG-3200 three-axis (X (roll), Y (pitch) and Z (yaw)) gy-
roscope with I2C interface. This small package (4 × 4 ×
0.9 mm) digitally ouputs rotational data from any of the
three sensed axes at a rate of 20 msec. In the current
implementation the gyroscope is built into a 9DOF Razor
Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU)3 via I2C protocol. The
IMU’s ﬁrmware scales the 16-bit output range of the gyro-
scope into a [−180.00,180.00] range for each axis and then
transmits the rotational data to the host Arduino board
via the serial portsTx and Rx, at a baudrate of 56700
bps. Figure 4 shows the direction of rotation of each of the
sensing axes, in reference to the El Lamellophone. In the
future we will use a cheaper platform for prototyping. This
model was readily available at no cost so we chose to use
it at the time. Lamellophone based gesture sensing using
an IMU builds on previous work that was sketched using a
Wiimote [9].
2.3 LEDs
A 10-segment LED bar graph is used to provide state and
sensor feedback to the EL-lamellophone user. To econo-
mize the wiring footprint and then number of Arduino pins
needed, two 8-bit Shift Registers are used to control the
LED bar graph.
2http://www.freescale.com/webapp/sps/site/prod_
summary.jsp?code=MPR121
3https://www.sparkfun.com/products/10736
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
538
Figure 4: Axes of rotation of 9DOF
2.4 Firmware
The Arduino ﬁrmware is simple: each loop an output vector
of ﬂoating point numbers is populated with the measure-
ment from each sensor, and then sent to Pure Data using
a serial connection. First, all analog sensors are read and
stored in the ﬁrst section of the vector. The Capacitive
Touch Sensors states are stored in the next portion of the
output vector. Finally the IMUs serial stream is parsed and
stored at the end of the output vector. The output vector
is now fully populated and ready to be transmitted to Pure
Data. From the Arduinos perspective, transmission of the
output vector to Pure Data is accomplished by writing the
entire vector to the serial port one value at a time, with a
newline character signifying the end of the vector.
3. HOST COMPUTER AND SOFTWARE
3.1 Beaglebone
Signiﬁcant previous work has been done by the authors us-
ing this autonomous music computing platform featuring
the Beaglebone. Technical specs (including the performance
of the DSP latency) can be seen in [6], which was a pre-
vious autonomous hyperinstrument platform developed by
the authors for the electric guitar.
3.2 Puredata
The DSP environment is built in Puredata (Pd). We chose
Pd because it is free, widely supported, ﬂexible, and robust.
Serial data is received from the Arduino and then scaled and
mapped to control speciﬁc eﬀect parameters (delay length,
feedback level, ﬁlter frequency, etc.). This simple prototyp-
ing system is robust but oﬀers a lot of ﬂexibility and po-
tential. The sensor data can also provide an intuitive con-
trol interface for synthesis applications including control-
ling oscillator frequency, ﬁlter frequency/bandwidth, MIDI
control/note attributes, and envelope values (attack, decay,
sustain, release). This application allows El-la to be used
as a versatile synthesizer controller while the lamellophone
can still be played as usual all housed in one unit.
3.2.1 comport and sensor data parsing
All of the sensor data is transmitted to Puredata by way of
a serial connection with the Arduino. The comport object
provides a serial port interface within Puredata, making all
sensor measurements available. The incoming ascii bytes
are then converted to numerical values.
3.2.2 Audio Analysis for Control Data
Audio analysis of the input signal is accomplished to pro-
vide an amplitude envelope tracking system. RMS energy
is thresholded to a usable range, and energy levels are dis-
played as they occur. This provides a simple means for
visualizing the rise and fall of the total signal energy, and
any further thresholding control can be added as needed.
This data can be used to create dynamic, audio responsive
control data for other devices.
Figure 5: complete mounted system (velcro straps)
4. ACTUATION
A system for actuating the tines of the instrument elec-
tromagnetically has been developed, but not yet integrated
into the existing instrument. This work is primarily based
on prior art by Berdahl [1], McPherson [7], and Britt [2].
Mcphersons Techniques and Circuits for Electromagnetic
Actuation outlines the possible methods that can be em-
ployed for this purpose, and our design derives from the
“Force on a Ferromagnetic Object” section of the paper.
Britt [5] suggest that the complexity of the circuits used
to drive both McPhersons and Berdahls electromagnetically
enhanced pianos can be reduced when the system is driving
an object without signiﬁcant harmonic overtones. This is
possible because a simpler ampliﬁer that lacks a linear re-
sponse can be used, a square wave input will produce a sine
wave output on the physical vibrating body - the harmonic
overtones of the input signal are ignored by the vibrating
body. However, in that paper about electromagnetic ac-
tuation of a vibraphone, the large mass of the vibraphone
bar necessitates a powerful ampliﬁer. Luckily, the use of a
polarized magnet aﬃxed to the vibraphone allows for both
positive and negative actuation of the bars, both attracting
and repelling the bar. A +24V and -24V ampliﬁer was used
for that system, and a 3-state waveform that had a positive
portion, a dead zone at GND, and a negative portion was
used to avoid shoot-through on the power supply.
In addition to sharing the same inharmonic overtone prop-
erty as vibraphone bars, the lamellophone tines have added
advantages from their low mass and natural ferromagnetic
properties, which allow for even greater simpliﬁcation of
this ampliﬁer. The current ampliﬁer design for EL-La uses
a single-ended 12V supply driving a single MOSFET tran-
sistor with a freewheeling diode in parallel. This conﬁgura-
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
539
Figure 6: pd patch
tion is eﬀective at driving the tines with a usable amplitude,
is very low cost, and requires minimal heat-sinking. The
most expensive element of the system is the electromag-
nets (footnote = part # ELMATU021020 from SolenoidC-
ity.com, 28AWG), which cost $20 a piece in the quantities
purchased for the project. The single-ended nature of the
ampliﬁer system also eliminates the need for the 3-state
waveform required by the vibraphone bar, so a much sim-
pler PWM output directly from a microcontroller pin can
serve as the driving frequency for EL-La. Polyphony han-
dling for the current system is an adaptation of the system
used by the EM-Vibe, described in [2]. Generation of the
multiple PWM waveforms is handled by a series of inexpen-
sive microcontrollers communicating over I2C, a signiﬁcant
advantage in cost over the 8-channel audio interfaces used
in the previous systems mentioned.
Some aspects of the current actuation system prevent
easy integration into EL-La without compromising the performers
ability to play the instrument normally. While the ampliﬁer
requires little-to-no heat-sinking, and the driver electronics
are relatively compact, the magnets themselves are some-
what bulky, and require signiﬁcant heat-sinking to avoid
overheating. Ideally, the magnets would be positioned di-
rectly over the lamellophone tine, near the plucked end, but
this conﬁguration prevents normal playing technique. The
actuation of the magnets also tends to cause the pitch of
the tines to lower slightly, for reasons that havent yet been
suﬃciently explored by the authors. For these reasons, the
current actuation system is a separate module from the rest
of the EL-La, able to be actuated by the BeagleBone, but
not part of the same lamellophone system held by the per-
former. In this case we can employ the various sensors,
such as the capacitive touch interface via the tines on the
performer′s instrument to control the actuation of the tines
on the electro-magnetic lamellophone, for instance. Fur-
ther, the signal from the actuated instrument can be ac-
quired in the same format, using a piezo, ampliﬁed, and
processed autonomously via its own Beaglebone audio pro-
cessing system. The two Beaglebones can be networked and
synced via ethernet or over a wireless connection using OSC.
5. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The El-la framework has been tested and deployed in per-
formance steadily over the past year. It has also been used
extensively on an album exclusively featuring the instru-
ment recorded at STEIM in Amsterdam during an Artist
Residency surrounding El-la. The instrument proves to be
stable, robust, and remains inspiring to the artist. Future
work includes designing a PCB and proper housing for the
interface and microcontroller that can easily mount onto
the instrument, while remaining easily removable. A cus-
tom Lamellophone design needs to be explored to ascer-
tain whether or not a proprietary version with embedded
interface and controller would be more intuitive. A user
study is planned to gain valuable feedback about the in-
strument’s augmentations. Solar cells for power could po-
tentially make the instrument truly autonomous and ready
for deployment in the ﬁeld where collaboration with tra-
ditional instrumentalists could be established, merging the
innovation with a staple practice in order to forge new mu-
sical territory grounded in intrinsically socially binding and
culturally meaningful music.
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank STEIM (Studio for Electro-
Instrumental Music) in Amsterdam.
7. ADDITIONAL AUTHORS
Additional authors: Stephen Harrison (University of Victo-
ria, email: msteveharrison@gmail.com) and Andrew Schloss
(University of Victoria, email: aschloss@uvic.ca).
8. REFERENCES
[1] E. Berdahl, G. Niemeyer, and J. O. S. III. Active
control of a vibrating string. In Acoustical Society of
America (ASA) and European Acoustics Association
(EAA), 2008.
[2] N. C. Britt, J. Snyder, and A. McPherson. The
emvibe: An electromagnetically actuated vibraphone.
In Proc. Int. Conf. New Interfaces for Musical
Expression (NIME), 2012.
[3] D. Font-Navarrete. File under ”import”: Musical
distortion, exoticism, and authenticit´ e in congotronics.
Ethnomusicology Review, 2011.
[4] D. Godlovitch, S. Trail, T. Tavares, and G. Tzanetakis.
Physical modeling and hybrid synthesis for the gyil
african xylophone. In Proc. Int. Conf. Sound and
Music Computing (SMC) , 2012.
[5] L. Jenkins, W. Page, S. Trail, G. Tzanetakis, and
P. Driessen. An easily removable, wireless optical
sensing system (eross) for the trumpet. In Proc. Int.
Conf. on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
(NIME), 2013.
[6] D. MacConnell, S. Trail, G. Tzanetakis, P. Driessen,
and W. Page. Reconﬁgurable autonomous novel guitar
eﬀects (range). InProc. Int. Conf. Sound and Music
Computing (SMC), 2013.
[7] A. McPherson. The magnetic resonator piano:
electronic augmentation of an acoustic musical
instrument.Journal of New Music Research , 2010.
[8] S. Trail, M. Dean, T. Tavares, G. Odowichuk,
P. Driessen, A. Schloss, and G. Tzanetakis.
Non-invasive sensing and gesture control for pitched
percussion hyper-instruments using the kinect. In Proc.
Int. Conf. New Interfaces for Musical Expression
(NIME), 2012.
[9] S. Trail and G. Tzanetakis. The wiikembe — performer
designed lamellophone hyperinstrument for idiomatic
musical-dsp interaction. In IEEE Paciﬁc Rim Conf. on
Communications, Computers and Signal Processing
(PacRim), 2013.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
540