spinCycle: a Color-Tracking Turntable Sequencer
Spencer Kiser
Interactive Telecommunications  Program
New York University
721 Broadway
New York, NY 10003
spencerk@nyu.edu
ABSTRACT
This report presents an interface for musical performance called 
the spinCycle.  spinCycle enables performers to make visual 
patterns with brightly colored objects on a spinning turntable 
platter that get translated into musical arrangements in real-
time. I will briefly describe the hardware implementation and 
the sound generation logic used, as well as provide a historical 
background for the project.
Keywords
Color-tracking, turntable, visualization, interactivity, 
synesthesia
1.INTRODUCTION
The original spinCycle consists of a turntable and video camera 
mounted to scan the radius of  the platter and connected to a 
multimedia computer. Several variations of  the interface have 
been implemented, each involving different audio content, but 
all consisting of  the same hardware setup.  Translucent 
plexiglass disks, with diameters of  2 or 3 inches, and tinted red, 
yellow or blue, are used as sound objects that can be arranged 
in visual patterns on the platter of the turntable. As the turntable 
spins, the video camera acts analogously to the needle and head 
cartridge of a traditional turntable, transducing sound from  the 
colors it senses rather than from vibrations.  A visual 
representation of what the camera sees is displayed, providing 
visual feedback to the audience, informing them of the 
correspondence between color and sound.
Figure 1. spinCycle, an early installation prototype
2.BACKGROUND
Recorded history of  efforts to develop a relationship between 
color and sound dates back to the ancient Chinese and Persians. 
In the West, it was Sir Isaac Newton’s system  for mapping color 
to tones, laid out in his treatise “Opticks” (1704), that became 
the most prevalent scheme for connecting musical notes and 
colors. He arbitrarily divided the spectrum  of visible light into 
seven colors (red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo and 
violet), and made a connection between their mathematical 
relationship to each other and the relationship between the notes 
of the musical scale.[1]
There are also many precedents of  mapping color to sound in 
the design of  musical instruments. Father Louis Bertrand 
Castel, a Jesuit monk, built an Ocular Harpsichord around 1730 
that involved a six-foot frame above a regular harpsichord.  A 
system of pulleys and rope would lift small curtains on the 
frame to reveal candles filtered by colored glass in time with 
the playing of the instrument.  Each curtain corresponded to a 
key on the harpsichord. Development of the color organ 
continued, and several inventors have had measured success 
with the device. In the late nineteenth century Bainbridge 
Bishop outfitted an organ with stained glass windows that were 
lit based on the keys pressed, and Alexander Wallace Rimington 
requested that the audience wear white to enhance the effect of 
the lights projected from his color organ.[2] 
Figure 2. Sir Isaac Newton’s Color Wheel (left) and 
Bainbridge Bishop’s Color Organ (right)
There is a rich history of performers and composers using 
turntables in novel ways to create and perform  new 
arrangements of prerecorded music.  John Cage was one of the 
first to use the turntable as an instrument in Imaginary 
Landscape No. 1, which called for records to be played on a 
variable-speed record player.[3] Nikita Pashenkov also provides 
an excellent history of  optical turntables in his paper presented 
in NIME 2003, where he mentions the Piano Optophonique 
created by Vladimir Baranoff-Rossine, which “generated 
sounds and projected revolving patterns onto a wall or ceiling 
by directing a bright light through a series of  revolving painted 
glass disks, filters, mirrors and lenses.”[4] Gideon D’Arcangelo 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies 
are not made or  distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
NIME 06, June 4-8, 2006, Paris, France.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
75
points out that truly interactive uses of the turntable as an 
instrument came in the 1970’s when the advent of hip-hop 
coincided with art experiments being done by Christian 
Marclay.[5]
More current contributions to the field of  optical turntables 
includes Jacques Dudon’s Photosonic Instrument,[6] which  
involves light shining through optical disks and filter onto a 
photocell, and Miyakodub’s Video Turntable, which employs 
color detection to trigger sounds, events and other musical 
parameters (delay, pan, on/off).[7]
Other recently developed interfaces worth noting that involve 
using tangible objects on a surface to arrange and create music 
are the reacTable*, developed by the Music Technology Group 
at the Universitat Pompeu Fabra[8],  and the Music Table from 
ATR Media Information Science Laboratories.[9]
3.IMPLEMENTATION
3.1 Hardware
The current prototype consists of a traditional turntable capable 
of 16 rpm, white slipmat, firewire web cam  on an adjustable 
gooseneck mount, small fluorescent lamp with adjustable 
mount and multimedia capable computer.  The disks are made 
of fluorescent tinted plexiglass (red, yellow and blue), which 
provide vivid colors to ease color recognition by the computer.
In development at the moment is a custom turntable with a 
wider platter and continuously adjustable speed.  The new 
platter has raised edges to prevent the disks from sliding off 
while spinning, which only happens when many are stacked on 
top of  each other.  The web camera is permanently affixed to 
the base of  the turntable.  The new version also provides a knob 
to adjust speed of  the turntable and a series of  buttons that can 
be used to select and assign the colors to be sensed.  There are 
also plans to provide hardware controls that adjust parameters 
related to video sensing, such as white balance, focus and 
saturation; these parameters are adjusted in a software interface 
in the current prototype.
3.2 Software
The application was developed in Max/MSP/Jitter.  Basic 
functions of the application include video sensing calibration 
(white balance, focus, saturation), selection of  colors to be 
sensed, assignment of desired sound to color, and volume 
control for each sound channel.
The original performance prototype was developed for Gideon 
D’Arcangelo’s NIME class at ITP in Spring 2005.  The theme 
for the class was “Tools for the Remix”, and accordingly, the 
prototype was designed to use sound coming from one channel 
of a two-channel turntable mixer as a source.  Samples were 
selected on the fly and then remixed with the original record.  
The sensing algorithm uses edge detection of  the colored disks 
to determine when a sound should be triggered, and granular 
synthesis is employed to play samples associated to disks 
located closer to the center faster than, but at the same pitch as 
those closer to the edge.  A representation of  the image that the 
camera sees at any given time is projected on to a screen behind 
the performer, which provides the audience with a connection 
between the colors and the sounds being emitted, and evokes a 
hypnotic synesthetic experience.
The installation prototype has two forms: drum  machine and 
sine wave generator.  The drum machine version has bass drum, 
snare and hi-hat color-sound assignment; users arrange drum 
patterns in real time and can make interesting syncopated 
patterns by shifting the disks slightly as the platter turns. 
The sine wave generator installation prototype allows users to 
experiment with more colors and sounds by stacking and 
thereby combining the colors to make green, orange and violet.  
Each color is hard coded to sine waves at frequencies that make 
up a chord to insure harmonious results.  The video sensing 
algorithm maps the area of  a given color to the amplitude of  the 
corresponding sound, thereby altering the envelope.
Figure 3. spinCycle sine wave generator installation
4.CONCLUSION
Using the turntable as the basis for an interface for musical 
expression is not a new idea.  The familiarity of the turntable 
and its constant circular motion provide a good basis upon 
which to build creative devices for sequencing and looping 
music.  What makes spinCycle distinctive is the simplicity of its 
interface that invites novices to arrange music and experiment 
effortlessly, but also provides a challenging experience for 
performers that can be perfected over time.  The synesthetic 
nature also makes it well-suited for multimedia installations 
intended for children and adults alike, as well as provides a 
dazzling visual component for performance.
5.ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The following people were integral to the realization of  the 
spinCycle: Gideon D’Arcangelo, Luke DuBois, Jamie Allen, 
MJ Hitchings,  and my wife, Chih-Yi Chou.
6.REFERENCES
[1] Hutchison, Neils. Music For Measure. 2004 http://
home.vicnet.au/~opticks1.htm
[2] http://www.paradise2012.com/visualMusic/musima/
[3] http://www.medienkunstnetz.de/werke/imaginary-
landscape-1/
[4] Pashenkov, Nikita, “A New Mix of Forgotten Technology: 
Sound Generation, Sequencing and Performance Using an 
Optical Turntable” Proceedings of the 2004 Conference on 
New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-04), 
Hamamatsu, Japan.
[5] D’Arcangelo, Gideon, “Recycling Music, Answering 
Back: Toward an Oral Tradition of Electronic Music” 
Proceedings of the 2004 Conference on New Interfaces for 
Musical Expression (NIME-04), Hamamatsu, Japan.
[6] Arfib, Daniel and Dudon, Jacques, “A digital emulator of 
the photosonic instrument” Proceedings of the 2002 
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression 
(NIME-02), Montreal, Canada.
[7] Miyakodub, http://miyakodub.com/color.html
[8] http://www.iua.upf.es/mtg/reacTable/
[9] http://www.siggraph.org/s2003/conference/etech/
augmented.html
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
76