Gamelan Elektrika: An Electronic Balinese Gamelan
Laurel S. Pardue
Responsive Environements
MIT Media Lab
75 Amherst St E14-548
Cambridge, MA 02142
punk@mit.edu
Andrew Boch
321 Highland Ave
Sommerville, MA 02144
Matt Boch
Harmonix
625 Mass. Ave, 2nd Fl.
Cambridge, MA 02139
Christine Southworth
65 Turning Mill Rd.
Lexington, MA 02420
southsea@kotekan.com
Alex Rigopulos
∗
Harmonix
625 Mass. Ave, 2nd Fl.
Cambridge, MA 02139
ABSTRACT
This paper describes the motivation and construction of
Gamelan Elektrika, a new electronic gamelan modeled after
a Balinese Gong Kebyar. The ﬁrst of its kind, Elektrika con-
sists of seven instruments acting as MIDI controllers accom-
panied by traditional percussion and played by 11 or more
performers following Balinese performance practice. Three
main percussive instrument designs were executed using a
combination of force sensitive resistors, piezos, and capaci-
tive sensing. While the instrument interfaces are designed
to play interchangeably with the original, the sound and
travel possiblilities they enable are tremendous. MIDI en-
ables a massive new sound palette with new scales beyond
the quirky traditional tuning and non-traditional sounds.
It also allows simpliﬁed transcription for an aurally taught
tradition. Signiﬁcantly, it reduces the transportation chal-
lenges of a previously large and heavy ensemble, creating
opportunities for wider audiences to experience Gong Ke-
byar’s enchanting sound. True to the spirit of oneness in
Balinese music, as one of the ﬁrst large all-MIDI ensembles,
Elek Trika challenges performers to trust silent instruments
and develop an understanding of highly intricate and inter-
locking music not through the sound of the individual, but
through the sound of the whole.
Keywords
bali, gamelan, musical instrument design, MIDI ensemble
1. INTRODUCTION
Gamelan has been performed for hundreds of years in In-
donesia. The term gamelan is a general reference to a mu-
sical ensemble which can take many forms. One of the
most famous is the metalophone instruments of the Bali-
nese Gong Kebyar. It is renowned for the shimmer, intricate
elaborate melodies and the tight interlock and togetherness
of the playing ensemble. Uniquely in Balinese gamelan, the
instruments come in pairs, where each instrument is slightly
∗The company Harmonix was not involved in this project.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’11,30 May–1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
out of tune with the other half of the pair resulting in acous-
tical beats. A characteristic of Balinese composition is the
interlocking of parts; a single line is regularly split between
two instruments and two players resulting in quick, intri-
cate rhythms. Additionally, gamelan is based on diﬀerent
versions of pentatonic tuning with each gamelan set having
its own related but distinct tuning. No two gamelans are
the same [3].
Figure 1: Galak Tika’s gangsa and reongs including
instruments from the Beta gamelan at the rear.
Balinese Gamelan is immensely popular in Bali, which
hosts large national ensemble competitions. Study of the
instruments ﬁrst spread to the US in 1958 [8]. Balinese
works are through composed and taught aurally. The Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology hosts Gamelan Galak
Tika (GGT), founded in 1993 under the direction of Evan
Ziporyn. With regular performances around the East Coast
including Carnegie Hall, Lincoln Center, Brooklyn Academy
of Music, and the Bang on A Can Marathons, GGT is a mu-
sical innovator focusing on new works by both Balinese and
American composers. GGT owns two sets of instruments.
The ﬁrst set was somewhat hard to blend to Western tonal-
ities so a second set, the Beta gamelan, was commissioned
from Bali with a diﬀerent tuning more suitable for projects
with Western instruments. Tunning is not just a problem
for GGT. Dewa Ketut Alit, one of the foremost composers
in Bali, has also turned to working with multiple gamelans
for a larger pitch range within a single composition.
Tuning is not the only limitation gamelan faces. The en-
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
18
semble itself is large and very heavy. The instruments are
metalaphones, including large gongs, brass or bronze pots
andgangsa with 1/2 inch thick brass/bronze keys and solid
heavy frames. Transporting the gamelan to a performance
is a signiﬁcant task on its own. With the mundane issues
of tuning and transport continually complicating commis-
sions and performance, through the generous support of
Alex Rigopulos and Sachi Sato, GGT’s Gamelan Elektrika
was born: a more compact electronic version of the origi-
nal instruments. Since the new instruments provide MIDI,
Elektrika simultaneously gave access to new sounds and new
tunings with as close to the original interface as possible.
Another beneﬁt is that MIDI is easily transcribable, prov-
ing a valuable tool to any Balinese ethnomusicologist doc-
umenting the aural tradition.
Gamelan Elektrika is not just about the instruments, but
as gamelan should be, it is about the ensemble. Elektrika
involves at least 11 performers playing often highly detailed
interlocking parts on silent MIDI instruments. Any serious
musician knows how important audible feedback from their
instrument is, yet Elektrika is an essentially silent orchestra.
MIDI signals are routed to a single brain that has complete
control over the player’s sound. We believe this is the ﬁrst
signiﬁcant large ensemble of this form.
2. THE GAMELAN INSTRUMENTS
Gamelan Elektrika is a subset of a gong kebyar ensemble.
Gong kebyar is presently the most popular form of gamelan
within Bali and is usually the focus for the most ambitious
compositions.
A full Gong Kebyar can have 24 or more instruments
tuned to a pentatonic scale termed pelog. There are four in-
struments that are almost exclusively percussion: the ceng
ceng playing rythmic ornamentation, the beat-keapingkem-
pli, and a pair of hand drums called kendang. Four large
gongs punctuate phrase structure. A single stringed bowed
instrument, the rebab, and thesuling, a ﬂute, provide melodic
ornamentation. Along with the gongs, the instruments we
built were the main melodic instruments of the ensemble.
These main melodic instruments include thereong, a set
of kettle pots, and both the pokok and the gangsa which
are similar keyed metal xylophones hit with mallets called
pangguls[9].
2.1 The Pokok
The pokok are the melodic core played with rubber tipped
wooden pangguls.
1) Jegogans- This pair is the lowest pitched set beside
the gongs and covers the 5 tone pentatonic octave. It gen-
erally outlines key melody notes.
2) Jublags- The next pair up in range with slightly faster
notes and playing a more complete subset of the melody.
The jublags have 5 or 7 keys.
3) Penyacah- A pair of 7 keyed instruments above the
jublags. These generally play along with the primary ugal
melody.
2.2 The Gangsa
The gangsa provide melodic elaboration and are played with
hard tipped wooden pangguls.
4) Pemade- Two pairs of two octave 10 keyed instru-
ment that provide the mid-range.
5) Kantils-The highest instruments in the gamelan, har-
monizing with the pemade. There are two pairs of these
6) Ugal- Also spanning two octaves with 10 keys, it is the
only unpaired gangsa, generally linking with the kendang to
lead the group. It plays the primary melody.
2.3 The Reong
Also spelled reyong, it plays melodic and rhythmic elabora-
tion and is played with wooden sticks wrapped in string.
7) The Reong- Consists of 12 tuned kettle pots span-
ning just over two octaves. These can all sit on one frame
or be split between two. Considered one instrument, it is
played by 4 people with the higher octave usually doubling
the lower. It is played similarly to bell ringing where an
individual is responsible for only speciﬁc pitches within the
melody.
2.4 Ensemble Play
Two major structural components of the music style are ke-
byars- very ﬂuid unmetered and variable interruptions (lit-
erally to burst open) and kotekans-tight interlocking sec-
tions where the melody is formed by the combination of
two separate parts [3]. The gangsa and reong are the pri-
mary kotekan instruments. For kotekan, players are paired
rather than instruments with half the gangsa (excluding
ugal) playing polos and half playing sangsih. Although
the interlock is rarely as straight forward as single note-
to-note on-beat, oﬀ-beat interlock,polos primarily centers
around the beats with sangsih ﬁlling in the oﬀ-beat. Out-
side kotekans, sangsih usually plays the melody in a range
above the polos. The reong often plays in kotekan with
itself or plays unison rhythmic punctuations matching the
rhythm section [9].
3. RELATED WORK
Gamelan has recieved little engineering attention. Aaron
Taylor Kuﬀner, and Eric Singer, with LEMUR built the
Gamelatron, a robotic gamelan orchestra [2]. The Game-
latron is a traditional set of instruments played robotically
rather than a gamelan interface. Alternatively, Ajay Kapur
has looked at custom percussion controllers for traditional
instruments with the EDholak and ETabla [5]. These are
Indian instruments but involve similar approaches applied
towards diﬀerent ends.
Meanwhile, electronic MIDI interfaces replicating tradi-
tional instruments are hardly a new thing. The ﬁrst MIDI
interfaces were keyboards produced in 1983 by Roland and
Sequential Circuits. Originally intended as mere controllers,
they were a clear mimic of the piano and quickly evolved
to fully replicate the it’s full range of interaction. 1984 saw
Roland release the G707, a MIDI guitar controller followed
by a MIDI only drum pad, the PAD8 ’Octapad’, in 1985 [7].
The ﬂexibility of MIDI means it has been found commonly
in new instrument interfaces ever since.
Gong Kebyar instruments are closest to xylophones and
vibraphones in performance style although the damping tech-
niques of both the gangsa and the reong are unique. The
sustained ring of the natural instruments and the playing
technique developed around it means damping is much more
integral to the instruments. Alternate Mode’s malletKat is
the closest MIDI xylophone to ﬁt the capabilities of game-
lan. It uses FSRs (force sensitive resistors) to detect note
onset and damping. It is also compatible with any mal-
let, matching a design goal to retain traditional playing feel
including realpangguls [1]. Wernick uses piezos in its Xy-
loSynth and is not mallet speciﬁc, but damping is based
on time release [4]. Don Buchla’s Marimba Lumina uses a
very diﬀerent approach based on radio frequency technol-
ogy which enables capture of more playing style but requires
special mallets [6]. None of these instruments were designed
with gamelan damping techniques in mind and hence, none
of them were suﬃcient for Elektrika.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
19
4. ELECTRONIC GAMELAN DESIGN
Although Elektrika is intended for long term use, initial
design and construction was for the premiere of Christine
Southworth’s ”Super Collider” with Kronos Quartet at the
Lincoln Center Aug 13, 2010. Part of Kronos’s commis-
sion of the work was that it would be performed with elec-
tronic gamelan and, to improve touring viability, it should
be a smaller ensemble. Hence rather than the full 24 in-
struments, the ensemble was reduced to 13 instruments: 4
gangsa, 2 pokok, 4 gongs, and a traditional rhythm section
but with only one kendang.
Traditionally the gangsa and pokok parts are doubled.
The instruments are paired and slightly out of tune with
each other creating Balinese music’s shimmering quality.
Since the instruments are sampled, the idea is that one
player can now trigger both pitches. This let us reduce
the metalaphones to the minimum players.
The gangsas remain split betweenpemade and kantil with
a polos and sangsih player for each section while the pokok
is reduced to one jublag and one jegogan. Penyacah is often
optional in traditional Gong Kebyar and was left out. There
is also nougal. There is no substitute for a full reong: two
frames house 12 synthetic pots. The gongs, previously the
most massive and heavy part of the ensemble, have been
moved onto one signiﬁcantly more portable frame.
The rhythm instruments have remained the traditional
acoustic versions. There were never any plans to build a
new hand drum interface for the kendang as commercial
electronic drum systems are readily available. After test-
ing a couple, they were not to taste, so we stayed with the
acoustic originals. There were plans to build a kempli and,
as the instrument is similar to a reong pot, it is not a sig-
niﬁcant technical challenge. However the kempli keeps the
beat and is what players lock onto. It is preferential for
its sound to remain centered within the ensemble and while
slight latency or problems with another instrument can be
dealt with, latency or missed notes on thekempli could be
disastrous. A guaranteed anchor becomes especially impor-
tant as the other instruments do not actually make noise.
The ceng ceng, although desired, has yet to be built due
to time considerations. Being a small ancillary instrument
requiring a unique engineering solution, leaving it acoustic
for ”Super Collider” and augmenting it with a drum pad for
the few synthetic sections was deemed acceptable.
There were a few dominant themes in the design goals for
the instruments. As previously mentioned, the instruments
should be lighter and more compact for travel. They should
also retain as much of their original feel and performance
technique as possible. Being able to use the normal mal-
lets was preferable but not required. Meanwhile, the over-
all ensemble performance included the plan for instruments
that could change samples and eﬀects on the ﬂy during per-
formance but have to remain intuitive and understandable
enough that the performers can still meet the demands of
coordinating complex parts with the other performers.
4.1 Gangsa and Pokok Design
Focusing on the gangsa requires further discussion of play-
ing technique. Proper playing of the gangsa (and pokok)
involves striking the key with a panggul in the right hand
while damping the previous note by grabbing the end of
that key with the left hand. This creates the eﬀect of one
hand trailing the other. Musical texture can be varied by
changing how long a struck note is allowed to ring and use
of a ”closed” hit meaning the key is damped while struck.
The gangsa have gone through two major design itera-
tions. As ﬁngers are used for damping, the initial design
idea used in the ﬁrst performance was to use a piezo to
detect strike and strike velocity and a touch capacitive sen-
sor to detect damping. First prototypes were made using
acrylic but transitioned to cast urethane rubber keys. This
was done as the rubber acts as a good acoustic dampener
when hit by hard wood mallets and also has suﬃcient spring
for good recoil. Casting also allowed the electronic keys to
physically mimic the originals.
We used Vytaﬂex 20 for it’s bounce and color, backing it
with a 1/4 inch acrylic sheet. A large 1 inch piezo disc was
centered on each piece of acrylic before casting and a copper
plate added at one end. The piezo was sandwiched between
the acrylic and the urethane while the copper capacitive
plate resided underneath exposed to touch.
Figure 2: Pemade with rubber tipped panggul. Two
FSRs between acrylic detect central strike and edge
damping.
An Arduino Mega, able to support the analog inputs from
upto 10 keys, was used to process the signals generated on
thegangsa. Aside from light conditioning, the piezo signals
from each key went directly to the chip analog inputs where
they were polled. The capacitive signals were processed ﬁrst
using a single Atmel QT 1103 capacitive touch sensor which
subsequently sent the digitized results to the Arduino.
Integrating the size of the piezo strike provided velocity.
Gangsa and pokok are played one note at a time which also
made cross-talk largely a non-issue. The strongest fastest
signal is always the target signal. The capacitive sensing
design was more challenging as the pad sizes were quite
large (starting from 1 inch x 1 inch) and had to be tuned.
When too sensitive, passing the hand near the sensor, as is a
common in performance, triggered unintentional damping.
During construction and testing of the ﬁrst gangsa design,
we found that inconsistency in the casting thickness and
piezo placing and adhesion, meant that velocity response
was insuﬃcently uniform and non-intuitive. Working with
piezo discs, the adhesive and mounting signiﬁcantly im-
pact the quality of signal recieved so slight diﬀerences lead
to comparative inconsistency. For an instrument made by
hand, suﬃcient consistency is hard to achieve. Adding to
this, the urethane damps too eﬀectively. The physical hit
does not propagate adequately throughout the whole key
meaning that a hit far from the piezo registers more weakly
than a hit directly above the piezo even though the physi-
cal force used was the same. A simple calibration test was
devised using a ping pong ball dropped down a paper towel
roll. Although detecting the strike was reliable and repeat-
able, the velocity sensitivity was not and deemed insuﬃcient
for use in performance.
These issues were addressed with a signiﬁcant redesign
after the ﬁrst performance. To ﬁx issues with velocity con-
sistency, each key on agangsa now uses an FSR sandwiched
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
20
between acrylic with a second FSR to detect damping from a
hand squeezing. Thin foam spaces the acrylic appropriately
to the sensor size. FSRs can be slow to decompress and re-
turn to original state, an issue handled by use of a moving
baseline. After considering playing styles, it was decided
that the damping rate of the real instrument directly corre-
sponds to the pressure with which it is squeezed and damp-
ing would be more appropriately detected through pressure.
Conveniently, switching away from capacitive sensing re-
sulted in more reliable damping, although frequent calibra-
tion was required while the new instruments settled. With
the struck surface now hard acrylic, accoustic damping of
the strike is achieved by attaching urethane to the panggul
tip. Although a slight divergence from the intended goal
to use unmodiﬁed pangguls, it is a minor modiﬁcation not
signiﬁcantly changing feel.
The pokok, being similar in playing technique to thegangsa,
have used the same designs adapted for correct scale.
4.2 Reong Design
The 12 pots of a real reong rest on strings providing bounce
and enabling resonance. It has four players who each have
two string wrapped pangguls and play single note melodies
or chords. There are two primary styles of hit, the byong
and the chuck. The byong is produced by striking the boss
or nipple of the pot with the string wrapped part of the
pangguland produces a clear pitched tone while the chuck
is produced by hitting the ﬂat part of the pot below the
boss with thepanggul’s hard wooden tip. The chuck is less
tonal and more percussive.
Like the gangsa, the reong pots ring signiﬁcantly and
are damped for musical clarity and texture. Damping is
achieved by direct pressure applied using thepanggul with
a technique of double hitting. The ﬁrst strike is allowed
to ring while the second, quieter damping strike sustains
enough pressure to mute the original. In practice this is
done very quickly and is hard to master. Thereong also
features a closed hit which is one that is never allowed to
ring. Both byongs and chucks can be damped this way al-
though the decay from a chuck is fast enough that damping
is not as signiﬁcant a concern.
The physical design of a reong pot is an acrylic mimic.
A solid acrylic column topped with soft rounded Vytaﬂex
urethane rubber is used for the boss and is mounted freely
in a removable acrylic pot. A special rubberchuck pad sits
in the pot edge. The byong column is kept in place by a
base it slots into. Felt is placed between the column and
the pot to eliminate contact sounds and ensure proper ﬁt.
Byong strikes are measured using a piezo ﬁlm placed
within the base the column slots into. This enables the
piezo to stay in a stable location. An FSR is co-located
which is used to detect pressure and damping. The piezo
response occurs faster than the FSR response and is easily
tuned to capture a full range of velocities through signal
integration. Using the FSR alone was not done as the col-
umn is tightly centered by the felt and the rest position and
pressure from the byong column are not always consistent.
Original tests also showed issues with dynamic range and
the slow response of the FSR increased latency. The combi-
nation of the FSR and piezo has also proven very handy for
identifying cross-talk. The byong sensors are sandwiched
with foam and felt to provide some isolation from vibration
transmitted through the frame and the column. Lastly, af-
ter the debut performance, it was found that the addition
of a light weight disc spring isolates the column from the
sensors, dramatically reducing cross-talk signals for much
improved low-level sensitivity.
The chucks were originally built with a piezo ﬁlm beneath
a urethane pad combined with two FSRs in the pots rubber
legs. The electronics will actually support four FSRs which
could be used for position sensing but only two have been
used so far. These sense pressure on the pot indicating the
pot is damped.
During construction it turned out that the sensors are
fairly delicate and would break easily while placed in the
pot legs. Additionally, as with thegangsa, the urethane did
not transmit the strike evenly so that the chuck velocity
was strongly linked with where and how it was hit. After
the debut performance, the piezo was removed and the two
FSRs were moved to directly beneath the pad. Being more
directly pressure sensitive, the FSRs remain largely cross-
talk impervious. Using two FSRs enabled coverage for the
full pad area and securing them under the pad is a less risky
location for breakage.
Figure 3: One half of the reong holding six pots.
The center is a free-standing rod with piezo ﬁlms
and FSRs placed underneath used to implementby-
ongs. The small pads on the right are the chucks.
With up to seven inputs per pot, each reong pot has its
own sensing engine. The piezo and FSR signals are run
through operational ampliﬁers for gain control and maxi-
mum dynamic range before being analyzed using an Atmel
Mega 88. Although initially interrupt driven, polling turned
out easier and suﬃciently eﬀective. The latency for sending
is under 7 ms with a 70 ms debounce hold after which it
begins checking for damping.
Unlike the gangsa where cross-talk is easily ignored by
selecting the peak signal, up to four of the six pots on a
reonghalf can be played simultaneously. Additionally, a
reong pot is uninformed of a neighbor’s signaling and the
sensors are aﬃxed to the frame recieving signal propaga-
tion through it. The paired behavior of the FSR and the
piezo enable the diﬀerentiation between cross-talk and a hit.
With both thebyong and the chuck in the case of cross-talk,
the piezo response is timed signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the
FSR response. The column and the pot both being free
standing, the FSR does suﬀer from cross-talk. With the
byongcolumn, the FSR signal is caused more from the col-
umn landing after a cross-talk induced disturbance so that
it signiﬁcantly lags the piezo response to the initial vibra-
tions. The FSR signal also often rises before dropping as
the column bounces.
Although each pot has its own MIDI out, for eﬃcient
cabling, each half of the reong also uses a Parallax Propeller
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
21
to combine the MIDI streams on a frame for a single out.
The Propeller, with eight parallel cores, turned out to be
perfect for this task as a core could be devoted to tracking
each of the six MIDI inputs and queing input messages in a
stack to be sent out through an output core. This alleviated
any concerns for collisions and means if the maximum of
four pots are hit simultaneously, it adds a maximum of only
5 ms latency and guarantees no missed messages. The MIDI
combining board also acts as a power distribution source for
the other boards.
Figure 4: Gamelan Elektrika gongs being performed
by Mark Stewart and Jacques Weissgerber. Rear
mounted piezos discs are used to detect the strike
while centered gold discs provide damping through
capacitive sensing. Photo by Kevin Yatarola
4.3 Gong Design
After toying with a couple of novel designs it was decided
to use the same sensing arrangement as the ﬁrst gangsas for
the gongs. Each of the four gongs have a piezo attached to
a large acrylic disk to detect when it has been hit. Damping
(not musically required but immensely useful as gongs have
extremely long resonance) is done by mounting a large cop-
per vinyl circle at the center. This is also visually suggestive
of a gong. Again, the electronics are simply a reduced ver-
sion of the original gangsas. As the strike surface is acrylic,
the gongs do not suﬀer the same strike propagation issues.
The inital design and construction proved itself well in the
ﬁrst performance and has only needed minor maintenance.
Structurally, the size and weight of the gongs have been
dramatically reduced. Four large stands have been com-
bined into one that holds four free swinging acrylic disks.
Their sizes range from 9 to 12 inches in diameter, function-
ally matched to the real gongs according to their size.
4.4 The Brain
According to performance tradition where a musician is in
full control of his sound, each player would be able to mon-
itor and select sound banks locally. However in our case,
individual control of a sound bank would be both a physical
and mental challenge as the hands are fully occupied during
a sitting performance. It seems appropriately Balinese to
consolidate sample bank control in a central brain. Also,
individual monitoring though highly advantageous, ends up
either a cabling and mixing nightmare due to scale. A local
synthesizer module is presently prohibitively expensive.
The result was a risky but necessary decision to generate
all sound through one computer. The brain is a Macbook
running Ableton which a musician uses to select sample
banks in real-time. MIDI input boxes take 10 diﬀerent in-
strument inputs and pass the MIDI note information on to
Ableton. This has a disconcerting eﬀect on a musician due
to the lack of direct feedback from the instrument, replaced
with the need to pick ”your” sound out of a full mix. Added
to this, the sample bank may change without the musician’s
input. Performance in this environment requires trust in the
instrument behavior, low latency, and a diﬀerent level of
physical comfort than normal with a piece. Technical chal-
lenges aside, it was not certain from a musical perspective
whether this would be a feasible performance environment.
5. RESULTS
Southworth’s piece ”Super Collider” successfully debuted as
planned to an audience of over 5000 on Aug 13, 2010 at the
Lincoln Center performed by Kronos Quartet and Gamelan
Galak Tika using Elektrika. Apart from some issues eventu-
ally traced to electrical interference in cable runs, the ﬁnal
instruments worked largely as intended though they lacked
velocity sensitivity. The decision to drop velocity was as
much due to musicians inexperience with the instruments
as technical challenges.
Kronos Quartet rejoined for a second performance on
April 15, 2011, at MIT’s Kresge auditorium to a sold out
crowd using the second version of the gangsas. This time
there were no problems from the instruments. Improved
instrument sensitivity and reliability plus rehearsal time
enabled the return of instrument dynamics. Both perfor-
mances were a success.
Rehearsals smoothed some of the disconcerting eﬀects of
sample bank changes and transpositions not triggered by
the musician. The lack of local monitoring has displayed
itself to be a challenge but is not insurmountable. An ex-
ample of the trouble it can cause is there are times the
pemade polospart is in unison with the kantil polos. If one
player is slightly ahead or oﬀ, it becomes very diﬃcult to
know which player is actually the one ahead as there is no
sound identiﬁcation and correcting by trying to slow back
a bit could just make the problem worse.
The ease of transistion from learning on the original in-
struments proves Elektrika’s success at being interchange-
able with the real instruments but dynamics remain a chal-
lenge. A musician learns an instrument through feedback-
hitting with a particular force produces a particular level
of sound. For Elektria, sound systems and outside sources
also eﬀect volume, so a deﬁnite understanding is hard to
come by especially without the chance to learn in a solo
environment. Due to set up and rehearsal constraints this
is yet to be mastered.
The redesigns for the second performance have yielded
robust and satisfactory instruments. The instruments play
consistently and suﬃciently similarly to the originals. The
gongs never needed much revision. The move to FSRs for
thegangsa provides more expression at the cost of slight
latency due to FSRs slow response time. Interestingly, the
latency is small enough that musicians cope very quickly
with it once aural feedback is available. Each time a new
sound setup is used with diﬀerent monitoring paths, the au-
dible latency changes slightly regardless of the instruments.
This requires learning new timing. At each new setup, the
melody starts with a swing as interlocked syncopations are
slightly oﬀ. However the section adapts and evens out after
just a few minutes of sectional practice.
The addition of the disc spring after the ﬁrst performance
largely eliminated sensitivity limitations for the reong by-
ongs. It is responsive and reliable. Now the question is
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
22
Figure 5: Gamelan Elektrika played by Gamelan Galak Tika during its premiere with Kronos Quartet at
the Lincoln Center. The reongs and two pokok can be seen on the far side with the four gangsa and gongs
on the left. The rear center features the accoustic percussion section, the computer ”brain”, and traditional
gongs which Kronos Quartet played as part of the performance.Photo by Kevin Yatarola
whether the damped sound can be achieved using the same
sample as the open hit. The move to two FSRs for thechuck
works and has resulted in fewer torn sensors than the ﬁrst
design, but is otherwise not a major improvement.
6. FUTURE WORK
With the ﬁrst two performances complete, Gamelan Elek-
trika is next bound for the Bang On A Can Summer Fes-
tival. It will be used in the composition course to teach
gamelan and available for use by the students. Terry Riley,
previously reluctant to write for GGT, has also been com-
missioned to write a piece for performance in the spring of
2012.
The second rebuild of the gangsas has settled well at this
point and is now plug-and-play with no forseeable signiﬁ-
cant changes. The reong is due to move to a new larger
frame that can eﬀectively protect the electronics, presently
exposed underneath. Thebyong has proven reliable, sensi-
tive, and expressive and will merely require being rebuilt in
the new frame. Switching to just FSRs to sensechucks for
the second performance has resulted in a confusing mixture
of latencies as the piezo drivenbyong is much more instan-
taneously responsive. During the rebuild, the piezo will be
re-incorporated for consistent response time. To mitigate
the directionality of force applied to the urethane, the pad
will also be given a ﬁrm base so pressure applied anywhere
on the pad can be equally detected.
Long term technological goals are to provide an in-ear
monitor capability at each instrument, or instrument pair,
enabling the musician to easily hear and distinguish what
they are playing. There are also plans to ﬁnish the as yet
undesigned electronicceng cengand the option of the elec-
tronic kempli in order to complete all the electronic instru-
ments originally envisioned.
7. CONCLUSIONS
The Gamelan Elektrika instruments work. They achieve
both primary design goals- a signiﬁcantly reduced physical
size and weight and a similar feel to the original. Through
MIDI we have been able to meet the musical goals of vari-
able tunings, wider sound palette, and easier transcription,
The initial success even on immature instruments has been
brilliant, and gamelan can now participate in the electronic
age of music that other instruments entered years ago. For
performers and musicians in the genre it is a freeing and
exciting development.
8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Tremendous thanks to Alex Rigopulos and Sachi Sato for
their funding, support, and guidance without which Elek-
trika would be just an idea. Thanks also to Quentin Kelley
for building us beautiful frames, Galak Tika director Evan
Ziporyn, Jaques Weissgerber, Katie Puckett, Julie Strand,
Bill Tremblay, Noah Feehan and Steph Bou and the rest of
the gamelan for their help, support, and patience. Thanks
to Kronos Quartet for such a brilliant debut and lastly
thanks for the support of Dr. Joe Paradiso, Responsive
Environments and the MIT Media Lab.
9. REFERENCES
[1] http://www.alternatemode.com.
[2] http://www.gamelatron.com.
[3] L. Gold.Music in Bali: experiencing music, expressing
culture. Oxford University Press, 2005.
[4] M. Goldstein. Playing Electronics with Mallets
Extending the Gestural Possibilities. 2000.
[5] A. Kapur, P. Davidson, P. Cook, P. Driessen, and
W. Schloss. Digitizing north indian performance. In
Proceedings of the International Computer Music
Conference. Citeseer, 2004.
[6] L. t. O. Nearﬁeld Multimedia Marimba Lumina.
Electronic Musician, 16(6), June 2000.
[7] G. Reid. The History Of Roland. Part 2: 1979-1985.
Sound On Sound, December 2004.
[8] P. J. Revitt. The Institute of Ethnomusicology at
U.C.L.A. College Music Symposium, 2, 1962.
[9] M. Tenzer. Gamelan gong kebyar: the art of
twentieth-century Balinese music. University of
Chicago Press, 2000.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
23