Connecting Strangers at a Train Station 
 
Lars Pellarin 
Aalborg University, Copenhagen 
Lautrupvang 15 
2750 Ballerup, Denmark 
+45 35 82 61 49 
lars@statler-waldorf.dk 
 
Ole Gregersen 
Aalborg University, Copenhagen 
Lautrupvang 15 
2750 Ballerup, Denmark 
+45 35 82 61 49 
post@oleg.dk 
Niels Böttcher 
Aalborg University, Copenhagen 
Lautrupvang 15 
2750 Ballerup, Denmark 
+45 35 82 61 49 
ilz@jenkamusic.dk  
 
Stefania Sarafin 
Aalborg University, Copenhagen 
Lautrupvang 15 
2750 Ballerup, Denmark 
+45 35 82 61 49 
sts@media.aau.dk 
 
Jakob Mejner Olsen 
Aalborg University, Copenhagen 
Lautrupvang 15 
2750 Ballerup, Denmark 
+45 35 82 61 49 
jakob@blim.dk  
 
Michel Guglielmi 
Aalborg University, Copenhagen 
Lautrupvang 15 
2750 Ballerup, Denmark 
+45 35 82 61 49 
migu@media.aau.dk 
 
ABSTRACT 
In this paper we describe a vi rtual instrument or a performance 
space, placed at Høje Tåstrup train station in Denmark, which is 
meant to establish communicative connections between strangers, 
by letting users of the system create soundscapes together across 
the rails.  
We discuss mapping st rategies and complexity and suggest a 
possible solution for a final instance of our interactive musical 
performance system. 
Keywords 
Motion tracking, mapping strategies , public installation, multiple 
participants music interfaces.    
1. INTRODUCTION 
The development of performance sy stems with gesture-controlled 
sound output can be understood as related to the research field of 
digital instruments.  
Unlike traditional physical instruments, the interface and the 
actual sound generator can be regarded as two separate parts.  
The result is that the connection between the interface and the 
instrument becomes important in itself. This paper describes the 
authors main experiences with motion tracking, mapping 
strategies and sound designs from user tests in connection to the 
development of an interactive installation which takes place in 
Hoje Taastrup train station in Denmark.  
 
2. DESCRIPTION OF THE 
INSTALLATION 
On two opposite platforms at Hoje Taastrup train station, an area 
that responds to movements whic h generate sounds is created. A 
connection between the people moving inside the area can be 
established if one or more persons move inside the two areas at 
the same time. The soundscape can be explored, until the train 
arrives and breaks the connection. 
The system uses motion tracking, which via video translates 
user’s movement into sound. Tracking users from above moves 
hardware out of the field of vi sion and does not require physical 
contact from the user in order to control the sound, which does 
not interrupt the normal behaviour of the users in the public space 
of the train station.  
Each of the two users can trigger sounds, moving around a 2 by 3 
meter area. Each person controls an individual system so there is 
both a process of  understanding the system, and the process of 
understanding the relation between the two areas and users. This 
happens through the output sonic feedback.  
The full setup includes two laptops, connected through WLAN, 
transmitting control messages and l oudspeakers. Each laptop runs 
a Max/MSP plus Jitter [1] patc h, which performs the initial 
motion tracking and the sound synthesis.  
 
Permission to make digital or hard copi es of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME'05, May 26-28, 2005, Vancouver, BC, Canada. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
152
 
 
 
Figure 1 Scheme of the installation at the station 
3. RELATED PROJECTS 
In our research we have looked at similar and related projects. 
This was used to discuss different sound constellations or designs, 
communicative aspects and studies in how people approach and 
adapt to new interfaces. 
 
3.1 Bubbles and Bouncing Balls 
In an early stage in developing our sound aesthetic, we tried to 
create the sensation of walking among bobbles of sound particles, 
which would bounce when you pus hed them as seen in a 
performance of “Messa di voce” by Golan Levin et al.[2]  
We started designing an implementation of the bouncing balls  
metaphor for Max/MSP, so that the more you moved, the longer 
the sound would “bounce”, and the bigger the jumps would be. 
Our first implementation failed, but we suspect that this would be 
a good candidate for our further development of a complex 
mapping. 
 
3.2 Using the system 
Inspired by the people at Boxiganga 1 and the paper Performing 
Space by Pedro Rebelo [3] we have defined some expectations to 
the development process of a novice user of the system: 
First she must explore the system, then learn the basic 
possibilities, experience the system and at last she can start 
finding new possibilities. 
In these 4 phases the user has different demands to the 
installation.  
In phase 1 the user has to be interested in order to stay. Therefore 
the installation needs to create some initial attention.  
In phase 2 she needs to find out what is the intended use of the 
installation, what is she supposed to do. To make this clear, the 
system has to react somehow logically to the users actions.  
In phase 3 the user has learned how to use the installation and can 
experience it the way it was intended. Here we expect the 
connection between the two platforms to be established.  
                                                                 
1 Boxiganga is a Danish performance, and stage-art group. for 
further info visit : www.boxiganga.dk  
In phase 4 which is running parallel in time with phase 3, the user 
will try to find new possibilities in the system, if not she will 
become uninterested and leave. Therefore the complexity of the 
installation has to develop along with users ability to use and 
understand the system. 
 
3.3 Communication 
The communication is not the primary objective - rather the ideal 
product. If this can happen with our system, we will be more than 
happy.  
We expect a byproduct, which may be just as important as the 
relations: By installing a system on in a public space, we hope to 
see secondary communication between people about the system, 
as seen with other installations (For instance the installation of the 
Process console by Oval [4].). 
4. MAPPING STRATEGIES 
Using human motion as interface for control of sound parameters, 
frees the user of the restraints of physical objects like, a mouse or 
other objects used to manipulate data.  
We need to balance between making intuitive mappings without 
loosing the users’ interest [5]. We have to limit the complexity of 
the movements that we define as controllers, since we can not 
expect the users to do weird gestures. This would be 
uncomfortable for the users and not encourage participation. 
Moreover a very complex definition of gestures as controllers for 
the system would make it very hard for a new user to learn how to 
control it [6].  Since most users are likely to have no experience 
with the installation and since they probably only have a few 
minutes to explore the interactive installation there are natural 
limits for the complexity of the interaction. 
The mapping strategy mainly used  is a simple one-to-one [7], 
connecting all motion tracking parameters directly to instrument 
inputs in the MSP patch. Various  tests were done with more 
complex mappings (one to many , and cooperation based), and 
different sound designs. 
4.1 Simple mapping strategies 
To get to the point of communica tion across the rails as fast as 
possible, by minimizing all parts of the  interaction. This was 
tested by mapping horizontal positi on to frequency of user A and 
amplitude of user B. 
Even though we knew how the mapping was done, we as users 
had great difficulties defining who controlled what. Also, the 
changes was so uninspiring that the urge to explore the system 
quickly fainted. 
This suggests that a common cont rol of one instrument is not 
necessarily very easy to comprehend.  
4.2 Complex soundscape design 
This idea was to make a more complex soundscape, as opposite to 
the previous. Here the complex ity of the soundscape should blur 
the simplicity of the mappings, making the exploration of the 
system more interesting. By only letting the users explore the 
complete soundscape when working together, the cooperative 
aspect was highly emphasized.  
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
153
We used samples in this test, but still with a one to one  mapping 
strategy: Sample end-point cont rolled by user A and playback 
speed by user B. 
4.3 Simple soundscape design with one to 
many mapping strategy 
The concept here was to assign one unique instrument to each 
user. Giving them their own dis tinct voice. There is no actual 
dependency between the 2 users. They are free to use their voice 
for some kind of play or communication with the other user, or 
they can choose to explore their own instrument. 
This idea was tested on an airplane like synth sound with a 
different frequency spectrum assigned to each user. The mapping 
strategy was one to many and  the controlled sound parameters 
were frequency and volume. 
The user easily understands what sh e controls but there is made 
no clear connection between the two users. The process of 
controlling the sound seems to capture the main focus of each 
user. From this test we concluded that the use of samples could 
not stand alone since the interac tion would be too controlled and 
predictable. But the idea of making a more game-like interaction 
between the two users, was very engaging, at least on a short 
timescale.  
4.4 Mirroring movements 
Mirroring movements means to force the user to cooperate by 
making them do the same action. In case this happens, a clear 
reward exists. Otherwise no sound output should be produced. 
Users trigger samples by standi ng in corresponding sub-areas  of 
each their assigned area. When both users are in the same area a 
sample is played in loop. 
The mappings are quite easily unders tood, but the interaction is 
very restraint, which makes the users loose interest fast. The 
cooperation is very game-like, al most too childish for the context 
of the project.  
From the above tests and the experience we have gained during 
the development process of this  performance system we have 
tried do develop a refined set of mappings corresponding to the 
defined sound design. 
The mapping strategy preferred is the simple one to one , 
connecting all motion tracking pa rameters directly to sound 
parameters.  
We have defined a set of mapping rules based on two main 
approaches: the learning process the user goes through during a 
session [3], and the direct connection between sound and motion. 
In general, we are foreseeing the following behaviour: 
Exploration of the system: 
the user wants to be interested in order to stay. Therefore the 
installation needs to create some initial attention. 
Learn the basic possibilities: 
The user needs to find out what is the intended use of the 
installation, what is he supposed to do. To make this clear the 
installation has to react somehow logically to the users actions 
Experience the system: 
When the user have learned how to use the installation he can 
experience it the way it was intended. Here we expect the 
connection between the two platforms is being established.  
Finding new possibilities (running para llel in time with phase 3) 
 the user will try to find new possibilities in the system, if he does 
not he will loose interest and leave. Therefore the complexity of 
the installation has to develop along with users ability to use and 
understand the system. 
We have used a straightforward instrument analogy in the 
mapping strategy where e.g. a movement from left to right 
changes the pitch of a played tone as running the fingers over a 
piano. Furthermore we have defined a set of rules for the control 
of the energy of the sound, which is also inspired by the nature of 
musical instruments: 
Fast movements mapped to percussive sounds as when you punch 
an instrument you get a short loud sound. 
Slow movements mapped to atmospheric sounds (e.g. like stroked 
string instruments). 
The more movement the more complex soundscape and higher 
amplitude (2 persons create more  movement and thereby more 
sound). 
These simple rules are intended to give the user a chance to grasp 
the connection between his m ovements and the sound output 
rather fast.  
From our tests we have experienced that there is a big chance that 
users will find the experience boring if there is no development or 
“resistance” in the system. So the goal  with the mapping strategy 
was to create a mapping that would not be too hard to learn, not 
too easy and not too controlled.   
By combining ideas from our experiments in a multi-layer 
mapping system, we have gained a certain complexity with 
possibilities for exploration, and by using only one to one 
mapping strategies in every layer, we have sustained a simple and 
comprehensible connection between movement and sound. 
5. CREATING THE INSTRUMENTS 
The considerations on the sound was split between making 
controlled sequences which would resemble conventional pieces 
of music put together from small bits according to the user 
movements, and an open sound system determined by the users 
and the situation. The first, suited for the atmosphere of Høje 
Tåstrup railway station, yet inevitably very determined by the 
taste of the authors. The goal was also to create as little 
predefined structure or compos ition as possible, leaving this 
control to the movement of the users. 
Then there is the consideration about users only exploring their 
own area, and not recognising the opposite area. The marked out 
areas visible to both users will hint a similarity between them. 
The complexity of the mappings and the sound should make the 
period users spend on the system, long enough for them to 
discover the area on the other side. However, there is a risk that 
the complexity or abstract sound will intimidate users.  The 
question is, if we can make a sound design that intimidate less 
people than another, and if the sound is really that important.  
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
154
6. CONCLUSIONS 
Since we only need fast reactions to the movement, and accurate 
position data of the whole body, we chose a cheap tracking 
method based on background subtraction. 
We found the one-layered mappi ngs too tedious and added 
complexity. We built a multi layered mapping system, where the 
single user had control of some instruments and the control of 
other instruments depended on both us ers. This complexity is not 
only adding depth to the experi ence but more over confusing 
users.  
We intend to develop evolving be haviours for the instruments, 
which e.g. depend on the surroundi ngs (the weather, the number 
of people at the station or the distance of the approaching train), 
to substitute the above mentioned complexity. 
The prototype sound design was mainly based on the testing of 
mappings, and not an aesthetic consideration. We find it 
necessary to work on a more consistent design to make a system 
that will be appealing to users, and encourage them to use it.  
However, we are not sure of the importance of the sound design, 
since we suspect the users’ exploration of the interactive 
possibilities, will be enough to establish the communicative 
connection we try to create. 
The prototype did not facilitate the amount of cooperation that we 
intended. The test persons spent too much time and attention 
exploring their own area. In the further development we have to 
work on clearer mappings, but still implement an increasing 
complexity. 
We still need to test the system at the station, and in spite of the 
many problems with the technical si de of our installation, we are 
confidant that we will be able to establish a connection between 
people. We believe this will make the installation relevant, by 
proposing a break in peoples everyday routines, in a space 
regarded as uninspiring and intended only for waiting; a chance to 
play – even with others. To us, it has merely been an investigation 
in the use of modern multimedia technology, but we see it as a 
chance to bring a little color to the gray train stations, and maybe 
even a bit of poetry. 
7. REFERENCES 
[1] MaxMSP & Jitter - http://www.cycling74.com 
[2] Golan Levin, Zach Lieberman, Jaap Blonk, Joan La Barbara 
- An Audiovisual Performance & Installation for Voice and 
Interactive Media  
Created Summer 2003 http://tmema.org/messa  
[3] Pedro Rebelo - Performing Space 
Sonic Arts Research Centre, Queen’s University Belfast 
[4] Oval / M. Popp, J. Werner & S. Oschatz - Oval Process 
Public Beta - Product 
http://www.meso.net/oschatz/oval/product.html  
[5] Kia Ng - Music via Motion: Transdomain Mapping of 
Motion and Sound for interactive Performance 
Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 92, April 2004 
[6] M. M. Wanderley, P. Depalle - Gestural Control of Sound 
Synthesis Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 92, April 2004 
[7] A. Hunt, M. M. Wanderley, M. Paradis – The importance of 
parameter mapping in electronic musicNIME-02 Ireland, 
May 2002 
[8] Nick Efford – Digital Image Processing, 
Pearson 2000 
[9] A. Hunt, M. M. Wanderley, R. Kirk - Towards a model for 
Instrumental Mapping in Expert Musical Interaction 
[10] Kia Ng - Interactive Gesture Music Performance Interface 
NIME-02 Ireland, May 2002  
[11] C. Dobrian, F. Bevilacqua - Gestural Control of Music Using 
the Vicon 8 Motion Capture System 
NIME03, Canada 2003 
 
 
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
155