 
  
Abstract 
Starting from a parallelism between the effervescence of the 
1920s in the exploration of new ways of controlling music 
and the actual revolution in the design of new control 
possibilities, this paper aims to explore the possibilities of 
rethinking instruments from the past towards instrument s 
of the future. Through three examples (the experience of the 
Persephone, the design of the Persephone2  and the 4 
strings ribbon cello project) , I will explore the 
contemporary notion of  « instruments of the future  » vs. 
controls that people expect from s uch instruments 
nowadays.  
Keywords: Controller, Sensor, MIDI , USB, Computer 
Music, ribbon controllers, ribbon cello . 
1. Introduction 
Are we the future  of the past? Let’s go back to the early 
twentieth century and the recent invention of filters and 
VCA, whic h has been followed by the invention of many 
new controls and new electronic instruments. If among 
these, many are now parts of our cabinets of curiosities, 
some are worth a closer examination… Sensor technology 
now enables to recreate some of these forgot ten controls 
with a new accuracy, turning them into innovative tools . 
2. Historical Parallelism 
A quick historical comparison between the XXth and the 
XXIst century will lead to the conclusion that both 
centuries have known, in their early years, a certain 
effervescence in the design of new controllers. This 
parallelism can be explained by recent discoveries that 
have, at both times, opened w ide fields of new technical 
possibilities. May it  also f ind its origins in a particular 
political and economical environ ment – this won’t be the 
subject of this paper.  
2.1 1920’s Effervescence 
The creation of the first electronic oscillators, followed by 
the invention of filters and VCA enabling to play tremolos 
and vibratos and to recreate the musicality of classical 
instruments, opened the field of  the research for new 
controls, which would offer more possibilities than generic 
keyboards. The 1920s remains the most fertile years for the 
evolution of electronic music instruments with the 
invention of new controls like dial -operated non -keyboard 
electronic instruments or ribbon -controlled instruments. In 
Russia, Lev Sergeivitch Termen developed the Theremin 
using the body capacitance as a control mechanism, 
freeing the performer from the keyboard and fixed 
intonation. He also created the first fingerbo ard cellos. In 
France and in Germany, a whole family of dial -operated 
non keyboard electronic instruments was developed. 
Among them, René Bertrand and Edgard Varèse’s 
Dynaphone or Jörg Mager's Electrophon and Spharaphon. 
At the end of the 1920s, a family o f the fingerboard 
instruments –or ribbon controllers - appeared. In France, les 
Ondes Martenot , designed by Maurice Martenot , included 
both a seven -octave keyboard and a ribbon controller that 
allowed pitch inflections like a voice or stringed 
instrument. It allowed for a wide glissando when the player 
moved a finger ring attached to the metal ribbon that 
controlled frequency. Hundreds of symphonic works, 
operas, ballets, and film scores were composed for this 
instrument by Varèse, Honneger and Maessian. 
In Leipzig, Peter Lertes and Bruno Helberger developed 
the Hellertion. This fingerboard was a flat metal resistance 
strip covered with leather. Depending on where the strip 
was pressed, a different resistance in the circuit was 
created altering the voltage se nt to the oscillator and 
thereby producing different pitches. The force of the 
pressure controlled the volume of the output signal. The 
fingerboard was marked to help the performer find the 
correct pitch on the strip and had a range of approximately 
five o ctaves. The original instrument had just one 
fingerboard strip which was gradually increased to four 
and then on the later models, six aligned in parallel 
horizontally at the height of a piano keyboard. The four 
and six strip models allowed four and six vo ice polyphony. 
The Trautonium was the first instrument to ally position 
and pressure control. Created in 1931 by Franz 
Trauntwein, it used filters to modify the timber of the note 
and a keyboard. The Original Trautonium had a 
fingerboard consisting of a re sistance wire made of a tube 
of graphite stretched over a metal rail marked with a 
chromatic scale and coupled to a neon tube oscillator. 
When the performer was pressing the wire, it would touch 
the rail and complete the circuit. The Trautonium had a 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.  
NIME09, June 3-6, 2009, Pittsburgh, PA 
Copyright remains with the author(s).  
Emmanuelle Gallin, Marc Sirguy 
Eowave 
La Cure, 58110 Tintury, France 
info@eowave.com 
Sensor Technology and the Remaking of Instruments from the Past 
NIME 2009199
three octaves range that could be transposed by means of a 
switch. The Sonar, developed by N. Anan'yev in the USSR 
in the 1930s also had a fingerboard continuous controller 
to vary the pitch of the oscillator.  
2.2 The Supremacy Of Keyboards  
After the 40s, the gene ral use of keyboards (and the war) 
slew down the research of new types of controls. Ribbon 
controllers were back in the 1960s with Moog ribbon 
controllers which Keith Emerson was famous for attaching 
to a pyrotechnics control. The Theremin -like sound in th e 
Beach Boys' song "Good Vibrations," was played by a 
ribbon-controlled instrument called the Electro -Theremin, 
which the Beach Boys have later replaced by a Moog 
ribbon controller with a Moog synthesizer.  
Only a few synthesizers from the 1980s had ribbon 
controls: Yamaha CS80 ’s ribbon controller, Kurzweil 
synths and the Korg Prophecy.  
3. The XXIst Century and the Emergence Of 
New Controls 
The 2000s offered new possibilities with the development 
of sensor technology and new computer controls. Today, 
new contr ollers designed by the gaming and 
communication industries are much more innovative than 
the controls developed in the music industry. The general 
use of these new controls necessarily has a deep impact on 
the demand from musicians for new controllers as w ell as 
on the invention of a new approach for making music. Will 
brands like Apple or Nintendo be at the origin of a new 
musical gesture? Communication & game new controllers, 
such as Apple IPod, IPhones, ITouch, Nintendo Wiimotes, 
or DS with Korg D -10 for example, are commonly used by 
musicians as new tools for controlling music -first 
advantage being the low prices of these new tools. Though 
they offer a choice of innovative controllers, their low 
sampling resolution remains a barrier for making music 
(the number of values being insufficient for a musical 
gesture). On another hand, new controllers made for 
musicians are often limited to a closed non editable 
environment. Some artists and circuit bending specialists 
modify these new controllers to have a hi gher sampling 
resolution (12 bit allowing a resolution of 4096 values), 
but this approach is rare for a larger public. In general, the 
re-appropriation of control tools, which have not been 
thought for musicians and are not designed for musical 
applications, is limited in terms of use. Though it is 
possible to imagine that these new controllers could be at 
the origin of a new intuitive control gesture? The question 
of intuitivity in musical gesture must refer to an acquired 
gesture, but not necessarily to a  musical gesture.  The 
analysis of this intrusion of new control gesture into the 
music area is fundamental for all music industries and 
controller new designs. The « learning limit  » is another 
important aspect for the design of new instruments. 
Among the forgotten controllers from the past, many have 
disappeared because their play  required to be learnt. The 
past experiences with controllers tell us that a controller 
must be intuitive. The fact that most of the non -keyboard 
instruments using new controllers  required a new play 
explains why they remained unpopular with musicians 
who had little time to practice on unusual keyboard, the 
Telharmonium 36 -note-per-octave keyboard designed by 
Cahill for example.  
4. Remaking Ribbons: the Persephone 
Experience[1] 
In 2002, we decided to work on a contemporary version of 
a fingerboard instrument, using sensor controls today’s 
technology would offer but preserving the best of analogue 
sound generators. Beyond a vintage look, the Persephone 
allies sensors technology and dig ital controls to a pure 
analogue generation of sound. Its analogue oscillator can 
generate notes with a range of 10 octaves, which goes from 
a deep and resonant cello tone to a nearly human voice [ 2]. 
And on the highest pitches, it can reach very high 
frequencies. The oscillator waveform can be set between 
triangle and saw tooth for a more or less brilliant sound. Its 
ribbon sensor technology allows all k ind of glissando a 
Theremin or L es Ondes Martenot would allow, though the 
sensor ribbon is much more pre cise than the tube full of 
graphite used as a variable resistance in the Trautoniu m.  
 
 
fig. 1. The Persephone 
The way the Persephone is played creates the instrument 
personality. The Persephone follows the traditional play of 
the first non-keyboard electronic instruments with the right 
hand controlling the pitch and the left hand controlling the 
velocity. Control gesture is very intuitive, expressive and 
accurate enough for playing scores – not only sci-fi effects.  
Like on the Trautonium, the Persephone’ s ribbon is 
sensitive to pressure and position. The ribbon is a linear 
potentiometer that generates different control voltages 
depending on where it is touched. These changes in 
voltage are applied to the voltage -controlled oscillator and 
the filter. A 12 bits converter samples analogue signal from 
the ribbon to send them in MIDI or control the oscillator. 
In the 5 octaves mode, the 12 bit sampling enables a 
resolution of 68 cents per half tones  –the average human 
perception range being of 8 cents. This avoids scales effect 
and it is possible to switch from mode A to the other 
modes without hearing the analogue/digital switch.  An 
expression key controls the filter. This kind of key was 
also found on Les Ondes Martenot. With the Persephone, it 
200
is controlled by an optical sensor able to reproduce 
vibratos.  
Four play modes A,B,C,D offer different hierarchy of 
control between the pitch, the velocity, a filter modulation 
and a LFO. An expression pedal can be connected to 
control the volume (modes A and B) or the  LFO speed 
(modes C and D).  
5. Designing Persephone markII 
Three years after the first release of the Persephone, 
comments from users and suggestions for new features 
illustrate how important is the influence of new controllers 
developed by the game and comm unication industries (e.g. 
multi-touch surfaces and Nintendo Wii games) on the 
perception of new musical interfaces. A growing demand 
called for a polyphonic ribbon and stronger integration into 
the computer music environment by adding a USB I/O to 
the MIDI and CV I/O. 
5.1 Designing Persephone II: A duophonic ribbon [3] 
The Persephone II has two analogue oscillators (low wave 
and hi wave) both generating a sine to saw waveform. 
Making the ribbon duophonic extends the instrument 
sonorities spectral to play simpl e chords. With ribbons, the 
resistance is usually measured where at the stimulated 
position (the ribbon is pressed). Here, the resistance is 
measured at each extremity of the ribbon.  
 
fig.2. Duophonic ribbon  
 
The Uc switches alternatively the voltage at the two ends 
of the ribbon. Measuring the voltage at the stimulated 
position will alternatively track the right and left positions.  
and left positions.  
 
 
fig.3. Circuitry for a duophonic ribbon   
The duophonic ribbon allows modulation capabilities like 
frequency modulation of one oscillator by the other one. 
Each oscillator has a dedicated 12dB low -pass filter to 
adjust the low and hi sounds separately.   
5.2 The hierarchy of controls  
16 presets enable to select different routing architectures.  
8 presets are fixed and 8 are users presets configurable thru 
a software application. Users presets will be stored in an 
internal memory.  
5.3 Compatibility with computer music environment  
The A/D conversion is made with Eowave ESS DSP [ 4]. 
This process assures a 12 bits r esolution (4096 values) 
conversion for an accurate musical gesture. It’s 100% 
MIDI compatible and uses USB full speed 12 Mb/s. This 
compatibility makes the Persephone II compatible with all 
MIDI compatible softwares. It reduces the latency at less 
than 1,5ms. ESS DSP offers an internal signal process and 
a compatibility with MAC/PC/ Linux. 
Used as a controller, Persephone II parameters can be 
affected to any controllers in different format Control 
Change 7 bits, Control Change 12 bits (where the 5 LSB 
bits a re mapped on CC + 64), note on trigger, program 
change, pitch bend 12 bits real, pitch bend14 bits mapped, 
monophonic aftertouch (channel pressure). Presets, 
transmission channels, parameter setting can be saved in 
the internal memory.  Each controller has an optimized 
processing with analogue and digital zooming, offset, 
inverse, low -pass filter, noise gate to transmit the better 
signal to the host. In the Persephone II, these processes are 
fixed for controller presets, but editable in an opened 
mode. 4 CV outputs, MIDI in & out and USB turn the 
Persephone II into a versatile controller.  
6. Remaking The Ribbon Cello: Ribbons like 
strings 
Working on the Persephone II duophonic ribbons is at the 
basis of another project involving ribbons: the remake of a 
4 strings Ribbon Cello.   
 
  
fig. 4. Theremin’s Ribbon Cello [5] 
fig.5. Eowave multi ribbon surface, 4 strings Ribbon Cello 
prototype, 2009.   
The Ribbon Cello developed by Lev Termen is also known 
as the Fingerboard Theremin [ 6]. Instead of strings, it has a 
flexible plastic film fingerboard which, when touched, 
produces a tone. As long as the finger remains depressed, a 
201
tone is sustained. The technology employed for the ribbon 
at that time made impossible the making of 4 parallel 
ribbons. The volume is control led by a lever on the player's 
right and the tone color is controlled by knobs, and the 
sound is amplified by an external amplifier.  
 
6.1 Logarithmic multi-ribbons 
The ribbons created for the Ribbon Cello project use the 
same technical specifications than the  linear 
potentiometers used for the Persephone2. In a way to have 
the same surface than a bass neck with 4 ribbons, we 
needed ribbons thinner than the one that can be found on 
the market. We designed a 65mm x 520mm surface with 4 
resistive strips of 10mm l arge each. Contrar ily to the 
Persephone2, ribbons are not linear but logarithmic to 
imitate strings ratio.  
6.2 Sound Generation and tuning  
Sound is generated by 4 oscillators – one per each ribbon. 
The ribbon strings can be tuned with 4 pegs. 4 Infrared 
sensors placed in a row on the right side of the instrument 
table control the 4 VCAs. A 24dB low -pass filter is 
controlled via a pressure sensor on the back of the cello 
neck.  
6.3 The bow hand 
In the original version, the volume was controlled by a 
lever on the pl ayer's right. The multi -ribbon is not pressure 
sensitive and therefore, does not control the amplitude. If it 
had, the pressure sensitivity of the ribbons and the fingers 
contact with the ribbons, would have not been able to 
reproduce the particular attack  or decay of the bow action 
on the strings…  
If some existing systems can track such moves with 
accelerometers (guitar ring…)[ 7], we wanted to free the 
player of any accessories. A row of four i nfrared sensors 
placed on the table measure the right arm move s to 
reproduce the bow movements. This feature needs to be  
on/off. The inclination of the row of IR sensors also needs 
to be defined so it corresponds to the bow musical gesture.  
 
 
fig. 6. Infrared sensor row to control the bow hand  
 
6.4 Compatibility with the computer music 
environment 
Eowave Ribbon Cello is based on ESS DSP and has the 
same I/O environment that has been implemented in the 
Persephone II with high -speed USB, 100% MIDI 
compatible and freely assignable parameters per 
controllers available.  
6.5 Work in progress…  
Many aspects of the 4 strings ribbon cello still need to be 
defined. Among them, the location of the electronics: this 
should not be integrated inside the instrument body, but in 
a box apart. This will also enable to make a wireless 
version of the instrument.  
7. Final Words 
Today, sensor technology is reinventing controllers. If 
some interfaces for musical expression integrate these new 
technologies, the technical breakthroughs are lead by the 
game & communication industries. What will be the 
influence of the rapid rise of new controllers on musical 
interfaces in the future ? Remaking instruments from the 
past with these new technologies is a way to resurrect 
forgotten instruments and make reality the dream of their 
first designer. This confronta tion of ideas from different 
times reveal s new issues  for today , in particular the 
definition of the hierarchy of controls  vs. acquired musical 
gestures.  
 
References 
[1]    The first prototype has been presented in January 2004 at  
the Winter NAMM Show in Los Angeles and in April 2004 
at the Frankfurt Musik Messe. Two years later, the final 
version has been released with improvements and new 
functionalities, like MIDI in & out, full tone and half tone 
modes. 
[2]     Mp3 are available on www.monstersynths.com  
[3]     The Persephone markII prototype has been presented at the 
Francfurt Musik Messe 2009. See www.eowave.com  
[4]     ESS DSP  
(Eobody2 Sensor Systems Digital Signal Processing) is an 
integrated solution for sensor to digital protocols standard 
needs, compatible with USB, OSC, MIDI, DMX, high 
speed USB, 7 to 14 bit, internal analogue & digital DSP 
processing with 32 bit filtering, amplifying. ESS DSP was 
presented at Ircam Resonances in 2008. www.eowave.com  
[5]     Images courtesy of National Music Museum ,  
The University of South Dakota, Vermillion, SD.  
[6]  Albert Glinsky  : Theremin: Ether Music & Espionage , 
University of Illinois Press, 2005, 480 p.  
[7]     www.sourceaudio.net or www.xpresence.com 
 
202