Smartphone-based Music Conducting 
 
Yang Kyu Lim, Woon Seung Yeo 
Audio & Interactive Media Lab 
Graduate School of Culture Technology, KAIST 
291 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon  
lim0386@kaist.ac.kr, woony@kaist.edu 
 
ABSTRACT 
 This study introduces vMaestro, a smartphone interface for music 
conducting. Powered by the device’s gyroscope, vMaestro analyzes 
conducting motions, allowing the user to not only control the tempo 
but also to simulate cueing for different instruments. The results of user 
tests show that, despite certain ergonomic problems, conducting 
practice with vMaestro is more satisfactory than traditional methods 
and has a strong potential as a conducting practice tool.  
 
Keywords 
smartphone, conducting, 
practice, orchestra 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 It takes a considerable amount of practice to play music well. In 
particular, to become masters of music, conductors require sufficient 
practice time. However, it is impossible to gather more than 200 
orchestra members for daily practice. Therefore, a conducting major 
generally has only few chances to conduct a real orchestra. Conducting 
majors usually practice with music whose speed is unchangeable, such 
as CDs or MP3s. Further, students study with pianos as much as 
possible to make up for what they lack in live music practice. They 
quickly translate the full score of the orchestra to piano music. This 
practice helps them to learn about tempo, instrumentation, and melody 
line. Yet, there remains a significant lack of necessary practice. 
Therefore, the conductor cannot expect to have a good interaction with 
an orchestra in a short duration, as he would with an individual musical 
instrument. Significant experience can help someone master the 
technique of conducting. 
vMaestro is a handheld digital musical interface that can be used 
by students majoring in music in order to practice orchestral 
conducting.  vMaestro gathers several scattered conducting practices 
–tempo and cueing- into one realistic practice, using smartphone 
gyroscopes and computers to help students practice conducting. 
Students can learn about tempo, instrumentation, and melody line 
through conducting gestures and cueing directions. 
2. RELATED WORK 
Many research studies on virtual music conducting programs have 
been carried out in the past. The first was Radio-Baton, which was 
invented by Max Mathews. It is a system that allows conductors and 
composers to play orchestral scores through electronic methods, and it 
is still in use today [2]. Its computer-generated MIDI player controlling 
concept is similar to that of vMaestro. Using both hands to control the 
dynamics and other musical signals is very similar to real conducting. 
Using just one hand is a handicap when it comes to recognizing all 
gestures involved in conducting. However, using Radio-Baton is not a 
similar way to practice real conducting. Conductor’s cueing must have 
a directional information to command more than 200 orchestra 
members. Our study uses directional informations with gyroscope to 
make a realistic situation of practice. 
 Pinocchio is a virtual symphony orchestra system that enables the 
user to experience conducting using a baton with a computer camera. 
It also develops and applies multiple beats, orchestration setups, and 
audio effect setups. Orchestration practice is the focus of our study. 
Pinocchio has an administration mode that can move each user 
anywhere on the screen. 
Adding a face recognition conducting system 
was suggested as a future task [3]. However, until now, studies have 
considered only conducting gestures, not cueing. It is similar to our 
study using as a learning tool for children. However, our study is 
focused on conducting practice for musicians.  
 The Nintendo Company in Japan recently developed a program 
called Wii Music. It is a virtual game that enables the user to play 
various instruments using the motion plus system, which has three 
accelerometer axes from the Wii remote controller, as well as two 
more axes from the Wii Fit Balance Board. The orchestra-conducting 
category uses the Wii remote controller as a baton, which allows the 
user to conduct a virtual orchestra on the monitor by following the beat.  
 One program that is similar to Wii Music’s orchestra conducting 
game is the UBS Virtual Maestro: An Interactive Conducting System. 
This also uses the Wii remote controller as a baton to conduct a virtual 
orchestra, and uses a method that changes the music tempo. Using a 
motion sensor to change tempo is a similar to the method used in our 
study [4]. 
These Wii-based conducting systems include visual information to 
recognize and sense the presence of a live orchestra. They are 
considerably similar to the vMaestro program used in our study, but 
we have added a cueing system in order to identify and develop 
conducting practice. Both the Wii remote control and smartphones 
have gyroscope-based downbeat detection.  
 Lijuan Peng’s study used an infrared camera installed in a Wii 
remote controller to read users’ hand movements. This made the 
conducting of 2/4, 3/4, and 4/4 time possible [5]. 
 That study focused on detecting various time signatures. The focus 
of our study was different; however, we did use conducting gestures 
as a controlling method in our study. 
  
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and 
the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on 
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME’14, June 30 – July 03, 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
573
3. DOWNBEAT AND CUEING 
 To measure conducting motions, we have to know about conducting. 
Every conducting motion has an up-and-down direction. We call this 
the upbeat and the downbeat. The downbeat is a particularly important 
factor in calculating the music’s tempo. In one bar, the relative strength 
of each beat is “①Strong-②Weak-③Middle Strong-④Weak” in 4/4 
time, while in fast 6/8 time—in which one downbeat is counted per 
three beats—the strength of each beat changes as follows: “①Strong-
②Weak-③Weak-④Middle Strong-⑤Weak-⑥Weak” to “ ①
Strong-②Middle Strong” (see Figure 1) [6]. 
 Before the music starts, the conductor makes a weak accent to 
demonstrate the tempo and cue the start of the music. Usually, a weak 
accent is a half or full conducting gesture . While conducting, 
conductors change the direction of their gestures to make signs. The 
indication of entries—when a performer should begin playing—is 
called cueing. There is no special method for cueing: a conductor can 
use a hand gesture, a facial expression, and so on. The most important 
thing is the direction in which the conductor is facing. For example, if 
the violin section, located on the left side of the orchestra, has to start 
the main melody, the conductor must stand to the left and give a cue 
to that section immediately. An incorrect direction could cause a 
mistake to be played in a classical orchestra concert (see Figure 2). 
4. DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION 
Some details of vMaestro are as follows. First, the user inputs an IP 
address and a port number in order to connect with the server computer. 
Then, the user presses Start button to activate the sensor on the 
smartphone. Then, he/she begins the conducting practice. The user’s 
current position will be shown as a bar number and a directional angle 
slider (see Figure 3). 
 The conducting procedure is similar to a natural conducting method. 
The user starts with a weak accent to set the tempo and then makes 
conducting gestures and cueing directions to control the music 
smoothly. 
 Further, the user can enter the number of the bar in which he/she 
wants to start, or reset a directional angle to fix an incorrect direction. 
 
 The sensor gathers the information on tempo and direction. This 
information is tied to an Open Sound Control (OSC) message, which 
is transformed within the computer, which generates a musical and 
graphical order. Music is generated from a sequencer program and 
played through the speakers. The current direction of the conductor is 
displayed on a screen to guide the direction of each instrument in the 
orchestra (see Figure 4). 
In this study, well-known pieces were selected according to the 
method used by music colleges in Germany. In general, each selected 
piece has a different style and tempo. The samples used in this study 
were Ave Verum Corpus by W.A. Mozart—slow choral music in 4/4 
time—and Jazz Suite, Waltz No. 2  by D. Shostakovich —fast 
orchestral music in 6/8 time. 
4.1 Conducting Interface 
The vMaestro conducting system is an iOS7-based application that 
can be used on the iPhone. The basic concept of this application is 
created using MOMU [8] and KAMPO [9] [10]. 
Figure 2. Example of 4/4 time conducting analysis [7]. 
 
Figure 4. vMaestro operation process. 
 
. 
Figure 5. Rotation degrees for each of the three axes. 
 
Figure 1. Four-beat and six-beat conducting styles. 
 
. 
 Figure 3. Screen shot of vMaestro iOS app. 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
574
The gyroscope is the main sensor that detects conducting motions. 
We used Apple CMAttitude to access this data, which includes the 
rotation degrees for each of the three axes in Figure 5. The conducting 
movement can be calculated via the pitch-axis of the gyroscope. 
 The smartphone motion sensor makes a random noise at the 
downbeat point. This noise causes the music to have an abnormal 
tempo. Slow, small conducting movements create considerable 
irregular noise. We therefore set the sensor’s rotation rate at two 
rad/s for activation. 
Filtering can identify abnormal data in order to create a 
suitable conducting method for practice. In the situation shown 
in Figure 6 the hand movement have to show stop at the lowest 
point from around 0.4 s to 0.7 s. A raw sensor shows unstable 
movement, but filtered sensor stop detecting at the moment. 
 We set up very strong beats to play the music. A bar-divided 
MIDI file plays on the strong beats . Further, there is a weak 
accent before the music starts or restarts. Two beats are set for 
both 4/4 and 6/8 time, similar to a real conducting. 
 Bars are counted in order to recognize where the user is in the 
music. The user can skip to any bar in the music by inputting the 
bar number into the text box in the application. 
 Cueing systems are made by the smartphone gyroscope ’s yaw 
axis, sending direction data via OSC. vMaestro catches the 
direction of the conductor’s smartphone and compares it with a 
given moment in the music. The direction ranges from -90 to 90 
degrees and the conductor can point to four divided spaces. A 
wrong direction will result in a volume down signal, allowing 
the user to recognize the mistake. 
4.2 Sound Engine 
 
The computer runs a program called Pure Data that receives OSC 
signals—including direction, tempo, play commands, bar numbers, 
and volume information—from a Wi-Fi-connected smartphone. This 
musical information is sent to Ableton Live, which controls and plays 
the music with virtual instruments. Every beat signal from the 
smartphone will trigger a TAP in the control bar on Ableton Live in 
order to calculate tempo. Horizontal separation and vertical separation 
are bar and instrument (see Figure 7). 
Directional data is compared with original conducting 
information, and whether the conductor’s direction is right is 
calculated in Pure Data. This decision data will control the volume of 
the orchestra sections in Ableton Live (see the bottom of Figure 7). 
Visual data are displayed on the screen to indicate the orchestra and 
directional marks, in order for the conductor to recognize information 
about cueing. Conductor have to change his direction follow the 
instructions in the score. If conductor is in the correct direction, music 
will play normally. If not, main melody will cut off (see Figure 8). 
5. EVALUATION 
We tested five professional conductors and five professional music 
players. The reason for this grouping was to evaluate the usability and 
effects of the program for both conductors and non-conductors. First, 
both groups were given a short duration to preview the score in order 
to understand the music. Then, they tried the vMaestro program. A 
short explanation on how to activate vMaestro was provided before 
the practice session. During the session, we let each user have his/her 
turn. Both sessions performed the same orchestral score. Two tests 
were conducted, with an interval of one week in between. This was 
similar to the conditions for a real lesson setting. 
The participants were not allowed to use the application except 
during the two tests because we did not have to measure the 
application’s adaptability, only the relative improvement of the 
participants’ conducting feelings.  
 After the second practice, the participants were surveyed about 
vMaestro. The survey inquired about their interest and concentration 
during the vMaestro practice. It also measured how similar their 
vMaestro experience was to their existing conducting practice and skill 
improvement. Each question was answered on a scale of 1 to 5: very 
negative (1), negative (2), normal (3), positive (4), and very positive 
(5). 
Table 1. Survey items 
vMaestro is more interesting than traditional 
conducting practice. 
vMaestro let you concentrate more on conducting 
practice. 
vMaestro practice is similar to real orchestral 
conducting motion. 
vMeastro is an effective way of conducting practice. 
  
Figure 6. Comparison of raw and filtered sensor 
data. 
 
Figure 8. Direction of conductor in 1st bar of Ave 
Verum Corpus 
. 
Figure 7. Ableton Live setting [11]. 
 
. 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
575
 We expect ed that this simple method to practice conducting an 
orchestra would yield positive feelings. Further, an increased interest 
in smartphones could enhance the rate of participation in this 
program. 
Table 2. Survey ratings by category 
 Conductors Non-conductors 
Interest 3.8 4.0 
Concentration 4.2 4.2 
Motion 3 3.8 
Effect 3.8 2.4 
 
 Most participants answered the first question about interest in a 
positive way, which was the result that we expected before the tests. 
They also gave both “positive” and “very positive” ratings in the 
concentration category. This shows that if a program is interesting, 
users will concentrate more. The professional conductors group was 
particularly excited about this new learning environment.  
 Another rating category was the recognition of conducting motion 
in vMaestro. Both groups gave it ratings of “normal” and “positive.” 
The reason why the professional conductors group rated their 
satisfaction as “normal” was that they each have their own conducting 
motions that do not match perfectly with the textbook method of 
conducting. On the other hand, the non-conductors group rated it as 
“positive” because they are only used to making textbook conducting 
motions. 
 There was a significant difference between the two groups in the 
category of effects. The non-conductors group believed in the effects 
of existing practice methods. They only had complete faith in 
traditional practice methods and thought neither smartphones nor any 
other electronic device could replace those methods. In contrast, the 
professional conductors group expressed the desire to have a more 
reasonable way of conducting an orchestra. They said that, even if the 
conducting motions do not exactly match, vMaestro can still be a good 
practice tool for conducting majors. 
 We will hold a vMaestro demo session during a classical concert at 
the Ai One Arts Center in Seoul, Korea on February 15th. 
6. CONCLUSION 
vMaestro is a system through which a conductor can freely control 
tempo and supplement cueing —that cannot be carried out in 
traditional conducting practice—using a smartphone. The results of 
such practice will allow more conductors to acquire conducting ability 
through a simple, low-cost method.  
 Conducting is a major aspect of music performance. This means that 
conducting is a high-quality musical activity. Basic knowledge of 
music is not the only qualification for becoming a conductor. Every 
musician must experience many musical activities. vMaestro can 
make this happen not only via solo training, but also via training with 
a virtual orchestra.  
 This study faced two main limits. The first was the weight of the 
smartphones. When conductors are conducting, they generally use a 
baton weighing just 10 g, but sometimes they do not use a baton at all. 
In contrast, a smartphone weights about 137 g, which is 13 times 
heavier than a conducting baton. During the study, eight users said that 
they experienced wrist pain after practicing with vMaestro. 
 The second issue is the difference in grip. Since conductors use small 
batons or their empty hands, the experience of conducting is 
completely different when using a smartphone. Schmidt use d a 
wristband as his conducting device. An armband may prove to be a 
solution to the aforementioned wrist pain and difference in grip. 
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We thank GSCT KAIST for allowing us to conduct this study. 
8. REFERENCES 
[1] Y.K. Lim. Smartphone-based Music Conducting. Master’s 
Thesis, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, 
Daejeon, Korea, 2012. 
[2] M. Mathews and D.L. Barr. The conductor program and 
mechanical baton. The Center for Computer Research in Music 
and Acoustics (May 1988). 
[3] B. Brügge, C. Teschner, P. Lachenmaier, E. Fenzl, D. Schmidt, 
and S. Bierbaum. Pinocchio: Conducting a virtual symphony 
orchestra. In Proceedings of the International Conference on 
Advances in Computer Entertainment Technology (ACE ’07) 
(Salzburg, Austria, June 15-17, 2007), 294-295. 
[4] T.M. Nakra, Y. Ivanov, P. Smaragdis, and C. Ault. The USB 
Virtual Maestro: An Interactive Conducting System. In 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces 
for Musical Expression (NIME ‘09) (Pittsburgh, PA, June 4-6, 
2009). 
[5] L. Peng, and D. Gerhard. A Wii-based Gestural Interface for 
Computer Conducting Systems. In Proceedings of the 
International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical 
Expression (NIME ‘09) (Pittsburgh, PA, June 4-6, 2009). 
[6] B.H. Ahn. Fundamental Conducting Technique. Samho Music, 
Korea, 1977. 
[7] J.S. Jeong. Catholic Hymn Book. Catholic Bishops’ Conference 
of Korea, 1957. 
[8] N.J. Bryan, J. Herrera, J. Oh, and G. Wang. Momu: A mobile 
music toolkit. In Proceedings of the International Conference 
on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME ‘10) (Sydney, 
Australia, June 15-18, 2010). 
[9] The KAIST Mobile Phone Orchestra. Retrieved February 5, 
2014 from http://kampo.kaist.ac.kr. 
[10] App Store - KAMPO. Retrieved December 6, 2013 from 
http://itunes.apple.com/us/app/kampo/id432526049?mt=8. 
[11] Gear Lounge. Ableton 9 Korean Reference Manual. Gear 
Lounge, 2013.  
 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
576