An Epistemic Dimension Space for Musical Devices 
  
Thor Magnusson 
School of Arts and Media 
University of Brighton 
Grand Parade, Brighton, bn2 0jy, UK 
T.Magnusson@brighton.ac.uk 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
The analysis of digital music systems has traditionally been 
characterized by an approach that can be defined as 
phenomenological. The focus has been  on the body and it s 
relationship to the machine , often neglecting the system’s 
conceptual design . This paper brings into focus the epistemic 
features of digital systems,  which implies emphasizing the 
cognitive, conceptual and music theoretical side of our musical 
instruments. An epistemic dimension space for the analysis of  
musical devices is proposed. 
Keywords 
Epistemic tools, music theory, dimension space, analysis. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The NIME conference series, running for nearly a decade , 
epitomizes a historical approach to musical systems design , 
where musicians, computer scientists and engineers attempt to 
create engaging technologies for musical express ion. Surveying 
the history of new digital musical instruments  research , it is 
manifest that the emphasis has been on ergonomics, human -
computer interaction, sensor interfaces, and general engineering 
issues, on the one hand, and musical performance, mapping and 
embodiment, on the other. Conceptual issues have been  largely 
ignored, resulting in a research focus based on phenomenology , 
at the expense of a more ‘epistemological’ approach. 
In order to demonstrate this observation above and discuss it 
with some concrete material, a direct reference is made to an 
older NIME paper, A Dimension Space for Musical Devices [2]. 
In that fine paper, Birnbaum et al. introduce a visual 
representation of a dimension space of digital musical devices . 
Birnbaum et al. represent what I will call the phenomenological 
approach in the analysis of musical instrument design . Their 
paper will serve as a reference point and a foundation for the 
form this paper will be cast. Consequently, another type of  
dimension space is presented  here, namely one focusing on the 
conceptual and music theoretical  content of musical 
instruments. It points at how our instruments are inscribed with 
knowledge, how they store it, and how we, as users, engage 
with this theoretical structure of our devices.  
The aim of this paper is to engage  with the epistemic nature 
digital systems, i.e., with the embedding of  music theory and 
other systems of knowledge in the instruments themselves . 
Many of the music production tools available today  embody a 
distinctive view of how music should be made and what it 
should sound like. This is productive for some musical genres, 
but less useful for others; consider traditions such as the Arabic 
or the Indian, or simply Western folk. The increasing amount of 
systematic structures in  the digital instrument can  lead to the 
diminution o f expression. Responses have varied : whereas 
Machover [11] argues for time better spent than practic ing 
acoustic instruments, celebrating how digital instruments can be 
designed for  easy play, Jordà [ 6] stresses that the instrument 
should also be capable of bad playing; a fact that gives the 
performer the potential of mastery and in-depth knowledge. 
2. EPISTEMIC TOOLS 
Software is not just a device with which the user interacts; it is 
also the generator of a space in which the user lives. [14] 
The philosop hy of technology has much to contribute to the 
field of NIME. Ihde  [ 5] reports on diverse phenomenological 
modalities in our relationship with tools. Here the acoustic 
musical instrument can be viewed as an illustrative example of 
a techno logy that gives us an embodiment relationship  to the 
world. The instrument becomes an extension of the body, where 
trained musicians are able to express themselves through 
incorporated knowledge that is primarily non -conceptual and 
tacit. In many ways, the  digital musical instrument can be 
viewed in the context o f another phenomenological mode:  the 
hermeneutic relationship. It differs from the acoustic instrument 
in the sense that it is not an uninterrupted extension of the body, 
but rather a n external  tool whose information we have to 
interpret (thus hermeneutic). This instrument can be seen as a 
text, something we have to read in our use of it [9]. 
If primary tools, such as hammers, extend the body and 
prescribe certain processes through their affordances,  industrial 
machines automate those processes with energy not derived 
from the human body. The machines are repe titive, which 
results in a normalized output. The machines perform and frame 
human tasks in a normalized and  ideal way. The artistic 
response to the machine was to emphasize human eccentricity, 
uniqueness, and specialist craft. This observation materializes in 
the common thought that the invention of photography was 
simultaneously the invent ion of impressionist painting [7]. 
Cybernetic machines  (or computers) do not only automate 
human work processes; they prescribe human thinking to an 
elevated degree through their symbolic structures. As the 
computer becomes a tool for creativity, it undeniably 
streamlines and automates  human product. However, since the 
computer is a meta-machine, equally a tool for thinking and  an 
executor of our ideas, we are able to resist such normalization  
through the use of this very same machine.  
Baird states in his materialist epistemology that things “bear” 
knowledge. The language and theories we come up with “serve 
instrumentally in the articulation and justification of knowledge 
borne by things” [1]. This is a reference to how things can 
contain theoretical knowledge before they are conceptualized or 
understood as such. Baird’s definition of such incorporated 
knowledge is that “an artefact bears knowledge when it 
successfully accomplishes a function”  [1]. Analogously, it is 
obvious how the violin bore knowledge of acoustics before 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME2010, June 15-18, 2010, Sydney, Australia. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
43
Fourier discovered the Fourier series or  Helmholtz wrote his 
theories of timbre. 
The computer is a special case of  an epistemic tool. The only 
knowledge to be found in computer software is that which has 
been deliberately inscribed in it by humans. It is an entirely 
simulated system that has been designed from the level of micro 
transistors to machine language; to operating systems; to 
programming languages; to user interfaces. Unlike physical 
material, i t does not contain  natural affordances or mysteries. 
Epiphenomena like artificial life or eme rgence, that often give 
digital systems a degree of autonomy, are still defined by their 
initial rules. Digital instrument makers therefore get nothing for 
free, unlike makers of acoustic instruments who receive the gift 
of sonic timbre from the physica l p roperties of the materials 
they work with. The computer mediates: i nstead of presenting, 
it represents. It encourages primarily  top-down design 
processes, contrasting the experimental bottom -up process 
known to designers working with physical materials.  
The nature of epistemic tools as  augmentation of the mind 
questions the roles of the designers and the users of musical 
systems. From the designers it demands a self -understanding of 
the fundamental role they play in the users’ work practices. 
Their ideas of music, musi cal culture, and musical work  
practices are inevitably embedded in the software. It also calls 
for an acknowledgement by  the users, that the software they 
choose to work with conditions their thoughts, defines musical 
ideas, and streamlines how they work. It implies that they have 
to be critical to the ways of the software, scrutinize its 
underlying assumptions, and thus consciously accept or reject 
the script it presents. 
3. THE EPISTEMIC DIMENSION SPACE 
This paper engages with the epistemic natu re of digital musical 
instruments by shifting the focus to the conceptual and 
theoretical nature  of their design  – as opposed to the  pheno-
menological. For the sake of clarity, this is done through 
comparison with a paper by Birnbaum et al . [2]. The objective 
is to investigate and devi se a dimension space that suits better 
an epistemic approach in the analysis of musical instruments. 
Figure 1. The ‘phenomenological’ dimension  
space from the 2005 paper by Birnbaum et al. 
Birnbaum et al.  [2] identify seven dimensions onto which the 
musical devi ces can be mapped, namely: musical control 
(whether the instrument’s expression is at the timbral, note or 
score level); degrees of freedom  (an axis that represents the 
number of input parameters that can be controlled ); feedback 
modalities (the degree of real  time feedback to the user); inter-
actors (number of people involved in the performance of the 
device); distribution in space (the total physical area inhabited 
by the instrument); role of sound (informational, env ironmental 
or expressive); and required expertise (representing the level of 
practice and familiarity needed in the perfo rmance). Figure 1  
demonstrates how this visualization of parameter spaces can be 
highly useful as a conceptual tool for evaluating and classifying 
digital musical instruments.  
It is clear how  the computer affords new design features for 
digital music systems. The performer’s control can range from 
the microscale of sound to the macroscale of musical structure. 
Below is a refined and extended version of a list  initially  
presented by Wanderley [13] of various control modes: 
• Filtering (time and frequency domain manipulation of an 
audio signal) 
• Sonic texture generation  (layers of audio generated 
through synthesis or sampling) 
• Single musical n otes (where pitch, envelope, amplitude 
and timbre is controlled) 
• Continuous feature modulation of both note and phrase  
(timbre, amplitude, pitch) 
• Musical gestures (glissandi, trills, grace notes, etc.) 
• Simple scales and arpeggios (of various speed, range a nd 
articulation) 
• Phrases with different contours  (from monotonic to 
random) 
• Control of sampled material  (loop-points, rate, 
granulation, pitch, filtering) 
• Synchronization of musical processes  
• High-level control of recorded material  (as seen with 
DJs)  
Inspecting the above, it is clear  that only the first half is 
possible with acoustic instruments. Although the digital musical 
instrument makes use of all these controls, it is in the latter half 
where it excels. This is where the musical i nstrument is 
inscribed with music theory and models of musical performance 
to such a  degree that one can  talk about “composed 
instruments” [12]. What makes the digital musical instrument 
so profoundly intriguing for analysis is that it constantly 
transcends boundaries and fuses categories [4]. The philosopher 
Mumford echoes Marx by pointing out that “the difference 
between tools and machines lies primarily in the degree of 
automatism they have reached” [ 10]. This distinction can be 
applied onto our digital musical instruments  as well, but in the 
same stroke, the division has to be rejected; our modern devices 
of expression should be viewed as both tools and machines; as 
both instruments for manual dexterity and mechanisms for 
automation; both as extensions of the body  and cogn itive 
scaffoldings of the mind [3]. 
Considering the latter part of the above list, I propose, in this 
paper, to l ook at musical systems from the epistemological or 
music-theoretical perspective and forge another type of a 
dimension space, that of epistemic tools. Whereas Birnbaum et 
al’s [2] approach is phenomenological and  focus es on the 
human body and its expressive potential in the relationship with 
digital music systems, the epistemic dimen sion space addresses 
the culture -theoretical aspects that so pro minently define the ir 
nature.  
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
44
 
Figure 2. The epistemic dimension space proposed here. 
Here below is a description of the parameter axes of  the 
epistemic dimension space found in Figure 2.  
• The Expressive Constraints axis focuses on t he 
expressive limitations outlined by the tool’s design. This 
is the space of musical possibilities. 
• The Autonomy axis specifies the degree to which the 
instrument provides the functionality of an automata. 
Certain musical tasks  are delegated  to the instrument  
(often using artificial intelligence ), possibly responding 
to a performer.  
• The Music Theory axis represents t he amount of 
culturally specific music theory encapsulated in the 
instrument, in terms of the possibilities for various tonal 
and rhythmical structures, as well a s signal processing. 
This could typically be scales, chords , arpeggios, or time 
signatures. 
• The Explorability axis represents how much depth the 
instrument holds. This factor is critical with regards to 
how engaging the instrument is and affects learning curve 
and the possibility of flow. 
• The Required Foreknowledge axis represents the fact that 
many systems do not require much musical knowledge in 
their design or performance as they contain it already.  
• The Improvisation axis indicates the degree to which t he 
instrument lends itself to free improvisation. How 
responsive is it, how open for changes in real time 
performance and how quickly can it be adapted to those?  
• The Generality axis denotes how open in expression the 
instrument is and how well it copes wi th the multiplicity 
different of musical situations. 
• The Creative-Simulation axis captures w hether t he 
instrument is novel in terms of interact ion, sound and 
function or an imitation of established tools and practices.  
Obviously, many of these axes would not be relevant in the 
analysis of acoustic instruments. The epistemic nature of digital 
tools makes such dimension space  pertinent in the analysis of 
digital musical instruments. The above dimensions address 
parameters that are unique t o heavily abstract,  conceptualiz ed 
and symbolically designed musical tools. 
4. THE DIMENSION SPACE APPLIED 
Below, an attempt will be made to map a few well known 
digital musical systems onto the epistemic dimension space. 
Naturally, this is a subjective mapping, and as Birnbaum  et al. 
[2] mention, such mappings would ideally be performed by way 
of user surveys. It is appropriate to begin by analy zing 
Waisvisz’s instrument The Hands. Firstly , because it is one of 
the most well known digital musical instruments, but secondly , 
due to Waisvisz’s statement that he regularly “froze” the 
development of his instruments in order to gain an in -depth 
relationship to them.  The analysis of the Hands is divided into 
two distinct graphs, one for the general interface (the physical 
controller) and the other for the specific instrument (when the 
controller is coupled to a mapping and sound engine). 
 
  a) The Hands as an interface      b) The Hands as an instrument 
 
            c) The Voyager                   d) reacTable 
 
             e) SuperCollider                   f) ixiQuarks 
 
                  g) Reaktor                      h) Reason 
Figure 3. Dimension spaces of known environments. 
Figure 3a represents the Hands as gestural interface: it is open 
for improvisation; it affords larg e areas for exploration and 
there is relatively high degree of musical foreknowledge 
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
45
required to design the tool or compose for it. The controller is 
very general and could be used in almost any type of music. 
From its nature as a sensor device, we see the re is little music 
theory inscribed in it (a keyboard has much more for example), 
and few expressive constraints. Conversely, Figure 3b depicts 
the Hands as a musical instrument . Here it is not a neutral 
sensor interface anymore [9]. On the dimension space  graph, 
the music theory has become stronger, there is  more autonomy 
and expressive constraints have been designed into the system. 
It is therefore less general and can be used in fewer musical 
contexts. It can still be ideal for improvisation. 
Lewis’ Voyager is a generative performance system that 
analyses the playing of the human performer and responds 
appropriately. As such, it is less an instrument than a co -player. 
As seen in Figure 3c , it scores high on improvisation, music 
theory and expressive const raints. It is clearly a system that is 
designed by Lewis, for Lewis, and would not work for all 
musicians, though others, e.g., Evan Parker, have played with it.  
The reacTable (Figure 3d), in its current state, is an excellent 
improvisational tool and it affords much explorability. It does 
not require a strong  musical knowledge, nor does it contain 
much music theory as its functions is primarily on audio 
synthesis, simulating the modular synthesizer (t his is why it fits 
in the middle of the creative -simulation axis). It is quite 
constrained in expressivity; and in the context of generality, it 
depends whether we are analyzing the physical interface itself 
or its mapping and sound engine. 
SuperCollider, represented in Figure 3e , is by many considered 
the mos t expressive and free musical environment available 
today. Such freedom naturally comes at the cost of a rather low-
level working space, where much foreknowledge is required.  It 
also implies certain music  theoretical concepts, for example in 
the way its Pattern libraries are built. It affords great 
explorability, it is very general in its use and scope, and it opens 
up to almost infinite fields of creative productions. Naturally, 
considering SuperCollider’s openness, it can used in the design 
of systems that can be located practically anywhere on all the 
axes. An example of a high -level system built in SuperCollider 
are the ixiQuarks [ 8] shown in Figure 3f . This system is built 
for live-performance and direct interaction with sound.  
Reaktor (Figure 3 g) is i n man y ways related to Max/MSP or 
Pure Data in its design. However, the building blocks of 
Reaktor are typically on a much higher level than in Max or Pd, 
resulting in less expressivity, yet providing a smoother learning 
curve. This also means that it is e asier for the user to get “good 
sounding” patches working quickly, as there is more knowledge 
(both musical and signal processing) built into the indivi dual 
building blocks than in, for example, Pure Data. 
Unlike Reaktor, Reason (Figure 3 h) tries to realis tically 
simulate the rack hardware devices typically found in recording 
studios. It is a representational simulator where the screws, t he 
masking tape (for labeling knobs), and the swinging cables on 
the back attempt to create the feeling of the “real thing.” Reason 
scores low on improvisation, as it is not really a device for 
embodied expressivity. It is highly deterministic and contains 
expressive constraints and music theory to a large degree. 
The above is a rough analysis of a few selected systems. When  
making such analyses, it is important  to stress the distinction 
between the interface (such as the Hands) or the musical system 
(such as SuperCollider), on the one hand, and their instantiation 
as an expressive musical system, on the other. The Hands are 
not a musical instrument without a sound engine. SuperCollider 
is not a n instrument until some system has been designed  in it 
(except in the case of live coding, where it is an instrument).  
5. DISCUSSION 
This paper has highlighted the epistemic dimension in digital 
musical instruments. Such analysis can inform system designers 
who, often unconsciously, inscribe their culturally conditioned 
understanding of what music is and how it should be made into 
complex digital technologies. This approach can therefore y ield 
benefits to musical cultures that have difficulties in expressing 
themselves with modern  digital  technologies. The imperative 
would be to open up the systems, either by providing the source 
code or by making them modular, thus rendering them  
adaptable to the diverse musical contexts. 
6. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, a  decision was taken to emphasize the difference 
between the phenomenological  and the epistemological 
approaches through a dialogue with a paper that serves as an 
example for the former. Naturally , these two approaches do not 
exclude each other ; they should be seen as complimentary and 
overlapping. And indeed, just as Birnbaum et al. [2] never claim 
that their dimen sion space is final  or exhaustive, the one 
presented in this paper should not be con sidered that either, but 
rather open for improvement and adapted to context. 
7. REFERENCES 
[1] Baird, D. Thing Knowledge - Function and Truth. in 
Techne. 6, 2. (Winter 2002), 13-27. 
[2] Birnbaum, D., Fiebrink, R., Malloch, J., and Wanderley, 
M. Towards a Dimension Space for Musical Artifacts. In 
NIME 2005 Proceedings. 2005. 
[3] Clark, A. Natural-Born Cyborgs: Minds, Technologies and 
the Future of Human Intelligence. Oxford University 
Press, New York, 2003. 
[4] Drummond, J. Understanding Interactive Systems. In 
Organised Sound 14, 2. 2009. 124-133. 
[5] Ihde, D. Technology and the Lifeworld: From Garden to 
Earth. Indiana University Press, Bloomington, 1990. 
[6] Jordà, S. Digital Lutherie: Crafting musical computers for 
new musics' performance and improvisation. PhD Thesis, 
University of Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona. 2005. 188. 
[7] Levinson, P. Soft Edge: A Natural History and Future of 
the Information Revolution. Routledge, London, 1997. 
[8] Magnusson, T. The ixiQuarks: Merging Code and GUI in 
One Creative Space. In Immersed Music: The ICMC 2007 
Conference Proceedings. Re:New, Copenhagen, 2007. 
[9] Magnusson, T. On Epistemic Tools: Musical Instruments 
as Cognitive Extensions. In Organised Sound, 14, 1, 2009. 
[10] Mumford, L. Technics and Civilisation. Hartcourt Brace, 
New York, 1934. 10. 
[11] Machover, T. quoted in Rowe, R. Machine Musicianship. 
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2001, 5. 
[12] Schnell, N. and Battier, M. Introducing Composed 
Instruments, Technical and Musicological Implications. In 
NIME 2002 Proceedings. 2002. 
[13] Wanderley, M. Performer-Instrument Interaction: 
Applications to Gestural Control of Sound Synthesis. PhD 
Thesis. Paris. 2001. 53. 
[14] Winograd, T. (ed.). Bringing Design to Software. ACM 
Press, New York, 1996. xvii. 
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
46