Further Developments in the
Electromagnetically Sustained Rhodes Piano
Greg Shear
Media Arts & Technology (MAT)
University of California
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
gshear@mat.ucsb.edu
Matthew Wright
CREATE/MAT
University of California
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
matt@create.ucsb.edu
ABSTRACT
The Electromagnetically Sustained Rhodes Piano is an orig-
inal Rhodes Piano modiﬁed to provide control over the
amplitude envelope of individual notes through aftertouch
pressure. Although there are many opportunities to shape
the amplitude envelope before loudspeaker ampliﬁcation,
they are all governed by the ever-decaying physical vibra-
tions of the tone generating mechanism. A single-note proof
of concept for electromagnetic control over this vibrating
mechanism was presented at NIME 2011.
In the past year, virtually every aspect of the system has
been improved. We use a diﬀerent vibration sensor that
is immune to electromagnetic interference, thus eliminat-
ing troublesome feedback. For control, we both reduce cost
and gain continuous position sensing throughout the entire
range of key motion in addition to aftertouch pressure. Fi-
nally, the entire system now ﬁts within the space constraints
presented by the original piano, allowing it to be installed
on adjacent notes.
Keywords
Rhodes, piano, mechanical synthesizer, electromagnetic, sus-
tain, feedback
1. INTRODUCTION
The Rhodes Piano sound has been a staple of mainstream
music since its introduction and has recently found a place
in contemporary electronic music. Contemporary electronic
artists, however, desire modern control aﬀordances standard
on synthesizers. The amplitude envelope of a Rhodes Piano,
for instance, can be shaped with compression and variable
gain, but these tools are limited when the signal source of
each note inevitably decays to silence.
We present recent developments on a novel system that
controls the signal source itself, making swelling attacks and
inﬁnite sustain possible through aftertouch while preserv-
ing the original functionality and characteristic timbre of
the Rhodes Piano. Cost and ease of installation are also
considered with hobbyists in mind and, because Rhodes en-
thusiasts may be reluctant to make permanent alterations
to their vintage instruments, these modiﬁcations are non-
destructive by design and may be undone.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’12,May 21 – 23, 2012, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
2. BACKGROUND
Figure 1: Limited space inside the Rhodes Piano.
The Rhodes Piano [1] [2] is an electromechanical instru-
ment containing asymmetrical tuning forks, the tone gener-
ators, that are struck from below by a simpliﬁed key/hammer
action. The tine and tonebar are the small and large prongs
of the tone generator, respectively, and although these two
halves are very diﬀerent in size and shape (as shown in
Figure 1), each is tuned to the same natural vibrating fre-
quency. The tone generator vibrates with inharmonic over-
tones that are most prominent during the attack of each
note and give the instrument a somewhat bell-like timbre.
Vibrations in the tine are sensed by an electromagnetic
pickup that generates an analog voltage signal (the audio
output) for loudspeaker ampliﬁcation. After the initial at-
tack transient, the tine settles into steady state oscillations
with predominantly sinusoidal motion [3]. The signal pro-
duced by the pickup, however, has strong harmonic over-
tones that depend on the adjustable position of the tine rel-
ative to the pickup. This adjustment is called voicing and
is critical to the characteristic sound of the Rhodes Piano.
While there are many opportunities to shape the ampli-
tude envelope between the pickup and eventual loudspeaker
ampliﬁcation, they are all governed by the ever-decaying
physical vibrations in the tine. We presented a single-note
proof of concept at NIME 2011 [4] where the audio out-
put signal also served as the excitation signal that drove an
electromagnet to reinforce tine vibrations.
Of course, the pickup also sensed the excitation signal
emitted by the electromagnet, creating another feedback
loop apart from the vibrating tine. This loop was con-
trolled by placing a second pickup near the stationary end
of the tine and taking the diﬀerence of the two pickup sig-
nals. The placement of the second pickup, however, made
it impossible to install the system on adjacent notes in the
original piano where space is very limited (Figure 1). Fur-
Figure 2: Left: Custom tonebar with attached electromagnet and piezo sensor (see Section 5).
Right: Electromagnet coils mounted above and below tonebars.
thermore, it was unclear how this diﬀerential cancellation
method would work in the presence of multiple electromag-
nets each producing a diﬀerent signal at various distances
from the pickups.
Key insights over the past year have altered our course
with improvements made in every aspect of the system: We
now use a piezo-electric vibration sensor that is immune to
interference, thus eliminating the troublesome electromag-
netic feedback. For control, we both reduce cost and gain
continuous position sensing throughout the entire range of
key motion in addition to aftertouch pressure. Best of all,
the entire system has been made to ﬁt within the space
constraints presented by the original piano allowing it to be
installed on adjacent notes.
Figure 3 shows an overview of the system for a single
note. See Section 5 for details on the excitation circuit,
Section 6 for the audio output circuit, and [3] for vibrational
mechanics of the tone generator system.
3. PRIOR ART
3.1 Electromagnetically Actuated Instruments
The Electromagnetically-Prepared Piano [5] and the Mag-
netic Resonator Piano [6] are both acoustic grand pianos
that electromagnetically drive oscillations in the strings.
A computer controls multiple excitation signals (orchestral
or voice samples, noise, etc.) for the Electromagnetically-
Prepared Piano where each electromagnet is driven by a
dedicated channel on an audio interface. The Magnetic Res-
onator Piano, on the other hand, uses a piezo element to
sense vibrations in the soundboard and generate a single ex-
citation signal that is then conditioned and distributed to
all of the electromagnets. A continuous position sensor on
each key provides both amplitude and spectral control over
individual notes. Both of these instruments take advantage
of the ample space in an acoustic piano where mounting
hardware may lay across the piano frame suspending a row
of electromagnets above the strings. As shown in Figure 1,
this is impossible inside a Rhodes Piano.
The EBow [7] is a handheld device for electromagneti-
cally actuating ferromagnetic guitar strings, containing a
pickup, electromagnet, active electronics, and a battery in-
side a small plastic housing. The pickup generates a volt-
age signal in response to string vibrations which then drives
the electromagnet, producing a magnetic ﬁeld and support-
ing the motion of the string. An EBow held near exposed
Figure 3: System overview.
Rhodes Piano tines originally demonstrated electronically
initiated and sustained tine vibrations and its small form
factor encouraged us to pursue a similarly compact design
that would ﬁt within the limited space inside the piano.
3.2 Experiments with Elastic Waves in Solids
Rossing et al. ﬁnd natural modes of a metal bar [8] or a tun-
ing fork [9] by inducing vibrations with an electromagnet
driven by a synthesized sine wave. Similarly, Kraftmakher
suggests a classroom demonstration of electromagnetically
induced oscillations in a tuning fork [10]. He ﬁrst drives
the electromagnet with a synthesized sine wave at frequen-
cies in the range oﬀ the natural vibrating frequency of the
tuning fork. Stronger physical vibrations are produced as
the synthesized sine approaches the natural frequency of the
tuning fork, and amplitude beating is observed as the syn-
thesized sine deviates from the natural frequency. Kraft-
makher also creates a mechanical-electrical feedback loop
driving the electromagnet with an ampliﬁed microphone sig-
nal from the vibrating tuning fork. With the exception of
the sensing method, this system is most similar to our cur-
rent design despite having such unrelated motivations.
4. ELECTROMAGNET AND TONEBAR
Electromagnets remain the only feasible way of electroni-
cally initiating and sustaining oscillations in ferromagnetic
strings or tuning forks. Because of the tonebars, however,
we cannot simply suspend an electromagnet above each tine
as in the Electromagnetically-Prepared Piano and the Mag-
netic Resonator Piano. Instead, we mount the electromag-
nets securely to custom tonebars (Figure 2) designed to
compensate for the additional mass and maintain the cor-
rect natural vibrating frequency. This solution preserves
the critical separation between the tip of the electromagnet
core and the tine during installation and voicing adjust-
ments. The high magnetic permeability of the steel core
carries the magnetic ﬁeld down to the tine with minimal
attenuation when the electromagnet coil is mounted above
the tonebar.
Figure 1 shows original tonebars that are twisted at the
base, whereas we drill through the wide side of the tonebar
to mount the electromagnet and therefore require it to re-
main ﬂat. This modiﬁcation has no appreciable eﬀect on
the resonant properties of the tone generator, as described
in Section 7.3.
Figure 5: Simple model of tonebar with attached
electromagnet.
We calculate the length of the custom tonebar beginning
with a simple model of an ideal cantilever beam (with mass)
of length Lt [11] [12]. The attached electromagnet is mod-
eled as a point mass me at distance Le from the base, shown
in Figure 5. This model leads us to Equation 1 giving the
tonebar length Lt in terms of the desired frequency f0 and
the width w, height h, density ρ, and Young’s modulus E
of the tonebar. See Appendix A and [3] for full details.
L4
t =
3EK
(2πf0)2 −meLe
0.346whρ (1)
where K = h√
12
(2)
5. EXCITATION SIGNAL
The Magnetic Resonator Piano senses soundboard vibra-
tions with a piezo-electric sensor and distributes this signal
to each electromagnet. Unlike in an acoustic piano, each
Rhodes tone generator is acoustically decoupled from the
body. For this reason we mount a piezo-electric sensor di-
rectly to the end of the tonebar (shown in Figure 2), which
produces a nearly perfect sine wave as the tone generator
vibrates. These piezo elements are small, light, and immune
to electromagnetic interference. At about $1 US each, they
are by far the cheapest source for the excitation signal we
encountered.
5.1 Physics and Phase Relationship Theory
An ideal, undamped harmonic oscillator has constant am-
plitude because the restoring force F is a function of only
spring constant k and displacement x:
F = −kx (3)
The vibrating tine is a damped harmonic oscillator that ex-
periences the same restoring force −kx and also a damping
force −cv (damping constant c multiplied by velocity v):
Fnet = −kx−cv (4)
To sustain oscillations at a constant amplitude, a magnetic
force must be exerted on the tine equal and opposite to
the damping force, so that the net force is equal to that
experienced by an ideal, undamped oscillator:
Fnet = −kx−cv+ Fmag = −kx (5)
Fmag = cv (6)
Equation 6 shows that the magnetic force must be pro-
portional to and in phase with the velocity of the tine, which
is predominantly sinusoidal during steady state oscillations.
This velocity function may be approximated by adding a
90◦ phase shift to the accelerometer signal (which is also
sinusoidal) provided by the piezo sensor. The only delay
between the piezo sensor and the electromagnet is in the
electronic circuit. Here, the delay is easily measured and
may be adjusted to synchronize the excitation signal and
the resulting magnetic force with the velocity of the tine.
5.2 Magnetized Core for Efﬁcient Excitation
Both the EBow and Electromagnetically-Prepared Piano
use a magnetized core. Through trial and error we chose
an N42 grade magnet 0.25" in diameter and 0.5" long - this
magnet, when mounted to the top of the core, maximizes
tine deﬂection given a constant amplitude excitation signal.
Figure 4: Excitation signal path block diagram.
Figure 6: Bar graph of signal amplitude sensed by pickups as shown to the right.
5.3 Excitation Circuit
Figure 4 is a block diagram of the excitation signal path,
beginning at the piezo sensor. The low-pass Butterworth ﬁl-
ter stabilizes the feedback loop by removing unwanted high
frequency components, while leaving the excitation signal
well within the passband. An optical key position sensor
provides control voltage for the ﬁeld eﬀect transistor (FET)
attenuator described in Section 5.4. The AC ampliﬁer pro-
vides gain and blocks the DC bias introduced by the FET
attenuator. The constant amplitude phase shifter adjusts
the overall delay of the circuit and allows the phase rela-
tionship between piezo sensor voltage and the force exerted
on the tine to be set to the desired 90 ◦ as described in Sec-
tion 5.1.
5.4 Aftertouch Control
FETs have resistive properties for small signals where the
resistance is variable by a control voltage [13]. Our sys-
tem relies on two cascaded FET variable resistors connected
to ground to control the amplitude of the excitation signal
driving the electromagnet.
The QRD1114 Reﬂective Object Sensor is a small compo-
nent that varies its output voltage as an internal phototran-
sistor senses light reﬂecting oﬀ a nearby surface [14]. This
part and a dual op-amp for signal conditioning provide the
control voltage for the FET variable resistors.
Depending on how much aftertouch pressure is applied
to the key, the original Rhodes Piano action ﬂexes a few
millimeters at the bottom of its range of motion causing
a small change in output voltage from the phototransistor
placed below. The Magnetic Resonator Piano also relies on
a similar electronic component in the Moog Piano Bar to
sense small changes in key position as a result of aftertouch
pressure [6].
This optical sensor has the added beneﬁt of sensing the
key position throughout its entire range of motion. Possible
applications for this additional control signal are discussed
in Section 8.3.
6. AUDIO OUTPUT
Rhodes tines are very short compared to piano or guitar
strings, forcing close proximity between electromagnet and
pickup; this causes the excitation signal to appear as a
strong component in the audio output. This interference,
however, is sensed by all of the pickups, while only one
pickup senses each vibrating tine.
Figure 6 graphs the excitation signal amplitude as a func-
tion of pickup number. Deviation from the expected am-
plitude drop-oﬀ (for pickups 3 and 4) may be explained by
variation in number of turns of wire on a particular pickup
and variation in component value in the circuit.
Figure 7: Partial diagram of alternating polarity
pickup array circuit.
We reduce the presence of this excitation signal interfer-
ence in the audio output by reversing the polarity on every
other pickup before summing the output signals of all of the
pickups. Figure 7 shows a partial circuit diagram.
7. RESULTS AND EV ALUATION
We achieve the desired inﬁnite sustain and tremolo control-
lable through aftertouch.1 Furthermore, through electronic
excitation and manual damping, we are able to reproduce
the amplitude envelope of a reversed percussive note.
7.1 Phase Theory Veriﬁcation
As described in Section 5.1, we approximate a sinusoidal
excitation signal in phase with the tine velocity by shifting
the piezo (accelerometer) signal by 90 ◦. The only delay in
the mechanical-electrical signal path is introduced in the
circuit and can easily be measured with an oscilloscope.
Indeed, adjusting the phase shifter to achieve a 90 ◦ phase
diﬀerence between input and output signals results in the
highest amplitude oscillations during active sustain.
7.2 Excitation Signal Interference
We tested the cancellation method by holding the tine mo-
tionless and then driving the electromagnet with a synthe-
sized sine wave. Wired with the same polarity, each pickup
in the array would add the excitation signal to the audio
output. Our alternating pickup array, however, produces a
signal approximately equal to that of only the single pickup
nearest to the electromagnet - destructive interference re-
moves a signiﬁcant portion of the unwanted excitation signal
from the audio output.
1Audio examples: www.mat.ucsb.edu/gshear/EMSRhodes
7.3 Q Comparison
Our design goals maintain that new aﬀordances must not
come at the expense of original functionality - the instru-
ment should still sound like a Rhodes Piano when the active
electronics are switched oﬀ. Speciﬁcally, we want the modi-
ﬁed tone bars to behave as closely as possible to stock tone
bars. We quantify this as quality, or Q:
Q= πf0τ (7)
where τ is the time it takes for vibrations to decay to 1 /e
(about 37%) at fundamental frequency f0. A damped or
improperly tuned tonebar will reduce Q and shorten the
sustain time of a naturally decaying note.
Table 1 contains a few exampleQvalues from the midrange
of the piano and there is no appreciable variation between
modiﬁed and stock tonebars.
Table 1: Q values for midrange notes, modiﬁed tone
generators in bold.
Note f000f000f000 (Hz) τττ (sec) QQQ
B3 246.9 1.419 1101
C4 261.6 1.506 1238
D♭4 277.1 1.195 1040
D4 293.7 1.253 1156
E♭4 311.1 1.555 1520
7.4 Timbre Comparison
Figure 8: Normalized spectra comparing passively
decaying and and actively sustained steady state os-
cillations.
The magnitude frequency spectrum of the actively sus-
tained tine signal is similar to that of the passively vibrat-
ing tine signal during steady state oscillations (see Figure 8).
The main diﬀerence is that the passively vibrating note has
greater amplitude for the lower harmonics and lower am-
plitude for the higher harmonics as compared to the ac-
tively sustained note. We can attribute this to the general
tendency for higher frequencies to decay faster: the spec-
trum of the decaying note shows that the high frequencies
have already decayed relative to the fundamental, whereas
the spectrum of the actively sustained note is closer to the
spectrum earlier in the natural decay. This may also be
related to interference of the excitation signal described in
Section 6.
8. FUTURE WORK
8.1 Effective Frequency Range
The current system works well in the middle octave of the
piano, but the extreme high and low ends will present new
challenges. The highest frequency tines are only 18 mm
and the attached tonebars are correspondingly short - we do
not yet know if our method of mounting the electromagnet
directly to the tonebar will be possible in this range. We
are also unsure if the excitation signal will cancel as nicely
given the tight proximity between electromagnet and pickup
at this end of the piano.
At the low end, the long tines reach a much greater max-
imum deﬂection from equilibrium when vibrating at full
amplitude, so much so that the original tonebars in this
register are shaped to provide clearance. Furthermore, on
the 88-key model, the lowest seven tone generators have no
tonebars at all. We don’t fully understand the vibration
mechanics involved at this end of the piano - more research
will be necessary before we determine what modiﬁcations
are possible on these notes.
8.2 Adaptive Gain
Aftertouch pressure controls the attack time of notes initi-
ated from silence via the level of gain in the feedback loop.
The high gain necessary for this musical result, however, will
clip the large signal generated by the piezo sensor when the
tone generator is vibrating at full amplitude, and this clip-
ping adds high frequency distortion in the audio output. A
performer who is aware of this possibility may ease oﬀ on af-
tertouch pressure as amplitude increases, but adaptive gain
limiting will prevent this undesirable eﬀect all together.
8.3 Active Damping and Percussive Attack
Reversing the electromagnet polarity in our excitation cir-
cuit shortens sustain of the vibrating tine. This encour-
aging result suggests a system where the tine is damped
electromagnetically when the key returns to its upper posi-
tion, thus simulating the eﬀect of traditional felt dampers.
As described in Section 5.4, our current phototransistor-
based sensing system produces the continuous control signal
through the range of key motion necessary for this feature.
We look forward to experimenting with more powerful
electromagnets and various excitation pulses [15] in hopes
of reproducing a percussive attack similar in sound to that of
the original instrument. Full electromagnetic actuation and
damping will allow us to remove the entire key/hammer ac-
tion and instead control the instrument externally via MIDI
or OSC.
8.4 Play, Practice, and Perform
Perhaps it goes without saying, but this work was moti-
vated in part by our own musical aspirations and we are
most excited about getting to play an electromagnetically
sustained Rhodes Piano, instead of having to engineer one.
It would be fun to learn the original compositions that in-
spired the project - compositions that could only be realized
in the studio and with audio editing software.
9. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Curtis Roads for his help in structuring the pre-
sentation of this work, Ben Mazin for vetting the physics
theory, and Karl Yerkes and Daniel Bazo for brainstorming
about vibrational mechanics in the lab.
10. REFERENCES
[1] H. Rhodes. Electrical musical instrument in the
nature of a piano, 1961. US Patent 2,972,922.
[2] Rhodes Keyboard Instruments USA. Rhodes Service
Manual, 1979.
[3] G. Shear. The electromagnetically sustained Rhodes
piano. Master’s thesis, University of California, Santa
Barbara, 2011.
[4] G. Shear and M. Wright. The electromagnetically
sustained Rhodes piano. In NIME Proceedings, Oslo,
Norway, 2011.
[5] E. Berdahl, S. Backer, and J. Smith. If I had a
hammer: Design and theory of an
electromagnetically-prepared piano. In ICMC
Proceedings, Barcelona, Spain, 2005.
[6] A. McPherson and Y. Kim. Augmenting the acoustic
piano with electromagnetic string actuation and
continuous key position sensing. In NIME
Proceedings, Sydney, Australia, 2010.
[7] G. Heet. String instrument vibration and sustainer,
1978. U.S. Pat. 4,075,921.
[8] T. Rossing and D. Russell. Laboratory observation of
elastic waves in solids. American Journal of Physics ,
58:1153–1162, 1990.
[9] T. Rossing, D. Russell, and D. Brown. On the
acoustics of tuning forks. American Journal of
Physics, 60:620–626, 1992.
[10] Y. Kraftmakher. Computerized experiments with a
tuning fork. European Journal of Physics , 25, 2004.
[11] T. Rossing and N. Fletcher. Principles of vibration
and sound. Springer, 2nd edition, 2004.
[12] T. Irvine. Bending frequencies of beams, rods, and
pipes. vibrationdata.com/tutorials2/beam.pdf,
2011. Revision P.
[13] P. Horowitz and W. Hill. The Art of Electronics .
Cambridge University Press, 2nd edition, 1989.
[14] Fairchild Electronics. QRD1114 reﬂective object
sensor datasheet.
fairchildsemi.com/ds/QR/QRD1114.pdf.
[15] S. Van Duyne and J. Smith. Developments for the
commuted piano. In Proceedings of the 1995
International Computer Music Conference , pages
335–343, Banﬀ, Canada, 1995.
APPENDIX
A. SIMPLE TONEBAR MODEL
We model the tonebar as an ideal cantilever beam (with
mass) of lengthLt and the electromagnet as a point massme
attached at distance Le from the base, shown in Figure 9.
Figure 9: Simple model of tonebar with attached
electromagnet.
Breaking this apart we have the original cantilever beam
and a separate point mass at the end of a massless beam of
length Le, shown in Figure 10.
Figure 10: Separate tonebar and electromagnet
models.
The cantilever beam vibrates at the same frequency as if
it were a point mass mt′ (the eﬀective mass ) at the end of
a massless beam of the same length Lt. Similarly, the mass
me vibrates as if it were a smaller mass me′ at the end of
a longer beam, also of length Lt. These point masses are
shown in Figure 11 and are related to known quantities in
Equations 8 and 9.
Figure 11: Eﬀective masses at length Lt of tonebar
and electromagnet.
mt′ = 0.346Ltwhρ (8)
where Lt, w, h, and ρ are the length, width, height, and
density of the original tonebar.
me′ = me(Le
Lt
)3 (9)
Figure 12 shows these two masses added together and
Equation 10 relates fundamental vibrating frequency f0 to
known quantities - E is Youngs modulus of the tonebar
material.
Figure 12: Aggregate eﬀective mass on massless
beam of length Lt.
f0 = 1
2π
√
3EK
(mt′ + me′ )L3
t
(10)
where K = h√
12
(11)
Solving for Lt and substituting in Equations 8 and 9 leads
us ﬁnally to Equation 12.
L4
t =
3EK
(2πf0)2 −meLe
0.346whρ (12)