endo/exo : Making Art and Music  
with Distributed Computing 
 
Jiffer Harriman 
ATLAS Research Institute 
University of Colorado 
Boulder, Colorado  
Jeffrey.Harriman@ 
colorado.edu 
 
Michael Theodore 
College of Music 
University of Colorado 
Boulder, Colorado 
Michael.Theodore@ 
colorado.edu
 
Nikolaus Correll 
Department of Computer 
Science 
University of Colorado 
Nikolaus.Correll@ 
colorado.edu 
 
 
Hunter Ewen 
College of Music 
University of Colorado  
Boulder, CO 
Hunter.Ewen@colorado.edu 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
What do new possibilities for music and art making look like in 
a world in which the biological and mechanical are increasingly 
entangled? It is with this question in mind that the interactive 
mechanical sound art installation endo/exo came into being. 
Through the use of networked technology, the system becomes 
more like a self -aware organism, passing messages from node 
to node as cells communicate through “chemical signals” with 
their neighbors. In an artistic context, the communication 
network resembles, but differs from, other mechanical systems. 
Issues such as latency are often considered negative factors, yet 
when leveraged purposefully, they can contribute a touch of 
personality in this context.  
This paper is a reflection on these and other considerations 
gained from the experience of designing and constructing 
endo/exo. Additionally, it considers future implications for the 
Honeycomb platform as a tool for creating musical interactions 
within a n ew paradigm that allows for emergent behavior 
across vast physical spaces. The use of swarming and self -
organization, as well as playful interaction, creates an aliveness 
in the mechanism, and renders its exploration pleasurable, 
intriguing and uncanny.  
Keywords 
Robotic musical devices, emergent behavior, sound art, actuation, 
distributed computing, honeycomb, algorithmic composition 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Artists have always been interested in emerging expressive 
possibilities, and therefore often curious about the most recent 
technologies. Technology has always been a material projection 
of human ideas — an artifact — but recently the projections and 
the “projec tors” have been developing closer relationships. 
Endo/exo was developed as part of the mechanism/organism 
exhibition at the David B. Smith Gallery in Denver, Colorado, 
USA. It is an interactive installation that participates in the 
traditions of kinetic sculpture, sound art, fiber art, and light 
works, while exploring new environments for creating sounds 
algorithmically and acoustically. It leverages a new networked 
microcontroller platform called the Honeycomb[3], in which 
each node is identical and creates a system of behaviors that are 
based on local conditions and communication with neighboring 
nodes. 
At first glance, endo/exo is a study in stark contrasts. The large 
gridded exterior is fabricated from hard, industrial materials 
and features sound-producing mechanical objects, which are 
seen in silhouette. The silent interior, a volumetric textile 
membrane, is glowing with intense, continuously modulated 
color, and is constructed with soft materials that have been 
worked by hand into a web of amorphous shapes. 
 
Figure 1: endo/exo, installed at the David B. Smith Gallery  
Left to its own devices, the installation mimics various natural 
cycles, such as the winds that rhythmically rustle grasses in an 
open field, or waves that advance and recede in ever-changing 
patterns, resulting in a visual and auditory spectacle ena bled by 
emergent properties of the networked system.  
As we grow accustomed to new pervasive technologies, most 
of which serve us in our daily lives, a new level of comfort with 
connectedness to information and others is developing. 
However, interactions wi th systems, which impose their own 
preferences and tendencies, could still be unfamiliar to some. 
The response is typically fascination, and even uneasiness, as 
one proceeds to explore the unknown. We have learned to 
accept various roles of machines in our lives; new encounters 
with them allow us to explore the edges of the “uncanny 
valley”[8] of lifelike robotic organisms, while finding pleasure 
in the excitement of the eerily familiar. For instance, as the 
installation waves roll by and one listens to the  sound of wood 
on metal, it becomes easy to imagine a creaking ship pitching 
in the sea. 
2. RELATED WORK AND IMPLICATIONS 
A number of installations have explored the boundaries of the 
biological and mechanical through the use of physical actuation 
to stimulate the uncanny sensations of li fe in the inanimate. 
Nils Völker’s One Hundred And Eight [15] inflates and deflates 
plastic bags in patterns across a wall to create flow and 
movement that can be likened to breathing. Much of Philip 
Beesley’s work, such as his installations in the Hylozoic Soil[2] 
series, uses physically imposing immersive environments to 
transport the viewer into another world. Through simple 
movements of the installation’s tendrils, life is given to the 
lifeless. Meanwhile the design team Humans since 1982, 
developed the installation A Million Times [5], which 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on 
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME’14, June 30 – July 03, 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
383
beautifully exemplifies the way simple, choreographed 
oscillations cascading across a wall can create motions that 
mimic waves found throughout nature. Endo/exo shares the 
uncanny lifelike behavior of One Hundred And Eight and 
Hylozoic Soil,  and the mimicry of natural waves found in A 
Million Times. 
The study of flocking algorithms with distributed models for 
computer animations provides insight into how behaviors in 
distributed computational systems might be programme d[11]. 
Accordingly, the current installation further explores the self -
organization and herding algorithms first utilized in Swarm 
Wall[4], a work based on the same hardware platform, and that 
also explored several interactive concepts revisited here. Like  
Swarm Wall , the overall aesthetic of endo/exo has drawn 
inspiration from biological forms, but here, the motion of the 
mechanism has been further refined and interactions made 
more convincing[14].  
Mechanical musical actuators have been explored for years . In 
the 1800s player pianos and orchestrions became popular, 
usually powered pneumatically[10]. In more recent years 
electromechanical robotic actuators have been explored in a 
variety of settings [6, 13].  
While endo/exo has drawn on a variety of artisti c inspiration 
and technical fields, the combination used in the final execution 
yields a unique experience and exploration of a new paradigm 
for creating art and music with the aid of distributed computing.  
3. INSTALLATION  
The site-specific installation consists of a grid  of 55 nodes, and 
is 8.5 m wide by 3.8 m tall and 1.5 m deep. The intelligence of 
endo/exo resides in a distributed network of custom 
microcontroller boards known as Honeycomb[3]. The 
installation is built out of light frame material that were built in 
sections off site. The gridded exterior provides the structure to 
mount the servo motors, with 75 cm wooden dowels fixed to 
the motors, draped conduit, long range infrared (IR) proximity 
sensors, and the circuit boards and corresponding cabling. The 
framing i s left open, leaving picture windows to view the 
interior, which consists of meticulously hung, tied, braided and 
draped white polyester yarn, and which takes up much of the 
depth of the installation. The depth also leaves room for high 
powered, DMX progra mmable LED stage lights, for which the 
yarn becomes a projection surface, causing it to glow in 
continuously changing patterns of color and light. (The lights 
were controlled by an independent program that cycled at a 
much slower rate than the sound component.) 
4. TECHNOLOGY AND MATERIALS  
Each node consists of one Honeycomb board (depicted in green 
in figure 2) and one servo-motor. The boards are interconnected 
to have bi -directional communication with four neighbors (up, 
down, left and right): connections are depicted in figure 2 wit h 
orange cabling. Each node in the bottom row has a long -range 
IR proximity sensor attached to detect presence across the 
breadth of the system. Due to the configuration of the 
installation, a majority of the nodes are above the viewers, and 
therefore each column uses sensor data from the bottom row to 
identify presence on a column. The flexibility offered by this 
platform enables arbitrary configurations and numbers of nodes 
without any changes to the coding. A newly inserted node will 
be automatically programmed by the system and identify its 
position and associated role.  
4.1 Honeycomb 
Honeycomb is a microcontroller platform that can easily be 
networked into hexagonal lattices of hundreds of nodes to 
create novel materials that tightly integrate sensing, actuation, 
computation and communication. Each PCB consists of an 
Atmel Xmega 128A3 microcontroller and auxiliary electronics. 
This microcontroller was chosen for its seven hardware serial 
ports, which allows two -way communication with up to six 
neighbors ( in addition to  a debug output). The serial 
connections (two wires, one for sending, the other for receiving 
data) are made available via standard 8-pin RJ45 jacks, which 
allow using off -the-shelf Ethernet cabling for connections. The 
remaining six pins of the cable are used for power and ground . 
By this, all boards share a common power supply and can 
distribute power to its neighbors . Servos are connected to the 
microcontroller’s bu ilt-in pulse -width modulation (PWM) 
outputs, and the IR proximity sensors are connected to one of 
the microcontroller’s analog inputs. 
 
Figure 2: Depiction of 3x2 node section of endo/exo  
with Honeycomb connectivity  
The boards use a viral bootloader that allows new programs to 
automatically propagate throughout the system by simply 
programming one board. The main program receives pertinent 
data from the neighbors, including sensor data, current angle 
and a strength variable, which represents physical presence 
detected some distance away in the system.  
An alternative  version of this platform was used to create a 
localization solution for the hearing impaired, with a wearable 
garment utilizing microphones to create a sensor array to 
perform the sound localization[9]. In that project, haptic 
feedback is provided with vi bration motors sewn into the 
garment to indicate the direction of sound.   
4.2 Sensing Presence 
The detection of people for this installation was accomplished 
with a long range IR sensor (Sharp GP2Y0A710YK), which 
has a range of 100–550 cm. To create pronounced effect when 
presence is detected, a distance threshold with a programmed 
hysteresis was used to alert the program of presence at a given 
node to reduce false triggers. In order to be able to respond to 
presence in the system to varying degrees (depen ding on the 
location of the presence), a value of 1 is assigned to a column 
currently detecting presence. The messages are passed to the 
left and right, where the strength of the presence signal is 
diminished with an exponential decay, allowing immediate 
neighbors to “feel” the presence more s trongly than nodes 
further away.  Each board continual ly calculates and sets a new 
position for its servo motor  based on the cu rrent mode (mood) 
of the system, stimulus from the environment as well as  its 
neighbors state. In this way viewers can interact by moving 
throughout the space, influencing the movement and generated 
sound. 
4.3 Sound Actuation 
The sound component of the installation is created acoustically 
by wooden dowels physically scraping along a ridged, 
aluminum electrical conduit. The conduit becomes like the 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
384
guiro, a Latin American percussion instrument, normally made 
of wood and played with a wooden stick. The wooden dowels 
are directly attached to a 180 degree servo motor, which is 
controlled by the Honeycom b board. When swept slowly, the 
individual ridges of the conduit are audible, while at high rates 
they become one brisk gesture. The physical motion of a node 
is inextricably tied to the associated sound created by the 
motion. The result is a satisfying stimulation of the visual and 
aural senses that the physical world readily offers us.  
There is an incredible range of sounds offered by this setup. At 
times a single node interrupts silence, while at other times, all 
55 nodes fill the space with powerful sound. The physical size 
of the installation spatializes the acoustic sound sources acr oss 
the 32.5 square meters of the installation, which contributes 
significantly to the experience of space and the kinetic 
movement of the sculpture. 
4.4 Programming for visuals and sound 
A primary goal for the sculpture was the creation of a 
convincing, natural sense of movement and sound. To  this end, 
we employed several approaches familiar to sound synthesis 
and audio effects, and developed a library of functions to 
enable rapid exploration of ideas. Our workhorse building 
block was simple harmonic motion, modeled as a sine wave. 
The sine function was used to set the angle of the servo, with 
the amplitude determining the angular sweep. Delay lines 
throughout the system were another important component. 
Because of the networked nature of the platform, it is 
convenient for each node to know the behavior of its 
neighbors,  and to respond accordingly. By using a short delay, 
perceptible waves propagate throughout the system. When 
timed appropriately, these can create mesmerizing visuals and 
enhance the sense of space and movement when hearing the 
sound move across the room.  
When these basic functions are combined and orchestrated 
across this large -scale network of sound actuators, they take on 
new life, with the relationship amongst neighbors making the 
end results considerably  richer. Dowels sweep  across the 
conduit in and out of phase, producing a pleasing audible and 
visible interplay between the nodes that can at times be likened 
to Steve Reich’s phasing music[12]. In the following section 
some of the programmed behaviors are described.  
4.4.1 Behavior Cycles  
When l eft undisturbed the system cycles through seven 
behaviors, changing modes every 90 seconds. The transition 
between modes captures the last angle of the previous mode 
and linearly interpolates to the newly calculated.  
One behavioral mode uses a modulated d elay line to propagate 
waves across the installation. For these, the far left column 
determines the behavior, which is then mimicked to the right. 
The columns use messages from their neighbors relaying their 
current angle, which is stored in a circular buf fer at each node. 
The delay from node to node is then slowly modulated with a 
low frequency oscillator (LFO)— spanning from no delay up to 
1 second, depending on the specific mode. Types of movements 
that were passed across the structure included a sine wav e, an 
amplitude modulated (AM) sine wave, and a frequency 
modulated (FM) sine wave. In addition to the wave based 
motions, a quarter wave “raised cosine” sweep (starting with a 
quick transition) was also used to accentuate the percussive 
nature of the medi um. The periods and amplitudes of the 
various motions were selected experimentally, initially using 
Max/MSP for control to identify motions that looked and felt 
natural and interesting. 
Another mode uses a weighted average of the neighbors’ angles 
to mimic  the natural flocking of birds, fish and herds of 
animals. Many of these principles are taken from concepts 
introduced in early computer flocking models[1]. Each node 
has a unique, preferred harmonic frequency, which it randomly 
selects upon initialization  of the mode. It then listens to its four 
neighbors to determine their current angles, and comes up with 
a new angle based on its own preference and the neighbors’ 
current states. This creates a mesmerizing pattern throughout 
the system that shows the infl uence of a cluster behaving 
similarly, but the influence of one node fades as your gaze 
moves across the system. The amount of weight the system 
gives to the neighbors is modulated with an LFO over 20 
seconds, creating cycles of close unison, which then tr ansition 
to a more chaotic behavior where the nodes more or less ignore 
their neighbors. The resulting emergent behavior is directly 
related to the size of the system and individual and algorithmic 
“personality” of each node. 
The final mode contrasts the a ctive modes previously described 
by remaining mostly at rest but randomly calculating a time at 
which it will briefly activate a quick and subtle twitch. In this 
mode, a single node may only move once in ten seconds, but 
with the whole system going, an int ricate dance permeates the 
installation as the nodes sporadically activate.  
4.4.2 Interaction Responses 
By engaging one of endo/exo’s sensors, the observer elicits a 
variety of responses, ranging from empathetic, mirrored 
movements to sudden and bemused silence. The audience 
realizes that the work is watching them, just as much as they 
are watching it. Each behavior in the cycle has a corresponding 
sensor response. Some of the responses are subtle, only 
affecting a local column, while others are quite overt, eliciting a 
response from the whole system. For instance, in the fast and 
chaotic finale of the cycle, the entire system abruptly stops and 
“points” at the viewer upon detecting presence: the closest 
column becomes vertical while other columns splay out at ever 
increasing angles to create a large -scale gradient of angles 
pointing at their object of affection. The abrupt response of the 
system in this case is impacted by a small amount of delay, 
allowing you to watch the messages get passed throughout the 
system as the motors respond successively. The delay is due to 
system latency based on the communication rate and 
overhead—not a programmed delay — although in this case it 
contributes to create a satisfying effect. Meanwhile, another 
mode chooses an angle at which to pause, perhaps ne rvously 
holding its breath, while the viewer is near. Another response is 
a joyful shake of the column, which sometimes remains local 
and sometimes spreads out in all directions.  
An additional response leans toward the more human attributes 
of musical rhyt hm, which the system is well equipped to 
facilitate: a patterned rhythmic response that turns the 
installation into a massive, algorithmic drum machine. This 
interactive behavior derives from the world of compositional 
algorithms in computer music. For yea rs people have been 
fascinated with using computers to generate new music based 
on algorithms[7]; only in recent decades have machines have 
become powerful enough to do so in real time. A novel feature 
of the current design is that the algorithms are compu ter via 
distributed computing, calculating a new pattern to play each 
time presence is detected. If more than one column detects 
presence, complicated patterns will emerge, spatialized by the 
physical distances of the different columns. This mode of 
interaction turns the entire installation into a large -scale, multi-
user instrument, which can be played by stepping towards and 
away from the structure.  
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
385
 
Figure 3: Close up of endo/exo showing servo  
motor, dowel scraping electrical  conduit and yarn detail  
5. REFLECTIONS 
A number of challenges are unique to the particulars of this 
project. These include a paradigm shift towards  distributed 
systems as opposed to a centralized computing model, 
synchronization of the nodes, mapping behaviors spatially, and 
prototyping, as well as the physical challenges when fabricating 
a new interface with off the shelf raw materials.  
In distributed computing systems such as Honeycomb, each 
board is running an identical piece of software but is 
responding to its own context. For instance, with endo/exo, 
each board becomes aware of its location in the system by 
noting which ports it is actively rece iving messages from.  
One of the resulting challenges of such a system is 
synchronization. With no central computer keeping track of 
cycles, the variations in the boards’ oscillators causes drift from 
their sense of time, which can in turn cause complications with 
time-based algorithms such as sine functions. For instance, if 
the columns are following a delayed version of their neighbor 
with the delay amount fluctuating with a sinusoidal LFO, clock 
drift will cause noticeable discontinuities as a wave propagates 
across the system. Some of these issues could be addressed by 
looking again to biological inspirations to make distributed 
computing systems more robust[1]. For inst ance, another 
potential approach might include exchanging more information 
with neighbors about a node’s present state, including its sense 
of time. 
6. FUTURE WORK 
We believe the Honeycomb platform offers a promising 
approach worthy of further exploration in music making . The 
software that was developed for this project will be made open 
source, and we hope this will provide a stable starting point for 
future work. Algorithmic compositional approaches which take 
into account more information about the neighbors’ patterns 
and current state as well as a more refined sense of 
musicianship will help produce a dynamic and scalable robotic 
musical ensemble. The affordances of the networked system 
create unique opportunities in this space.  
Presently, we plan to create a small s cale version of this system, 
which will result in a more personalized interaction and allow 
for each node to be physically accessible for a single user to 
stimulate and control as an instrument or interaction, with 
networked and emergent properties.  
7. SUMMARY 
We p resented here the description and development details of 
the interactive art installation titled endo/exo and the 
development of its core technologies. It leverages a newly 
developed microcontroller platform called the Honeycomb, 
which utilizes distributed computing technology. Each 
percussive actuator creates sound acoustically with a wooden 
dowel and ridged conduit, which are physically spatialized 
across the installation. The motivations and programming of the 
behaviors and various interactions were desc ribed. The 
networked nature of this system offers a new paradigm for 
creating sound and visuals across vast physical spaces. The 
potential for further research into emergent behaviors for both 
visuals and sound provide interesting areas for further 
research.   
8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work was supported by the ATLAS Research Institute, 
NSF grant #1150223 and with a seed grant from the University 
of Colorado, Boulder. Special thanks to Nicholas Farrow, Ken 
Sugawara and Shang Ma for their consultation.  
9. REFERENCES 
[1] Babaoglu, O., Canright, G., & Deutsch, A. (2006). Design 
patterns from biology for distributed computing. ACM 
Transactions on Autonomous and Adaptive Systems , 1(1), 
26–66.  
[2] Beesley, Philip, Hyliozoic  Soil, 2009, 
http://www.philipbeesleyarchitect.com/sculptures/0848VI
DA/ 
[3] Correll, N., Farrow, N., Ma, S. (2013). HoneyComb – A 
Platform for Computational Robotic Materials. 
Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on 
Tangible Embedded and Embodied Interaction   
[4] Correll, N., Farrow, N., Sugawara, K., Theodore, M. The 
Swarm-Wall: Toward Life’s Uncanny Valley, IEEE 
International Conference on Robotics and Automation  
[5] Humans Since 1982, 2013, http://humanssince1982.com/a -
million-times 
[6] Kapur, A. A history of robotic musical instruments.  
[7] Leach, J., Fitch, J. (1995). Nature, Music, and Algorithmic 
Composition, Computer Music Journal, Vol. 19, No. 2 
(Summer), pp. 23-33 
[8] Mori, M. (1970/2012). The uncanny valley (K. F. 
MacDorman & N. Kageki , Trans.). IEEE Robotics & 
Automation Magazine, 19(2), 98 –100. 
[9] Profita, H. P., Farrow, N., & Correll, N. (2012). Flutter. 
Proceedings of the 16th International Symposium on 
Wearable Computers (ISWC), pages 44 -46, Newcastle 
upon Tyne, June 2012., 8 –9. 
[10] Reblitz, Arthur A. The Golden Age of Automatic Musical 
Instruments. ISBN 0-9705951-0-7 Woodsville, New 
Hampshire: Mechanical Music Press, 2001.  
[11] Reynolds, C. (1987). Flocks, herds and schools: A 
distributed behavioral model. ACM SIGGRAPH Computer 
Graphics, 21(4), 25–34. doi:10.1145/37402.374Schwarz, 
R., Reich, S.: Music as a Gradual Process, Part I, 
Perspectives of New Music (Autumn 1980, Summer 1981)  
[12] Schwarz, R., Reich, S.: Music as a Gradual Process, Part I, 
Perspectives of New Music (Autumn 1980, Summer 1981)  
[13] Singer, Eric, et al. "LEMUR's musical robots." 
Proceedings of the 2004 conference on New interfaces for 
musical expression. National University of Singapore, 
2004. 
[14] Theodore, Michael, endo/exo, 2013 
http://vimeo.com/67170767 
[15] Völker, Nils One Hundred and Eight, 2010, 
http://www.nilsvoelker.com/content/onehundredandeight/ 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
386