SoundStrand: Composing with a Tangible Interface  
 
 
Eyal Shahar 
MIT Media Lab 
75 Amherst Street 
Cambridge, MA 02139 
persones@media.mit.edu 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
SoundStrand is a tangible music composition tool. It 
demonstrates a paradigm developed to enable music 
composition through the use of tangible interfaces. This 
paradigm attempts to overcome the contrast between the 
relatively small of amount degrees of freedom usually 
demonstrated by tangible interfaces and the vast number of 
possibilities that musical composition presents. 
SoundStrand is comprised of a set of physical objects called 
cells, each representing a musical phrase. Cells can be 
sequentially connected to each other to create a musical theme. 
Cells can also be physically manipulated to access a wide range 
of melodic, rhythmic and harmonic variations. The 
SoundStrand software assures that as the cells are manipulated, 
the melodic flow, harmonic transitions and rhythmic patterns of 
the theme remain musically plausible while preserving the 
user’s intentions. 
 
Keywords 
Tangible, algorithmic, composition, computer assisted 
1. INTRODUCTION 
1.1 Motivation 
It is well established that the benefits people get from engaging 
with music are substantial – it arouses creativity, provides 
means of deep expression and builds self-confidence  [1]
 [7]. 
The entry level for music composition, however, can be quite 
intimidating. Composing music requires extensive knowledge 
of music theory, developed aural skills, and often requires 
mastering a musical instrument. This prevents a large share of 
the population to take on composing, including young children 
and mentally or physically challenged people – those who need 
their self-confidence supported and their means of expression 
enhanced the most. 
Therefore, it is not surprising that many endeavors have been 
made to lower the entry level for involvement in music 
composition. Software systems have been designed to enable 
music composition using abstract graphical input, with the 
software translating shapes, lines and colors to musically 
plausible compositions  [5]. On the other hand, the use of 
tangible interfaces in music is mostly restricted to exploration 
and manipulation of pre-composed music due to their limited 
amount of degrees of freedom. SoundStrand demonstrates a 
hybrid approach that provides tangible interaction yet yields a 
complex, deliberate musical composition. 
1.2
 Distinction from Related Work 
The body of work in the field of tangible interfaces for music 
creation is immense. Concentrating on interfaces for music 
composition, we can observe works such as the reacTable  [6] 
and AudioCubes  [8], in which objects represent musical 
elements that are constantly playing, bringing the interaction 
more similar to a performance, improvisation or composition in 
real time.  Other interfaces such as the Tangible Sequencer  [1] 
and Music Blocks  [10] are, indeed, sequencers; however, the 
sequenced units are sampled, unchangeable segments of music, 
a fact that leaves the user highly limited in terms of composing. 
Finally, augmented reality projects, such as the Music 
Table  [2], support detailed music composition, yet the objects 
with which the users interact take the role of commands or 
temporary representation of content, rather than embody the 
musical material and act as a consistent representation. 
The SoundStrand cells not only represent their musical content 
but also the means to control it. Their individual manipulation 
controls rhythm, pitch and harmony, while their assembly is a 
high level description of the musical content arrangement. The 
finished strand is a mentally sustainable representation of a 
composed musical piece. 
2.
 SOUNDSTRAND 
SoundStrand is a set of cylindrical cells, each representing a 
musical one measure long musical phrase. Cells come in 
different types that represent different musical phrases. Cells 
can be attached to one another to create a musical theme, as 
shown in Figure 1. 
The skeletal mechanism of a cell allows it to 
be stretched or shrunk to shift the rhythmic center of mass, bent 
upwards or downwards to change melodic directionality and 
twisted along its axis to change the harmonic context. 
 
 
Figure 1. Two SoundStrand configurations, demonstrating 
different manipulations of cells 
The physical interface of SoundStrand is a set of cells. A cell is 
a cylindrical object with a 3D printed skeleton and stretchable 
fabric skin. The skeleton is designed so that the cell can be 
bent, elongated and twisted. Cells also include electrical 
circuitry that is used to digitally capture the cell’s physical state 
and to communicate with neighboring cells. Cells connect to 
each other by a set of extrusions and holes on both their ends. 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advant age and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME’12, May 21-23, 2012, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
Electrical connectors are also located on the cells’ ends. These 
are used to carry power and data between the cells. The first 
cell in a strand connects to a computer using an FTDI cable. 
The data that is received by the computer describes th e 
complete current strand configuration. 
The computer, in turn, is running dedicated software that reads 
the strand’s configuration and translates the cells’ order and 
individual cell manipulations to a musical composition. 
3. MUSICAL 
APPROACH 
3.1 Musical Paradigm 
Currently SoundStrand is restricted to a single voice, single 
timbre theme accompanied by a harmony and a bass. It is 
recognized that a theme is the assembly of musical phrases, 
often repetitive with some modifications. It is then stressed that 
these variations are introduced to the timing of the notes, their 
pitches and the underlying harmony. Applying these variations 
using a tangible interface requires that a user will have access 
to the wide varieties of possible variations of one of these 
properties with a single parameter. 
For rhythmic variations, a phrase can be viewed as having a 
center of rhythmical mass.  If a phrase is one musical bar long 
and it is comprised of four consecutive quarter notes, it is said 
that its center of rhythmical mass is 0.5, i.e. in the middle of the 
measure. If notes are shifted towards the beginning of the 
measure it will have a smaller center of mass and a larger 
center of mass if notes are shifted towards the end. The 
suggested application will shift the notes to accommodate the 
desirable center of mass as expressed by the user. 
For melodic variations, the notes comprising the phrase can be 
viewed as having directionality. Modifying the directionality of 
a phrase will shift the notes’ pitches upwards or downwards. 
Finally, when a harmonic variation is introduced to the phrase , 
the system not only changes the notes of the underlying 
harmony and bass, but also the melody notes in a manner that 
will be musically plausible. 
It is also required that the system ensures that transitions from 
one phrase to the next are musical, mainly in respect to the 
harmonic transitions and the melody line. 
3.2 Parameter Mapping 
Assignment of the various degrees of freedom of the 
SoundStrand cell to the different types of phrase variation 
attempts to be as intuitive as possible.  
As cells are connected sequentially to one another, it suggests 
that time moves along the trajectory connecting the cells, i.e. 
along the cells’ lengths. Therefore the variation concerning the 
timing of the notes – their rhythmic distribution – is mapped to 
changes along that axis, which is the cell’s elongation. 
Pitch is commonly referred to as the axis perpendicular to time; 
therefore, the cell’s bend is mapped to the phrase’s melodic 
directionality. 
Finally, the mapping of the cell’s twist to harmonic tension 
seems natural as the act of twisting is often paired with physical 
tension, such as springs or lids of jars. 
Table 1 shows a phrase along with one of the several results of 
the cell’s manipulation along each degree of freedom. 
4. DESIGN 
4.1 Mechanical Design 
The cells are cylindrical objects about 4” in length and 2” in 
diameter. They consist of a plastic skeleton, a skin and 
electronic circuitry.  
 
 
Table 1. Example of a manipulated cell 
 
4.1.1 Skeleton 
The skeleton of a SoundStrand cell ( Figure 2) is fabricated by 
3D printing. It is designed to enable the cell to be bent, twisted 
and elongated, and to be connected to neighboring cells  [9]. 
The center piece of the skeleton is the frame. It has a rail in 
which slides the rack. The rack can be moved back and forth to 
change the elongation. The frame has a niche to which the 
pinion fits. When the rack slides back and forth, the pinion 
turns, and by measuring a potentiometer attached to the pinion, 
the amount of elongation can be determined.  
 
 
Figure 2. 
A disassembled cell skeleton 
The arm serves as the bending mechanism of the cell. It 
extends from the frame to which it is connected with a pin, 
allowing the arm to turn around the pin’s axis. The pin itself 
has an extrusion that fits into a niche in the arm, forcing them 
to move together. A potentiometer attached to the pin measures 
the angle between the arm and the frame, determining the cell’s 
bend. 
Finally, the twisting mechanism consists of the plate rotating 
against the rack’s end. Two braces locked into each other and 
to the plate encapsulate the rack’s end and hold the plate in 
contact with it. A potentiometer attached to the plate measures 
the amount of rotation between the plate and the rack’s end in 
order to determine the cell’s twist. 
4.1.2 Skin 
The cells are covered with an elastic fabric skin. The skin is 
sewn to a cylinder, and it keeps its shape with three plastic 
rings fastened to its interior. Two rubber rings are sewn to the 

ends of the skin and fit to grooves on the edge of both the 
skeleton’s ends. 
4.1.3 Connectors 
Three cross-shaped extrusions are located on the face of the 
plate. These fit into corresponding cuts in the face of the 
connected cell’s arm . In addition, the electrical connectors , 
which are a 2x2, 2.54mm pitch header-connector pair, not only 
provide power and communication but also support the 
mechanical connection between cells. 
4.2 Electrical Design 
In the center of every SoundStrand cell is an Atmel 
ATmega168 microcontroller. It measures the value of three 
potentiometers fixed to the cell’s skeletal structure to dete
rmine 
the cell’s elongation, bend and rotation.  
Cells connect to each other electronically as described in 
section  4.1.3. The first cell in a strand is connected to the 
computer with a USB FTDI cable. This connection allows the 
computer to provide a 5V power line and a ground line for the 
entire strand and receive the strand ’s configuration, encoded as 
described in section  4.3.  Two of the pins are used as a shared 
5V power supply. A third pin is used to transfer data over a 
serial bus from a cell to the one preceding it. The fourth pin is 
reserved for future use. 
The circuit features an RGB-LED that serves to indicate that 
the cell is working properly. The color of the LED is 
determined by the state of the potentiometers. The light is 
clearly visible to the user as it is diffracted by the cell’s skin. 
4.3 Communication Protocol 
By design, data can flow between the cells in only one direction 
- from the end of the strand towards the computer. The last cell 
in the strand periodically initiates the data transfer with a 
packet that contains the cell’s type and potentiometer values, 
followed by an “End of Transmission” (ETX) byte. The packet 
is passed to the preceding cell which adds its own type and 
potentiometer values to the beginning of the packet before 
passing it on. This process is illustrated in Figure 3. 
 
  
Figure 3. Packet formation. a) Cell A, the last in the strand, 
initiates a packet. b) Cell B adds its data to the packet. 
Working in tail mode, a cell assumes it is the last one in the 
strand unless receiving a packet in its input port. While 
operating in this mode, it will initiate a data transfer every 
250ms. Once a packet is received, the cell will no longer 
consider itself last and will enter body mode. Under this mode 
of operation, packets received will be promptly modified and 
passed on. If no packet is received for a period of 500ms, the 
cell will assume its subsequent cells have been removed and 
return to tail mode. The 500ms interval assures cells do not 
leave body mode prematurely. 
4.4
 Software 
The software used to translate the strand’s configuration to a 
musical theme is written in Java. When the software is started, 
it loads XML files describing the various cell types in terms of 
their musical content, which is the original pitches of the notes 
and a table of possible rhythmic distributions. Other XML files 
describing harmonic transition tables are also loaded.  
The software then allows the user to select various harmonic 
models which are implemented through their respective 
transition table. The user can also select melodic models which 
determine how note pitches will be quantized, e.g. diatonic vs. 
pentatonic scales.  
The software also features a transport bar, allowing playing, 
stopping and looping the strand or a particular cell and a piano-
roll style visual representation of the theme. 
Finally, the software allows the user to enter simulation mode 
in which connection to a physical interface is not necessary and 
cells are added, deleted and manipulated virtually. 
Two additional software tools allow the user to program new 
harmonic transition tables and new phrases along with their 
possible rhythmic permutation. These will be described in 
section  5.4. 
5.
 ALGORITHMS DESCRIPTION  
5.1 Rhythmic Variation 
Stretching and compressing a cell result in changes in the 
rhythmic distribution of its phrase’s notes. Currently, a phrase 
is programmed with a predetermined list of possible rhythmic 
variations. The value of the cell’s elongation potentiometer is 
quantized by the software which in turn selects the appropriate 
rhythmic permutation from the list.  
5.2
 Harmonic Variation 
SoundStrand’s harmony system is inspired by David Cope’s 
SPEAC system  [4]. A cell can have one of five possible tension 
functions: Statement, Preparation, Extension, Antecedent or 
Conclusion. Different states correspond to different degrees of 
twist introduced to the cell. A harmonic transition table 
determines the cell’s chord based on its tension function and 
the preceding cell’s chord. As an example, let us assume a 
SoundStrand playing in the C-Major key. If a cell is twisted to 
assume the Extension function and its preceding cell’s harmony 
was an F-Major chord, the harmonic transition table might 
indicate that the cell’s chord should be a D -Minor chord. 
Different harmonic transition tables can be applied to produce 
different musical modes, e.g. Minor or Phrygian, or various 
musical genres. 
5.3
 Melodic Variation 
Bending a cell alters the melodic directionality of its phrase . 
The alteration of notes is done in several stages. First, if a cell 
is not the first one in a strand, the phrase is transposed so that 
its reference point, which is the middle C, is shifted to be the 
same as the last note of the preceding cell. This is done in order 
to achieve a natural melodic flow from cell to cell.  
It is then that the direction and amount of bending are 
considered. Notes are transposed up or down depending on the 
direction of bending - notes that are closer to the end of the 
measure are transposed more than notes that are closer to the 
beginning. The notes’ pitches are then quantized to pitch values 
that are on the strand’s key, and the first and last notes are 
further quantized to pitch values which form the cell’s chord. 
5.4
 Content Generation Tools 
To achieve even greater flexibility using SoundStrand, 
advanced users can create their own content using two content 

generation tools. These define the melodic content, the 
rhythmic permutations and the harmonic behavior of 
SoundStrand. 
5.4.1 Cell Content Editor 
With the Cell Content Editor, the user can program cell 
phrases, along with the possible rhythmic permutations:  in the 
piano-roll like Pitch Area the user defines the number of notes 
present in the phrase and their pitches when the cell is not bent . 
Although the timing of the events is also expressed in this 
editor, it is only for reference and for the initial setting of a new 
rhythmic pattern. The actual timing is specified in the Rhythm 
Area. The Rhythm Area allows the user to create the various 
rhythmic patterns accessible through modifying the elongation 
property. The pattern editing interface is a row of boxes 
representing the 1/16th note intervals in the measure. The user 
edits a pattern by marking the desired onset times.  
5.4.2 Harmonic Transition Table Editor 
The Harmonic Transition Table Editor allows the user to create 
a set of rules that determine SoundStrand’s harmonic behavior. 
A rule, as a software entity, has two fields: state, which is a 
string expressing the harmonic function of the preceding cell; 
and transitions, which are an array of strings, each expressing 
the next function based on the degree of tensions as conveyed 
by the cell’s twist. The user begins to create a new harmonic 
transition by starting with an empty table. When adding a new 
rule, the software prompts the user to determine the state of that 
rule. The user can choose any degree on the scale, i.e. I to VII, 
and has a choice between a major or minor chord. The user can 
then determine the different transitions of that rule. However, in 
order to use a harmonic function as a transition, it must first be 
defined as a state of another rule. This scheme prevents 
SoundStrand from reaching a harmonic function for which 
harmonic transitions are not defined.  
6. SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK 
This work intends to demonstrate the feasibility of composition 
with tangible interfaces, a concept which allows users of 
various musical backgrounds to engage in creative musical 
activity. Additional work to develop this concept can take many 
forms. 
Enhancement of SoundStrand interactivity can be explored in 
many paths. At present, auditioning cells, playing, stopping, 
and toggling the loop mode are all done from the computer 
GUI. A search for ways to execute these functions through 
tangible interaction will help to concentrate the user’s 
engagement around the physical interface. Other sensors can be 
incorporated in the SoundStrand cells to detect the strand’s 
location and orientation in space. This, for example, can be 
used once the piece is ready and is being performed by 
handling it in space. The research work to be done in this case 
will include the sensing technology, but even more importantly, 
the mapping of the data retrieved to musical parameters. 
Visual feedback can also be greatly improved, perhaps by 
increasing the illumination of the currently playing cell or even 
the current playing position within the cell. In addition, a 
sturdier, more robust physical structure can be developed, both 
from the perspective of the mechanical design and the materials 
being used. 
On a wider scope, the paradigm of composing by manipulation 
of pre-composed musical fragments can be implemented in 
other applications - the most obvious are a range of yet 
unexplored tangible interfaces for music composition that can 
take very different form from SoundStrand, use different 
mappings, but still utilize the same paradigm and algorithms. 
Further research can be done regarding the algorithms 
themselves, allowing multiple harmonic changes within a 
measure, automatic generation of rhythmical permutations and 
key changes. 
7.
 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I would like to thank Yan Shen and Kelsey Brigance for their 
key contribution in the mechanical design and Tod Machover 
for supporting this project. 
8. REFERENCES 
[1] Bernstein, J. T., The Tangible Sequencer - a Simple 
Musical Instrument, 
http://murderandcreate.com/tangiblesequencer, 2005 
[2] Berry, R.,Makino, M., Hikawa, N., and Suzuki, M., The 
Augmented Composer Project: The Music Table, in 
Proceedings of the 2003 International Symposium on 
Mixed and Augmented Reality, Tokyo, Japan, 2003, pp. 
338–339. 
[3] Boulanger, A. Music, Mind and Health: How Community 
Change, Diagnosis, and Neuro-Rehabilitation can be 
Targeted during Creative Tasks. Ph.D. Thesis, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2010 
[4]
 Cope, D., Computer and Musical Style, A-R Editions, 
Madison, WI, 1991 
[5] Farbood, M., Kaufman, H., and Jennings, K. Composing 
with Hyperscore: An Intuitive Interface for Visualizing 
Musical Structure. In Proceedings of the International 
Computer Music Conference, Copenhagen, Denmark
, 
2007 
[6] Jorda, S., Kaltenbrunner, M., Geiger, G. & Bencina, R., 
The reacTable*. In Proceedings of the International 
Computer Music Conference, Barcelona, Spain, 2005 
[7]
 Machover, T. Shaping minds musically. BT Technology 
Journal, Kluwer Academic Publishers Hingham, MA, 
2004, 22(4):171-179.  
[8] Schiettecatte, B. and Vanderdonckt, J., "AudioCubes: a 
Distributed Cube Tangible Interface based," in 
Proceedings of the Second International Conference on 
Tangible and Embedded Interaction, Bonn, Germany, 
2008, pp. 3-10. 
[9]
 Shen, Y. Sound Strand Design: Designing Mechanical 
Joints to Facilitate User Interaction within a Physical 
Representation of Digital Music. B.S. Thesis. 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 
2011 
[10] Sosoka, J., Abercrombie, B., Emerson, B. and Gerstein, 
A., Educational Music Instrument for Children, 6,353,168, 
March 5, 2002.  
[11] Weinberg G. Playpens, Fireflies, and Squeezables – New 
Musical Instruments for Bridging the Thoughtful and the 
Joyful Leonardo Music Journal, MIT Press, 2003. Vol. 12, 
pp. 43-51
 
 