 
Conductive Music: Teaching Innovative Interface 
Design and Composition Techniques with Open-Source 
Hardware 
Emily Robertson      Enrico Bertelli  
      Sonic Arts Research Centre         Independent Researcher  
    Queen’s University Belfast, UK           London, UK 
             erobertson01@qub.ac.uk            info@enricobertelli.co.uk  
ABSTRACT  
Through examining the presentation of a multi -media 
instrument fabrication program to students, this paper seeks to 
uncover practical elements of best practice and possible 
improvements in science an d music education. The Conductive 
Music program incorporates public engagement principles, 
open-source hardware, DIY ethos, contemporary composition 
techniques, and educational activities for creative and analytical 
thinking. These activities impart positive skills through multi -
media content delivery for all learning types. The program 
reviewed in this paper is designed to test practices for engaging 
disadvantaged young people from urban areas in the 
construction and performance of new electronic instrumen ts. 
The goal is to open up the world of electronic music 
performance to a new generation of young digital artists and to 
replace negative social behaviours with creative outlets for 
expression through technology and performance. This paper 
highlights the key elements designed to deliver the program’s 
agenda and examines the ways in which these aims were 
realised or tested in the classroom.  
Keywords  
Conductive Music, open source, musical interfaces, public 
engagement, didactic techniques, youth, urban schools 
1. INTRODUCTION  
Conductive Music is an innovative international project linking 
music, technology and science. We designed this project to 
enable at-risk young people (Key Stage 4, ages 12 -18) to gather 
employability skills (soldering, coding, instrum ental design, 
sound design and composition) and gain interest in science and 
music. We achieve these goals by teaching them how to create 
electronic instruments out of everyday objects. To date, in 
London, we have reached more than 150 students who have 
built instrument interfaces using tinfoil, water, and kitchenware 
such as ice cube trays. Conductive Music proposes to introduce 
students to the community of do it yourself (DIY) musicians 
and to link them to the world of open source software —  
resources whi ch will allow them to continue exploring music 
technology in their own homes and in the long term.  
Generous funding from the Arts Council of England, the PRS 
Foundation, the Newham Music Trust, Community Links, the 
European Cultural Foundation and the support of the London 
Music Hackspace and JoyLabz (USA, the inventors of the 
Makey Makey) allowed us to host the Conductive Music project 
in the borough of Newham. We have engaged in discussions 
with our partners, the Newham Music Trust and various Heads 
of Department in the areas of science, music and arts, to collate 
the optimal combination of skills and ensure we reached the 
correct target group.  
 
2. REACHING OUR TARGET GROUPS  
We propose music as the eng agement medium and the end 
product, reached through the academic learning framework of 
science, electronics and music itself. Music and science 
presented together in the educational curriculum ‘provide more 
opportunities for students to theorise and evalua te competing 
theories.’ (Monk & Poston, 1999) Conductive Music has liaised 
with the Pupil Referral Unit, to engage with young people in 
difficulty in education, as well as those in the Free School 
Meals program, who are more likely to have limited access t o 
creative resources. We have decided to bring Conductive Music 
to them, instead of setting up in a single venue, to ease potential 
barriers of transportation and neighbourhood or gang-related 
boundaries. Our target is young people in challenging 
circumstances, who have daily obstacles to their educational 
and personal success. They are failing in mainstream education, 
at high risk or actually involved in crime, living in poverty, or 
refugees and asylum seekers. Sixty per cent of these secondary 
school stud ents have English as an additional language (EAL) 
and do not speak English at home. Furthermore, fifteen per cent 
of our young participants were categorised as having Special 
Educational Needs (SEN). We also especially targeted young 
people who were enrolled in Pupil Referral Units for 
behavioural issues such as petty crimes, gang involvement, 
aggression, and other negative social behaviours.  
We have also explored possibilities for diverse engagement by 
creating different workshop schemes tailored to speci fic groups, 
beyond our original target. For example, we approached over 
200 Russian children (in groups ages 4 -6, 6 -9, 9 -13) at the 
Mariinsky theatre in short sessions of 45' each, using the Makey 
Makey only with fruit and basic digital sounds. Whilst 
presenting at the London Mini Maker Art Faire and Re:New 
(Copenhagen), we encompassed in -depth sound design and 
programming, since our audience was conference attendees 
with prior technical knowledge.  
Conductive Music engages with young students by showing the 
creative possibilities that lie in the technology and objects that 
surround us everyday, from tin foil to fruit. We also seek to 
establish a transferrable blueprint for the new music education 
that moves away from traditional music technology curricula. In 
particular, we want the students to get inside the hardware and 
software of new music technologies and understand musical 
mechanisms through science.  
	  
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on 
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME’14, June 30 – July 03, 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
	  
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
517
3. WORKSHOP STRUCTURE AND 
MODULES  
Conductive Music is composed of five skills -focused modules, 
delivered through a variety of teaching methods. Students are 
introduced to the Instrument Design , by familiarizing with the 
new technology and creating their interfaces, to move on to the 
software-based Sound De sign. At the beginning of the second 
day, they are exposed to different techniques in Composition and 
Scoring, which culminate in the Rehearsal and Performance 
section, where they get to showcase their artistic creation in front 
of the class, plus other st aff and student guests.  
3.1 The first day  
The two -day project starts with training in core technology 
design and fabrication skills. We designed it around the Makey 
Makey board, an Arduino -based open source hardware, which 
generates keystrokes upon compl etion of a circuit. The Makey 
Makey offers multiple didactic possibilities, with a variety of 
levels of engagement: once plugged in on a USB port, the circuit 
can be completed with skin contact, extended via alligator clips 
or expanded via a basic strip -board with pin headers and extra 
cables for more advanced uses. A fter the familiarisation with the 
board, students are introduced to the coding module, during 
which they learn how to modify the keystroke output through the 
Arduino Graphic User Interface (GUI ). The soldering module's 
target is to create an expansion shield from strip -boards, pin 
headers and cables, thereby giving the instrument more 
interactive capabilities. During the connection and sourcing of 
conductive material, part of the fabrication mod ule, we challenge 
the students to make cardboard, a string, or some paper, into a 
conductive circuit element by using liquids or metallic pieces.  
Once the students have completed their instruments, we teach 
the principles of sound design, within an Ableton Live 9 
environment. We decided to use this proprietary software 
because of its cross -platform compatibility, even on low -end 
computers, and its design as a live performance software, as 
opposed to a production software. A student can, within a 
minute, ma ke the first sound with Ableton through her 
MakeyMakey; we found this immediate result to be key to the 
continued engagement of the pupils. At the same time, it offers a 
continuous scope for improvement of knowledge and skills, to 
the more advanced users, thanks to its integration with the 
object-based programming environment of Max4Live.  
 
3.2 ICT and Schools  
As all the ICT installations in our partner schools are managed 
by external companies, with teachers that have no or limited 
administrator privileges, we had to weigh risks associated with 
open source software such as last -minute upgrades or plug -ins, 
that we would not have access to implement. Where it was 
possible to implement open-source technologies with stability 
and troubleshooting access, we in tegrated them into the program.  
Based on lessons learned from Conductive Music , we have 
decided to integrate a number of different proprietary pieces of 
software in future projects, which are more likely to be pre -
installed on ICT suites. For example, Log ic Pro X is already part 
of the secondary school curriculum and many students are 
already familiar with it, allowing us to skip the initial setup 
phase and dive further into sound design during the workshop. 
Furthermore, students are much more likely to ca rry out 
continuing work in the school’s ICT suite, where they have 
powerful and familiar computers which they can access during 
their break and lunch times, than to work at home where they 
may not have a personal computer or the necessary space.  
3.3 The Second Day  
By the end of the first day, students have already acquired the 
basic skills of coding, soldering, instrument design and sound 
design, and are ready to start thinking about scoring and 
performance. After an introductory lecture on notat ion and 
composition, students are led in short realisations of graphic 
scores with their newly built instruments. We encourage them 
to create scores, not only to bridge the gap between composer 
and performer, but also to be able to interact with other 
musicians and reproduce their work.  
As tutors, we suggest a number of strategies for composition, 
avoiding the restrictions of ‘dot composition’ and embracing 
graphic notations. With a mixture of classic scores such as 
Michael Parsons’ Pentachordal Melody (1998) and Earle 
Brown’s December 1952 (1954) and Cathy Berberian's 
Stripsody (1966)
1 
and a few of our own compositions, we 
encourage students to find their own solutions. Whether they 
opt for open scores with elements of improvisation or more 
detailed systems of numbers and colour -coding, the students 
emerge with compositions that are not ‘covers’ or adaptations, 
but instead two or three minutes of their own self -expression in 
a multi -media performance. We also include brainstorming 
activities through the Rory's Storycubes , a collection of dices 
with actions, words, which, at every toss, cr eate a section of a 
story. Students are introduced to techniques that encourage 
them to express their own creativity. In the compositions 
presented, we include a range of personal styles, backgrounds, 
and genders. Two of the host schools were female -only, and 
female students formed at least 20% of all Conductive Music 
cohorts in mixed schools. A lack of educational material on 
women composers in mainstream education contributes to 
misconceptions regarding the place of women in music, and 
‘only furthers this  presumption for another generation of 
listeners and musicians, who may, in turn, educate the following 
generations with the same neglect of women composers that 
they were exposed to themselves.’ (Johnson, 2005) We strive to 
display gender equally within t he composition module, 
including not only historic works but also works -in-progress by 
the male and female instructors present and videos of male and 
female students performing their own compositions from 
previous sessions. Thereby, we both create an oppor tunity for 
students to experience music in a gender -equal space and teach 
the history of contemporary music with an inclusive view. 
(Jezic, 1987)  
The new, original instruments call for novel modes of 
presentation and communication, both in performance and 
composition, following in a rich heritage of musical innovation  
driven by exploratory performance techniques and scoring. In 
1964, composer Earle Brown gave a series of lectures in 
Darmstadt, in which he described the necessary simultaneous 
development of  experimental composition methods and graphic 
notations, alongside a deeper examination  of the processes of 
1 
Berberian’s piece allows us to introduce the topic of women 
composers. Whilst this is already a prominent area of study in the 
contemporary music world, it has been even more important for us since 
we deliver some sessions in female -only schools.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
518
performance (Brown, 1964). Three years earlier, Bruno 
Bartolozzi and Brooks Shepard wrote about the “natural 
evolution of musical languages” occurring alongside “new 
techniques of composing” (1961).  
These observations recorded the rise of graphic notations in 
the 1960s, a development, which continues to influence 
experiments with notation today. Alternative graphic notations 
provide a wider frame for composing with new technologies 
and extended techniques.  
As the notation workshops introduce the basic principles of 
graphic notation techniques, the students are encouraged to 
develop systems communicate effectively, reflect their own 
creative concepts and are specifically targeted for their 
instruments. After working through realisations of scores like 
Pentachordal Melody , the students start to brainstorm their own 
compositional ideas. They are prompted to identify ways in 
which their score design communicates (or leaves 
indeterminate) performance technique, pitch, rhythm, and 
ensemble interaction. By using simple illustrating techniques, 
the students explore methods of effective and innovative visual 
communication of musical ide as and performance instructions 
to other participants. These included the use of colour in music 
notation, indicating musical gesture through lines, and 
symbolising performative actions through simple icons. For 
example, one student performer (“Dr. Shoom”) , used coloured 
shapes keyed to specific pads on his drum -machine type 
instrument. The shapes were written out in carefully spaced 
rows, with numbers to indicate repetitions and timing.  
As the compositional and performance ideas begin to solidify, 
the gro ups move on to working in structured rehearsals. A 
crucial part of musicianship is the ability to work as a team in 
preparing and honing a performance. Working toward a 
performance in a group also impacts their compositional ideas. 
Some students decide to work together and collaborate on the 
entire performance, while others divide tasks, such that one 
student composes a score while another works on the sound 
design, or one deals with the rhythm section, while the other 
concentrates on harmony and melody.  
In all cases, they adapt their instrument interfaces to 
complement each other within a group. On the other hand, 
students planning to perform solo, build instruments and 
compositional sequences that they feel stand alone, whether 
through complex textures or  timbres. These performances are 
more complicated because one person has to deal with many 
musical elements at the same time. Nevertheless, the use of 
arpeggiators, note generators and some backing tracks help 
creating a more organic musical composition.  
During this phase, we encourage them to engage in an 
exploration of extended performance techniques at the levels of 
both physical embodiment and software. Two facets become 
central to the students' projects: the physical interactions 
between objects and b odies in performance, and the selection of 
the most adaptable sound design environment for each specific 
instrument interface. For example, many students build 
interfaces that physically mimic the patterns of traditional 
orchestral instruments like drums, harps or pianos. If they wish 
to expand the analogy through movement, they may fabricate 
metallic drumsticks to trigger the sensors in a drumming 
motion. Alternatively, a student may subvert expectations by 
assigning an unexpected sound to another, less recognisable, 
instrument shape, such as a violin sample assigned to a cup full 
of water triggered by a straw. The digital instruments created, 
‘allow for arbitrary new relationships to be created between 
objects, actions and sounds’ (Jensenius, 2013). We ans wer 
Jensenius’ pedagogical enquiry, by including the body in our 
music-making process (the Makey Makey circuit), performing 
with real -time devices whose sounds are programmed in real 
time, accompanying every module with its relevant theoretical 
background.  
4. TEACHING METHODS  
Throughout our modules, we employed multiple teaching 
methods, and used feedback from school staff and students to 
refine our teaching methods, reinforcing our responsive 
program. Conductive Music created a positive learning 
environment in which students developed a better 
understanding of their own creativity and practiced key personal 
development skills. We used Accelerated Learning techniques 
to encourage direct involvement and teamwork, and the 
participants saw their own creative projects through from 
beginning to end in an overarching exercise in self -realisation.  
They had the chance to bring their own experiences and identity 
into the classroom, and found stimulation during independent 
learning and team -oriented activities. Each module was 
subdivided into the key stages of Accelerated Learning : 
Preparation, based on vertical teaching, for core knowledge; 
Connection, their first hands -on experience with the new 
materials, hardware and software; Creative Presentation , when 
newly-absorbed knowledge is put into practice in a creative 
way, by transforming lifeless electronic components into 
personalised tools for musical expression; Activation, 
personalising the new concepts and skills by applying th em to 
their specific needs (different sounds, instrumental design, 
notation systems, performance practices) and Evaluation, when 
all participants in the project assess their own process and 
feedback to the group about their experience.  
All of our students  were given the opportunity to pitch and 
demo their findings and creations, developing public speaking 
and self-confidence skills, by sharing their work with others.  
They were able to perform collaboratively, thus boosting team 
working and team leading, a s well as communication skills, 
regulating personal behaviour and reinforcing a social value 
framework. When progressed through the program, students 
will have clearer views of their own personal artistic potential 
or career plan, with the goal effect of i mproved self-confidence 
and self-esteem.  
Conductive Music prioritized formative rather than summative 
assessment, mixing cooperative and independent learning 
strategies. For example, a little detail of setup and sound design 
(what a specific button does, how to change the volume, etc.) 
was given as a “hint” to one student, who was then encouraged 
to teach it within his/her working group. This helped not only to 
stimulate teamwork, where everyone is sharing ideas and 
waiting for the next clue, but also to o vercome the social 
divides that we anticipated at a planning stage. The host schools 
are in areas of great diversity and social challenges. We are 
working with students from different ethnicities, religions, and 
neighbourhood divisions. Creating an environment of shared 
discovery encourages the students to talk about their 
instruments and programming with each other.  
They also enjoy learning tips, having 'insider knowledge', and 
instructing other members of their peer group. Although we are 
aware that the ‘spaces for peer discussion of work will not work 
in the same ways for all pupils, because of the wider patterns of 
peer relations [...]’ (Pryor and Lubisi, 2001), we also faced the 
fact that most of our participants came from different classes 
and different years within the school. The peer discussion space 
became a way for the group to relate. Social and racial 
discrimination could be disrupted by the new surroundings and 
broken down by peer-to-peer knowledge-sharing processes.  
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
519
5. FEEDBACK  
In structured feedback sessions, students are prompted to reflect 
on the ways in which cooperating with peers on a performance 
has influenced their creative process or the outcome of their 
instrument. This project uses a mixed ethnographic method of 
short semi-structured interviews, group discussions, and open -
ended questionnaire forms to gather feedback from the 
participating students (Rapley, 2004).  
The interviews and group sessions were conducted on an opt -
in basis and were less frequent, but all studen ts returned 
feedback forms with written answers to questions such as: “how 
did today’s workshop relate to your interests?” and “what did 
you learn today?”. We encouraged peer -and self -evaluation, to 
boost critical reflective skills, often neglected even in  higher 
education settings (Daniels, 2001).  
At the time of writing this paper, the project had not yet been 
completed for the 2013- 2014 academic year; thus we do not 
have an in- depth analysis of the student feedback from the 
program. In this section, we p resent an overview of the 
feedback received thus far. Overall, students emphasised their 
experience building the instruments and sound design.  
Throughout the workshops and on the feedback forms, they 
expressed enthusiasm about learning the principles of 
electronics, “wiring and understanding the circuit” (Eastlea 
Community School, Year 10). Several students have remarked 
on the empowerment they feel when experiencing control over 
computers and seeing their ideas come to life in the circuitry of 
the instrum ents. Students also commented on the connection to 
their own musical practice or interest: “I love music and 
everything about it so I thought it was really cool that we can 
make our own instruments” (Plashet School for Girls, Year 9). 
Those from secondary schools with a focus on increasing 
STEM involvement wrote about the crossover they observed 
between music and science: “interesting to try out different 
things and see how science and music relate a lot so it is very 
interesting to see how they connect” (Plashet School for Girls, 
Year 9).  
When asked about what they had learned, the answers ranged 
from activity lists, to general statements about personal growth. 
“I learned to make a instrument out of everyday things, to 
solder, to make friends” (Chobham Aca demy, Year 9).  
6. THE FUTURE OF CONDUCTIVE 
MUSIC  
The primary positive indicators of continuing involvement 
within the project have been further requests from school staff, 
relaying unprompted queries from students, and students 
writing to us after the pr oject. “The project was very fun and 
shocking which is good because it grabbed my attention. It also 
combined 2 lovely subjects. I would do more of this if I get the 
chance” (Plashet School for Girls, Year 9). They have 
repeatedly asked either to be enroll ed for the first time, having 
missed the first round of workshops and heard about it from 
friends, or to join more advanced versions of the program, in 
the form of courses or a weekly club. For example, at the end of 
the workshop at Drew Primary School, the Year 4 students 
requested a “club on every week Fridays just like this!”. In all 
cases, students requested further opportunities within their 
school environment and showed disappointment or lack of 
interest in opportunities that involved travel outside o f their 
home neighbourhood and school. This confirms our strategy in 
touring the workshop in schools and delivering during term -
time. We have also provided the students with substantial tools 
for continuation in their own time. Every workshop involved at 
least one London Music Hackspace member, to assist with 
soldering and programming modules and personally present the 
students with various engagement opportunities. We also 
awarded 80 MakeyMakey units to students who won the 
performance competition in their  workshop. Each student was 
provided with a list of links to resources to help them continue 
working (legal music downloads, samples libraries, music 
freeware software, communities for uploading and sharing their 
own music).  
This positive interest has enc ouraged us to design a more 
ambitious project for the upcoming academic year, including a 
series of courses divided into an introductory session for 
primary school students, a beginner session (based on 
Conductive Music) and an advanced session, both for s econdary 
schools, based on augmented clothing, e -textiles, and other 
wearables. These courses aim to equip students with knowledge 
and a sense of empowerment for building their own creations 
out of electronic components and the things that surround them 
every day.  
The students’ sense of wonder and excitement about electronic 
interfaces and sound design is the heart of the Conductive 
Music project. We have organised a programme that combines 
multi-modal teaching/learning methods, simple experiments 
with ope n-source hardware, basic sound design with a DAW, 
composition and performance guidance, and varying levels of 
structured feedback. This is calibrated to give students a variety 
of opportunities to engage with the process of building an 
electronic musical i nterface with the MakeyMakey board. 
While expanding their musical experience and giving 
confidence with computers, the workshop also aims to equip 
students with some basic coding, design, and creative thinking 
skills for the future.  
7. REFERENCES  
[1]  Bartolozzi, Bruno and Brooks Shepard. “Proposals for 
Changes in Musical Notation.” Journal of Music Theory, 5, 
1961. pp. 297-301.  
[2]  Daniels, R. “Self -assessment in performance”. British 
Journal of Music Education , 18, 2001. pp. 215-226.  
[3]  Jensenius, R. J. “An action -sound approach to teaching 
interactive music” Organised Sound. 18/2 August 2013, pp. 
178-189.  
[4]  Jezic, Diane and Daniel Binder. “A Survey of College 
Music Textbooks: Benign Neglect of Women Composers?” 
The Musical Woman: An International Perspective. 
Volume 2. Ed. Judith Lang Zaimont. 
Connecticut:Greenwood Press, 1987.  
[5]  Johnson, Matthew S. “The Recognition of Female 
Composers.” Agora Journal of Education, 1, 2005. pp. 28.  
[6]  Monk, Martin and Mark Poston. “A Comparison of Music 
and Science Education.” Cambridge Journal of Education, 
29/1, 1999. pp. 93-101.  
[7]  Prior, J. and Lubisi, C. “Reconceptualising educational 
assessment in South Africa -resting times for teachers”. 
International Journal for Educational Development , 22/6, 
2001. pp. 673-686.  
[8]  Rapley, T. “Interviews”, in C. Seale, et al. (eds.) 
Qualitative research practice , London: Sage. 2000.  
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
520