The Samchillian Tip Tip Tip Cheeepeeeee: 
A Relativistic Keyboard Instrument
Leon Gruenbaum
96 St. Mark's Place #2
New York, NY 10009
646-286-0893
leon@samchillian.com
ABSTRACT
Almost all traditional musical instruments have a one-to-one 
correspondence between a given fingering and the pitch that 
sounds for that fingering. The Samchillian Tip Tip Tip 
Cheeepeeeee does not - it is a keyboard MIDI controller that is 
based on intervals rather than fixed pitches. That is, a given 
keypress will sound a pitch a number of steps away from the last 
note sounded (within the key signature and scale selected) 
according to the 'delta' value assigned to that key. The advantages 
of such a system are convenience, speed, and the ability to play 
difficult, unusual and/or unintended passages extemporaneously. 
Keywords
samchillian, keyboard, MIDI controller, relative, interval, 
microtonal, computer keyboard, pitch, musical instrument
1.INTRODUCTION
Modern improvising musicians often play very rapid soloistic 
lines that seem concerned primarily with the rhythm and the shape 
of the line. It was with such musicians in mind that I came up with 
the idea to create a keyboard wherein each key denoted not a fixed 
pitch, as is usual, but rather a relative change in pitch. That is, 
each key would denote whether the next pitch would be up or 
down from the previous note heard and how many steps away, in 
the current key and scale selected. The player could focus on the 
rhythm and general shape of what he/she wanted to hear and let 
the notes take care of themselves, essentially. In addition, many 
phrases that would otherwise be impossible to play on a 
conventional keyboard - or at the minimum require weeks or 
months of practice - could be performed extemporaneously, in any 
key. And any new approach to a melodic line necessarily yields 
strange and unusual music, which in and of itself can be of 
interest to adventurous musicians. I named this keyboard the 
Samchillian Tip Tip Tip Cheeepeeeee, or Samchillian for short.
I was also interested in creating something "manual" - i.e. with 
only one note sounding per keypress - to give a human feel to the 
playing. This would be in contrast to a lot of devices on the
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
NIME07, June 7-9, 2007, New York, NY
Copyright remains with the author(s).
market that make it "easy" to play music because one button sets 
off a lot of automated music. The result is an an instrument that 
actually takes some effort to master but whose output I believe has 
a unique “personal” character to it. In the examples below I have 
implemented this concept using a computer keyboard, though 
plans are under way for a custom keyboard specially built for this 
purpose. 
I have played some version of this keyboard for over a decade, 
recording and touring internationally. It has proved to be valuable 
in a number of varied musical settings, both in my own musical 
projects and with artists such as Vernon Reid (“thrash jazz”) and 
James Blood Ulmer (blues).[1] 
2.THE SAMCHILLIAN SYSTEM
Figure 1. The codes on each key denote Samchillian functions.
The most important functions are described below:
2.1Movement Keys (MV+n, MV-n)
Here's an example of a melody, written in traditional music 
notation.  All examples below are in treble clef:
To play this on Samchillian, you must first analyze the differences 
in pitches from note to note.
And then find the letters of the keys matching those ‘delta’ values 
on the keyboard itself:
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
256
The example above is a very simple one using the “major” scale 
in C. Let’s look at another example: starting on the note F# in F# 
pentatonic scale (the black keys on piano), "minus 2" alternating 
with "plus 1" might yield this sequence:
Such a system is surprisingly good at covering most melodies, 
especially when put in diatonic (“major”) mode. Typical melodies 
go stepwise or with skips of a few notes at most. There may be 
jumps of more notes than that, but almost never above an octave. 
Therefore, in the default keyboard layout I have from plus or 
minus 1 to 7 steps (an octave in the diatonic scale mode), and also  
keys for plus or minus 14 steps (2 octaves).
2.2Scales (Sn)
The default scales are both western (major or “diatonic”, 
chromatic, pentatonic) and microtonal (10-note equal, 20-note 
equal, overtone series simulation, harmonic minor, 
“compressed”/“expanded” (see below), and 16-note equal). 
The user can add his or her own scales. A scale is defined as an 
ordered set of relations to the root key. The scale need not even 
repeat at the octave.  For example, the 'compressed' and 
'expanded' scales sound like major scales except that the intervals 
between scale values are slightly compressed or expanded, and 
when the scale repeats at the 2 octave mark, the scale is one half 
step off, low or high respectively. 
Note that there is no necessity of a “minor” scale - if one selects 
"major", then starting the scale on each of the seven notes yields 
each of the modes (including several types of minor scales). 
Microtonality is achieved by means of sending pitch bend values 
prior to each MIDI note sent - this means that the receiving 
synthesizer need not be microtonal-capable.
2.3Key Signatures (Tn)
Key signature changes are relative as well - as one presses each 
subsequent key of the transposition row, a greater number of flats 
are added to the existing key signature. (I.e., pressing the ‘1’ key 
adds one flat, ‘2’ two, etc.). 
One immediate advantage to such a relativistic system is that to 
transpose a melodic phrase learned in one key signature, one 
needs only press a key signature key and can then play exactly the 
same sequence of keys in the new key.
2.4Reorient Feature
If the scale or key signature changes, the system immediately 
calculates where the last note fits in the new scale note set, and 
subsequent moves are smoothly related to the new “last” note.  
This is true even if the last note does not belong to the new set.
2.5Special Keys
- P_UN (Undo): returns the user to the previous pitch
- MV_SM (Same): repeats the last diatonic interval used 
- P_SM (Same actual): repeats last actual pitch interval used
- CR_U, CR_D (Chrom): plays a chromatic step away (up or 
down), ‘chromatic’ as defined in the scale data 
- CR_SH_DN, CR_SH_UP (Chrom Shift): Left and right shift 
keys do not sound pitches, but rather, while depressed, lower and 
raise every subsequent note by a chromatic step (as defined in the 
scale data).  This is akin to the chromatic button on a harmonica. 
There are also keys which are variations of the above - e.g., a key 
which returns the user to the previous note but one step higher or 
lower, etc..
2.6Serial Mode (SER, END)
One interesting feature is a serial mode (as is used in twelve tone 
music). There are two parts to this mode: recording, in which 
notes are sequenced and not allowed to repeat - this process 
continues until the END key is pressed, or the number of notes in 
the scale is reached; and playback, in which the recorded notes are 
played back manually - forwards, backwards, by 2's or 3's etc., 
according to which Samchillian keys are pressed. This becomes 
especially interesting when non-traditional scales are selected, 
such as the 20-note equal-tempered microtonal scale, and a 
cyclical pattern is played whose intervals sum to a number that is 
relatively prime to the number of notes in the scale. In such a 
case, by cyclically repeating two or three keys one can generate 
patterns that take literally hundreds of notes before they repeat.
2.7Harmony Configurations ("Chords") (Hm) 
and Monophony
The instrument tends to be used monophonically since there is no 
clear benefit to playing chords on it. As a monophonic instrument 
the Samchillian turns out to be extremely versatile - in addition to 
playing extremely fast, unusual solo lines, one also can play 
interesting repeating percussive patterns using the serial mode.  
And it is quite useful for playing bass lines, a role that is typically 
monophonic. 
However, technically the unit is not monophonic - on a sustaining 
sound one can hold one or more keys while striking others and the 
first ones will continue to sound. And one can play chords by 
playing several keys rapidly, one after another, giving the 
perception of simultaneity, like strumming on a guitar. 
And there is another way it is possible to play chords on this 
instrument - there are 4 preprogrammed harmony configurations 
through which the user can cycle by repeatedly pressing the Hm 
key, “\”. One configuration, for example, will harmonize the lead 
note with notes both 2 and 4 steps below it, making a triad within 
the current scale. Playing Samchillian with one of the harmony 
configurations selected is analogous to playing a piano with the 
fingers of the hand fixed like a rake.
2.8Scoring
I have adapted the traditional five-line staff notation to 
Samchillian, where the middle line is "0", the space above it "+1", 
the line above that "+2", etc.   Similarly, negative moves are 
positioned below the center line.  (Examples on my website [2].)  
The truth is, however, that aside from notating practice exercises, 
I haven’t found much use for written notation, as the instrument is 
intended for improvisation.
3.RELATED WORK
Nishimoto et al. [3] describe an improvisational jazz instrument 
(“RhyMe”), in which the keyboard shifts to play on the 'correct 
notes' for each pre-sequenced chord.  While this is a step in the 
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
257
right direction of freeing the player from the learning and 
cognitive load required to play over chord progressions, it is not 
as radical as Samchillian: within a given chord, a keypress still 
stands for a fixed function to the root, which I believe results in 
lines which are more conventional than Samchillian produces.  
RhyMe also lacks the reorienting feature, which allows for a 
smooth line to continue through chord changes in an intuitive 
way.  Finally, it is not always possible or desirable for the player 
to pre-sequence the chord progression - even if the progression is 
fixed, the drummer (not a computer) may be deciding the tempo.
4.KEYBOARD IMPLEMENTATIONS
4.1Piano-Style Keyboard
The first version of this device utilized a standard piano-style 
keyboard as the input device, redefining each key’s function 
through a translation table. (E.g., middle C was 'zero', C# was 
'plus 1', B was 'minus 1', etc.) 
4.2Computer Keyboard as Musical 
Instrument
However, I wanted to show that the old black-and-white layout 
was not the only option for modern keyboard playing. Also, as I 
was very concerned with speed, I rejected other gesture control 
options.  Using sticks or palms or something other than fingers 
would slow the user down.  Likewise for playing in air or on 
something like a flat membrane that doesn’t bounce back, or  
moving something continuously like a mouse.  Furthermore, with 
a computer keyboard, a maximal number of keys are easily 
reachable without moving the hand.  Therefore, the decision was 
reached to use a computer keyboard as input instead, even though 
this meant losing touch sensitivity and other niceties. An 
ergonomic keyboard made by Kinesis® was chosen, as it was 
comfortable and aesthetically pleasing. The preferred performance 
style is to stand with the keyboard strapped around the waist, flat 
against the torso.
Figure 2: Inventor in performance, Newport Jazz Festival ‘02 
4.3Keyboard Layout
In designing such a system, much thought was put into the layout 
of the keys. (That is, which keys should do what? Should the "plus 
1" key be assigned to the letter 'f', etc.?) Although provision is 
made for the user to change the keyboard layout, I felt that it was 
important to design such a layout and stick with it, because once 
the user learned it, it would be difficult to change his/her habits. I 
wanted to place the most-used keys in the strongest fingers, and 
furthermore to optimally allow for alternation of the hands and 
fingers for ease in playing rapidly. 
In the 1930’s August Dvorak created a typewriter keyboard layout 
meant as a more efficient alternative to the standard QWERTY 
one, so I studied his reasoning and applied it to what is essentially 
a huge math problem. The AI program, “Prolog”, was enlisted to 
aid in this. Obviously there are many good solutions to such a 
problem, but the final layout was deemed satisfactory because 
most of the patterns I wanted to play were reasonably easy to 
execute.[4]
4.4Turning any MIDI Controller into a 
Samchillian 
Most recently I have added a feature to the software version 
which turns any MIDI controller into a Samchillian. This is to say 
that when the user plays notes from an external MIDI controller 
into the program, those notes are assigned 'samchillianistic' 
functions. E.g., one can assign "+2" to the controller’s D# above 
middle C, etc.. One immediate advantage, such as I had in the 
very first implementation, is that the user has velocity sensitivity, 
aftertouch, and anything else that that particular MIDI controller 
has to offer.
There is also a mode wherein an external MIDI note is passed 
through as is, and subsequent Samchillian moves are relative to it.
5.SOUND
Since Samchillian lines are often quite rapid, triggering sounds 
with short attacks tends to work best.  And setting the receiving 
sound to be monophonic is often advisable, as it "cleans up" the 
line.  It is critical to take some time to develop rich, interesting 
sounds to trigger, as they “become” the instrument to the listener.
6.SAMCHILLIAN AS HARDWARE
This project began as software, moved to hardware and most 
recently exists again as software on a laptop.  However, years ago, 
laptops were rarely used in live performance, and because there 
was no need for a full screen or a hard drive, etc., the decision was 
then made to run the software in a custom built hardware box with 
a PC-on-a-card as the processor. (See Figure 3.)  This system 
featured: a pitch wheel knob; a foot pedal for "continuous 
control" (to control vibrato, wah filter, etc.); blinking lights to 
indicate when the keyboard was being played - the 3 lights 
represented the last 3 digits of the current MIDI note # expressed 
in binary; an 8-bit 11KHz sine wave that came out of an audio 
jack mounted on the box; and a display indicating the current 
note, key and scale.
7.HARDWARE VS. SOFTWARE: 
ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES
I am currently using an OS X laptop in performance. Laptops are 
plentiful and don't require users to lay out any additional money. 
And though it was not used for this project, the program Max/
MSP makes programming for MIDI quick and easy.
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
258
However, there are some advantages to using a hardware unit. 
Since the application is the only one running on the system, there 
are no conflicts with other programs. Furthermore, upgrading or 
adding another program is impossible, and making any changes at 
all to a system can often interfere with proper functioning of a 
given piece of software. In addition, laptops on stage run the risk 
of falling and/or getting broken or stolen. And theoretically, in 
mass production a hardware version could be cheap to reproduce.
 
Figure 3: Samchillian Hardware
8.SOME UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES 
WHICH TURNED OUT TO BE USEFUL
When I created the serial mode I intended that the user record a 
series of notes, and then once the serial buffer was filled with 
notes, start by playing them back in the order he or she recorded 
them. However, I once observed another player fill up the buffer, 
and then naively continue to play the same cycle of keys he had 
just played when he was in record mode. This produces a 
fascinating and complex pattern, with very little effort by the user. 
(The effect is reminiscent of a drawing game from many years 
ago, Spirograph ®.) 
It also turns out to be interesting to start with a spiraling pattern of 
3 or 4 repeating keys in one scale, and then change the underlying 
scale to hear the same 'harmonic contour' in a different context.  
Another unintended consequence involves the peculiar way in 
which microtonality is achieved, which is by sending pitch bend 
commands prior to every note, as if there is a robot user very 
quickly and accurately moving the pitch bend wheel just before 
each note is struck. I discovered that if one holds a note in a 
microtonal scale, and then holds a second note, the pitch of the 
first note being held will be changed, since only one pitch bend 
value is allowed per channel. This is quite an unusual, "scary 
movie" type of effect, especially effective with a “pad” sound, 
such as strings.
9.FUTURE ENHANCEMENTS 
Future enhancements include: an absolute (traditional) mode; a 
user-defined velocity value; pre-sequenced key signatures; more 
interesting graphical displays; an entirely mechanical, non-
electric, sound-producing version; and a more ergonomic 
interface, custom-built with the niceties of any modern keyboard 
(velocity, aftertouch, etc.), as well as some new ones. [5]
10.CONCLUSION 
Over the years I have been (pleasantly) surprised at some of the 
musical lines the device comes up with, and often I need to listen 
to a recording to fully appreciate what I have played.  This due to 
the speed, and also to the unusual way that notes are generated.  
Though I have been disappointed in my progress as a player -  
when I began I had hoped to fully replace the traditional keyboard 
as a solo instrument - I have come to appreciate that there are 
some uses at which Samchillian excels and others for which it 
makes more sense to use a traditional keyboard.  The latter 
include: chordal keyboard playing; music that changes scale or 
key frequently, or doesn’t stay within a key, or is chromatic with 
large jumps. I had originally planned to allow the user to change 
the scales and keys with foot pedals but my experiments with this 
suggested it would be too demanding, especially while standing.  
Overall, my experience on Samchillian has been very interesting.  
As I am fond of saying, “the hard things are easy and the easy 
things are hard.”
And recently with the release of the OS X freeware version, a 
number of beta testers worldwide are beginning to perform and 
record with it, using their home keyboard as input.  I look forward 
to hearing what new uses they find for it.  I believe that someone 
starting early enough on the instrument would find it as natural to 
play as the piano.
11.REFERENCES
[1] Leon Gruenbaum - Math Camp “Away” (Agenda Del 
Mondo, 2006). L.E.G. Slurp “Foolifingo!” (Sergeant Dan’s 
Records, 1998) Discography featuring samchillian: 
Vernon Reid’s Masque - “Other True Self” (Favored 
Nations, 2006) , “Known Unknown” (Favored Nations, 
2004), “Mistaken Identity” (Sony, 1996); 
James Blood Ulmer’s Memphis Blood - “Bad Blood In The 
City: The Piety St. Sessions” (Hyena, 2007), “No Escape 
from the Blues” (Hyena Records, 2003)
[2] http://samchillian.com/aboutsam.html (contains audio and 
video clips); http://samchillian.com/standalonepc.html 
(freeware); http://samchillian.com/thelicks.html (exercises)
[3] Nishimoto, K. et al. “Why Always Versatile...” (NIME-2003)  
[4] Determination of optimal keyboard layout: http://
samchillian.com/dvorakprolog.html.
[5] Eitan Shefer’s demonstration video: http://youtube.com/ 
watch?v=DbOIBIwg_E4 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Thanks to Vernon Reid and Gideon D'Arcangelo for their interest 
and support over the years. Also to Joe Waltz for hardware and 
Dan Coates and Ray Haleblian for software.
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
259