Graph Theory: Interfacing Audiences Into the 
Compositional Process 
Jason Freeman 
Music Department 
Georgia Institute of Technology 
840 McMillan ST 
Atlanta, GA 30332-0456 
+1 404 385 7257 
jason.freeman@gatech.edu 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Graph Theory links the creative music-making activities of web 
site visitors to the dynamic generation of an instrumental score for 
solo violin. Participants use a web-based interface to navigate 
among short, looping musical fragments to create their own 
unique path through the open-form composition. Before each 
concert performance, the violinist prints out a new copy of the 
score that orders the fragments based on the decisions made by 
web visitors. 
Keywords 
Music, Composition, Residency, Audience Interaction, 
Collaboration, Violin, Graph, Flash, Internet, Traveling Salesman. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, technological and aesthetic developments have 
challenged us to become more engaged and active cultural 
consumers, helping to create the content we enjoy rather than 
serving as mere spectators; we curate the playlists we listen to, we 
compete in the massively multiplayer online games we play, and 
we collaboratively filter the media we watch. Within this context, 
traditional concert performance, particularly of classical and 
contemporary art music, seems increasingly anachronistic: 
audiences sit in a dark concert hall, often looking at a conductor 
whose back is turned toward them, afraid to cough or sneeze lest 
they disturb their neighbors. 
Graph Theory aims to bridge this experiential gap. Through its 
availability on the Internet, it seeks to creatively engage audiences 
outside of the concert hall; the project then incorporates their 
activities into the context of a live concert performance. Web site 
visitors, who need not have specialized musical or technical 
training, use a visual interface to navigate among short, looping 
musical fragments for solo violin to create their own unique path 
through the open-form composition. Before each concert 
performance, the violinist prints out a new copy of the score from 
the web site, which linearly orders the fragments based on the 
decisions made by site visitors. 
2. MOTIVATIONS 
The concepts behind Graph Theory emerged out of my interest in 
involving audiences in my compositional process and my past 
frustrations in trying to do so. In 2001, I was commissioned to 
write a piece [7] for the elementary school band, chorus, and 
orchestra at the Collegiate School in Richmond, Virginia, as part 
of their “Be A Composer” project. Before starting to write the 
piece, I spent two days meeting with large groups of students to 
present my work and solicit their ideas for the music. By actively 
involving them in my compositional process, I hoped they would 
be motivated to listen for the realization of their ideas, and they 
would share the excitement of creating a piece of music. 
While composer residencies such as this one can be powerful 
structures through which to engage and challenge participants, the 
interface through which the interaction is usually facilitated —  
language —  can prove limiting. In this case, I naïvely asked each 
group: “What ideas do you have for the piece?” While there was 
never a shortage of ideas, students had trouble organizing and 
expressing their thoughts, so their suggestions were not 
particularly helpful. Most were hopelessly vague (e.g. loud, soft, 
fast, slow) or extramusical (e.g. animals, stories). Though the 
students were delighted that they had helped me to write the piece, 
I felt like I had cheated them out of a truly meaningful 
contribution. 
By structuring participant contributions through a simple web-
based visual interface rather than relying on unstructured group 
conversations, Graph Theory aims to engage each individual 
participant with the work’s musical content and structure. 
3. BACKGROUND 
3.1 Networked Music 
Recent networked music research and practice have focused 
primarily on real-time, collaborative, networked performance 
systems. Termed “shared sonic environments” by Barbosa [1], 
they range from the NinJam [5] software architecture, a 
networked multi-track audio environment which syncs 
participants on a common tempo and meter, to Phil Burk’s 
WebDrum [3] drum machine, in which different users edit each 
voice of a looping drum pattern through a simple grid-style 
interface. These projects are in turn indebted to earlier analog 
works such as Max Neuhaus’ Radio Net [11], in which 
participants from around the United States phoned in whistling 
sounds that were then mixed and processed in real-time and 
broadcast over the radio. And several recent works have linked 
such online environments to live concert performances, including 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME07, June 7-9, 2007, New York, NY 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
260
Tod Machover’s Brain Opera [10] and William Duckworth’s 
Cathedral Project [6]. 
Like Machover and Duckworth’s projects, Graph Theory links an 
online environment to concert performance, but it does so out of 
real time, following a paradigm closer to an online discussion 
forum than a chat. Each user contributes to an evolving musical 
score rather than improvising with other participants to create 
music in the moment. Participants need not log on during a live 
performance in order to influence it, and they need not log on 
simultaneously with other users in order to collaborate. 
In this respect, Graph Theory is influenced by projects such as 
Splice Music [14], a multi-track audio interface for collaborative 
remixes built from shared sound libraries; Sergi Jordá’s Faust 
Music On Line [8], a novel collective composition and synthesis 
interface; and the New York Miniaturist Ensemble’s 
Collaborative Composition Website [12], in which participants 
can add and remove notes and musical expression markings from 
a single staff system. 
3.2 Dynamic Score Generation 
Graph Theory also draws from a tradition of dynamically 
generated musical scores for concert performance whose visual 
appearance transforms from one performance to the next. In Earle 
Brown’s Calder Piece [2], the music, which is part of a sculpture, 
literally moves. And recent projects by Art Clay [4] and David 
Kim-Boyle [9] render digital scores in real time based on the 
activities of musicians and/or audience members. 
3.3 Open Form 
Graph Theory’s musical structure consists of small musical 
fragments and paths that link them. Participants navigate among 
these fragments and within the path constraints to create their own 
path through the composition. 
This structural paradigm is inspired by Stockhausen’s idea of 
open (or mobile, or polyvalent) form, as realized in works such as 
Klavierstuck XI (1956) [15]; by the graph structures common in 
computer science and discrete mathematics; and by the 
hypertextual narrative structure of the web itself. 
Kaija Saariaho’s Mirrors for flute and cello, which was released 
on her Prisma CD-ROM [13], provides a more recent musical 
precedent. It invites users to arrange fragments for flute and cello 
on a timeline and play them back; different modes allow 
participants to operate freely or within ordering constraints. The 
software, though, does not have a networked component. 
4. DESIGN 
4.1 Web Interface 
The web interface (Figure 1), created in Flash in collaboration 
with designer Patricia Reed, enables users to explore the graph 
structure and create their own path through the composition. In 
the top section, they see piano-roll style representations of the 
current fragment, previous fragment, and possible next fragments. 
Because the work utilizes only twelve different pitches, with each 
pitch class frozen in a particular octave for the entire work, the 
fragments can be easily represented with just twelve vertical steps. 
The lower section of the interface features a visual representation 
of the entire graph structure. Different colors highlight the 
previous, current, and possible next fragments. The coloring of 
possible next fragments indicates their relative popularity with 
previous web site visitors. The color of other fragments on the 
graph indicates whether they have already been visited during the 
current user session. 
Users indicate their choice for the next possible fragment by 
clicking either on the piano-roll representation or directly on the 
graph. If they are unhappy with a decision, they may move 
backwards to the previous fragment by clicking on it. 
A path review button enables users to play through the entire 
series of fragments they have visited thus far. In this mode, each 
fragment in the path is played in succession, each a single time. A 
control panel (Figure 2) enables users to jump to any fragment in 
the path as they review it; they may then choose to continue 
exploring the graph from that fragment, discarding any 
subsequent fragments in their path. 
 
Figure 1. Graph Theory web interface. 
 
Figure 2. Graph Theory path review control panel. 
4.2 Score Generation 
As users navigate through the musical fragments, each decision 
they make is logged on a server-side MySQL database. The server 
also records the number of times a fragment loops before a new 
decision is made. Each day, then, the server regenerates the PDF 
score file for the piece (Figure 3), which can be downloaded from 
the web site for use in concert performances. 
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
261
The algorithm, implemented in PHP, generates a linear path 
through the composition. It first assigns weights to the directed 
edges linking each pair of fragments in the graph; the more 
“votes” a particular edge has received from participants, the lower 
its weight. The software then finds the path that visits all 
fragments at least once but has the lowest total weight. It solves 
this optimization as a variation of the traveling salesman problem, 
allowing for a graph that is not fully connected and for the same 
fragment to be visited multiple times if necessary. A genetic 
algorithm is used to quickly compute an optimal or near-optimal 
solution. 
In this manner, more popular path segments are more likely to 
appear in performance scores. And the decisions of recent web 
site visitors take precedence: a server-side variable configures 
how far back to look in the decision database when computing 
weights. 
Assembling the PDF score is straightforward. An image file for 
each of the sixty-one score fragments is stored on the server. The 
PHP script simply pastes each image fragment into the file in the 
proper order. Each fragment is labeled with a suggested number 
of repetitions, based on the average number of times web site 
visitors let it play before moving on. 
 
Figure 3. Graph Theory score excerpt. 
4.3 Concert Performance 
Performers are instructed to practice several different versions of 
the score as they prepare for a performance of the piece. They 
then print out the latest version of the score just before the concert 
and look at it for the first time on stage. This encourages them to 
be spontaneous in their interpretation and to take liberties with 
tempo and other expression markings. 
While no technology is required in the performance of the piece, 
presenters are asked to direct audiences to the web site in advance 
of the concert, and they are also encouraged to place computer 
kiosks running the web site in the concert hall lobby. 
Each performance is recorded and archived on the web site, so 
that even if participants cannot attend a concert in person, they 
can still track how the piece evolves and compare the recordings 
to their own explorations of the music. 
4.4 The Music 
The sixty-one fragments that comprise the work range in length 
from 0.6 to 4 seconds, and each fragment contains between 1 and 
5 pitches. Linked fragments always differ by only a single added, 
removed, or changed pitch; each fragment is linked to three or 
four other fragments on the graph. The rhythmic and metrical 
content of each fragment were composed intuitively, without 
systematic restrictions. The music is mostly slow, meditative, and 
minimal, inspired by composers such as Feldman, Cage, and Pärt. 
On the web site, sound is continuous; a fragment loops until the 
next one is chosen or playback is paused. The fragment 
recordings, which were created by violinist Maja Cerar and 
recorded with a click track, are identical each time they play back. 
In each 7-10 minute concert performance, the violinist exercises 
considerable interpretive freedom to modify dynamics, timbre, 
and tempo, insert pauses, and vary fragment repetitions in order to 
musically shape series of fragments into cohesive, large-scale 
musical phrases. 
5. DISCUSSION 
5.1 Web Site 
In informal feedback received from web site users, a number of 
trends emerged. Many participants enjoyed the visual and aural 
experience of the score and the ability to control their own path 
through the composition. However, it was difficult for participants 
to follow how their own decisions related to those made by other 
users or to scores performed in concert. Instead, they focused on 
the individual product they created, and they often wished they 
could generate audio files or scores based only on their personal 
paths through the composition. 
Future works in this series will further explore this duality of 
individual and collective creation, and they will also more clearly 
show participants the role their individual contributions play in 
the development of the collective musical products, through 
visualization and auralization of the work’s evolution over time. 
Future works will also link participants via a social network so 
they can communicate directly with each other, develop versions 
of the music within social groups, and collaboratively filter user 
contributions. 
And while Graph Theory’s simple interactive structure is 
compelling, user influence remains limited. An enhanced design 
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
262
could engage participants for longer periods of time, challenge 
them to contribute in more significant ways to the score, and 
encourage them to visit the site regularly to see how the score 
evolves. Participants might gradually modify the connections 
between fragments, or they could even edit the content of 
fragments themselves through their collective actions. 
5.2 Concert Performance 
The three violinists who have performed the work to date all 
enjoyed the malleability of the score and closely followed how it 
evolved. One significant problem emerged, though. None of these 
classically-trained musicians was comfortable playing a new 
version of the score, sight unseen, in concert performance. When 
they did try to sight-read a version of the score, their playing 
tended to be stiff, messy, and unmusical, without large-scale 
expressive arches and smooth transitions between fragments. 
Since this performance directive seemed to work against its 
original aim —  encouraging musicality and spontaneity —  it was 
removed from the score. If they wish, performers may now print 
out a version of the score well in advance of the performance, so 
that they have sufficient time to practice that particular version. 
Graph Theory was written for Maja Cerar, a virtuosic violinist, 
and so the music is difficult, with fast runs and large leaps in the 
upper registers of the instrument. Future works in the series will 
be easier to play, so that they are more accessible to performance 
by amateur musicians, creating another avenue to participation. 
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Graph Theory is a 2005 commision of New Radio and Performing 
Arts, Inc., (aka Ether Ore) for its Turbulence web site. It was 
made possible with funding from the Greenwall Foundation. 
Special thanks to my collaborators, designer Patricia Reed and 
violinist Maja Cerar, for their creative ideas, talent, and hard 
work. Graph Theory is available at 
http://turbulence.org/Works/graphtheory/. 
7. REFERENCES 
[1] Barbosa, A. 2003. Displaced Soundscapes: A Survey of 
Networked Systems for Music and Sonic Art Creation. 
Leonardo Music Journal 13. 
[2] Brown, E. 1966. Calder Piece. The Earle Brown Music 
Foundation, New York. 
[3] Burk, P. 1999. WebDrum. 
http://www.transjam.com/webdrum/. 
[4] Clay, A. 2006. Conduct Yourself. Proceedings of Digital Art 
Weeks, ETH Zurich. 
[5] Cockos Incorporated. 2005. NinJam. 
http://www.ninjam.com. 
[6] Duckworth, W. 1999. Making Music on the Web. Leonardo 
Music Journal 9. 
[7] Freeman, J. 2001. The Jungle Book. Self-published score. 
Available at http://www.jasonfreeman.net. 
[8] Jorda, S. 1999. Faust music On Line: An Approach to Real-
Time Collective Composition on the Internet. Leonardo 
Music Journal 9. 
[9] Kim-Boyle, D. 2006. Real Time Generation of Open Form 
Scores. Proceedings of Digital Art Weeks, ETH Zurich. 
[10] Machover, T. 1996. Brain Opera. 
http://brainop.media.mit.edu. 
[11] Neuhaus, M. 1994. The Broadcast Works and Audium. In 
Zeitgleich. Vienna: Triton. 
http://auracle.org/docs/Neuhaus_Networks.pdf. 
[12] New York Miniaturist Ensemble. 2005. Collaborative 
Composition Website. http://nyme.org/collaborative.html. 
[13] Saariaho, K. 2001. Mirrors. Prisma [CD-ROM]. Naïve 
Classique, New York. 
[14] Splice, Inc. 2006. SpliceMusic. http://www.splicemusic.com. 
[15] Truelove, S. 1998. The Translation of Rhythm into Pitch in 
Stockhausen's Klavierstuck XI. Perspectives of New Music, 
36/1. 
 
 
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
263