Epipe : A Novel Electronic Woodwind Controller 
Stephen Hughes 
Media Lab Europe 
Sugarhouse Lane 
Bellevue, Dublin 8 
+353 1 4742864 
steveh@mle.media.mit.edu
Cormac Cannon 
Media Lab Europe 
Sugarhouse Lane 
Bellevue, Dublin 8 
+353 876782625 
cormac@media.mit.edu 
Síle Ó Modhráin 
Media Lab Europe 
Sugarhouse Lane 
Bellevue, Dublin 8 
+353 1 4742844 
sile@media.mit.edu 
 
ABSTRACT 
The Epipe is a novel electronic woodwind controller with 
continuous tonehole coverage sensing, an initial design for which 
was introduced at NIME ’03. Since then, we have successfully 
completed two fully operational prototypes. This short paper 
describes some of the issues encountered during the design and 
construction of this controller. It also details our own early 
experiences and impressions of the interface as well as its 
technical specifications. 
Keywords 
woodwind controller, variable tonehole control, MIDI, capacitive 
sensing  
1. INTRODUCTION 
There is a large pool of work in the area of development of 
expressive musical controllers, the vast majority of which have 
had the goal of emulating the responsiveness and feel of 
traditional musical instruments [2,3,4]. To date, the wind-
instrument community has been poorly served, in particular those 
who perform with open tonehole instruments, such as the baroque 
flute, the recorder or the pipes. These instruments afford the 
player fine control over the pitch and timbre of the generated 
sound, by varying degree to which their fingers cover the 
toneholes. Controllers thus far developed for wind instrument 
players have largely been keyed types, with either binary states for 
each tonehole (i.e. WX5 by Yamaha [7]) or conti nuous control 
but not in the traditional way (i.e. Gary Scavone’s Pipe [5]).   
The Epipe interface mimics the feel and responsiveness of an 
open tonehole wind instrument, and provides sensing of the 
degree of tonehole coverage. Our prototypes have their form 
factor modeled on the chanter of the Irish Uilleann Pipes, in terms 
of the number of toneholes and the spacing between them. 
However, the technology is equally applicable to any open 
tonehole wind instrument. This work is a continuation of that 
presented at NIME 2003 [1], at which stage there was no working 
prototype.  Since then, we have implemented the design, as shown 
in figure 1. We have also developed a MIDI-based protocol for 
output from the controller, and created a basic application in the 
PC software synthesizer ‘Reaktor’.  This application performs a 
basic conversion from tonehole coverage information to a pitch 
parameter, which directly drives a simple tone synthesizer, and 
also provides a basic visualization of the coverage for the 8-
tonehole instrument. 
2. HARDWARE DESIGN 
2.1 Sensing Requirements and Technology 
The length of the air column within a wind instrument, which 
determines the pitch produced, is predominantly governed by the 
position of the first opening in the bore of the instrument.  The 
design challenge was to create a suitable sensing arrangement that 
measures the degree of coverage of one such hole cut into a bored 
pipe and not any other parameters, such as the pressure applied 
around the holes’ circumference. To define it more accurately, the 
hole is considered covered if there exists an air seal around its 
circumference. For the human finger to create such a seal around a 
smooth surface requires only a tiny amount of pressure. Any 
increase in pressure above this threshold should not affect the 
sensed coverage.  The tactile feedback provided by the feel of the 
tonehole edges is an important aid to the player of the traditional 
instrument, and for this reason a flat plate-style sensor would be 
unsuitable for our purposes. To circumvent drifting and 
calibration issues, we decided on a discrete sensing system, rather 
than a purely analog one. We chose capacitive sensing for this, 
due mainly to its robustness, low cost and high sensitivity, 
allowing detection of finger presence with minimal pressure being 
applied. To minimize the wiring complexity and overall size of 
our design, we integrated the sensing electrodes onto the gold-
plated PCB containing the electronics. We arranged 16 such sense 
electrodes around the circumference of each tonehole, as shown in 
fig. 2. 
2.2 Physical and Electronic Design 
Once the sensing technology was chosen, a primary concern was 
to ensure that the feel of the controller was as close as possible to 
Figure 1: The Epipe showing the front 7 toneholes and the 
“Energy Input” FSR 
Figure 2: Close-up of a section of the 4-layer PCB which 
contains all the electronics.  The sense pads are located 
on the rear of this PCB. 

that of a real instrument.  With this in mind, the dimensions of the 
eight holes and distances between them were based on 
measurements taken from an Uilleann pipe chanter pitched in B 
made by Andreas Rogge and the circuitry arranged to 
accommodate them.  
The circuit works by multiplexing in time the capacitance of all 
128 sense pads (16 per tonehole) to two custom designed peak-
detect sensing circuits, details of which can be found in section 3 
of [1]. A PIC microcontroller monitors the outputs from these 
circuits, and translates the data into MIDI controller messages. 
The Epipe also provides an analog input to which an energy input 
device such as a breath or bag-pressure controller can be 
connected. In tests conducted to date, we have been using a force 
sense resistor mounted in a foot widget for this purpose. 
2.3 MIDI Protocol 
We decided to use a MIDI-based protocol having determined that 
it provides sufficient bandwidth to handle the maximum data rate 
possible from the Epipe. We chose to use MIDI continuous 
controller messages, numbers 20-27, to represent the data of 
toneholes numbers 1-8 respectively, and numbers 29-30 for the 
energy input transducer. To minimize the amount of information 
to be transmitted, a control message is sent for a particular 
tonehole only if the coverage value differs from the value in the 
previous time frame, each time frame being 10mS long. The 
absolute maximum data rate of the controller, if all tonehole 
coverage states are changing simultaneously, is 76% of the total 
available MIDI bandwidth. This leaves more than adequate 
bandwidth to carry the data from the energy input device. 
 
Table 1. Epipe Technical Specifications 
Parameter Min Nominal Max 
Sense Elements per Tonehole  16  
Controller Update Rate  100Hz  
Output Jitter  <2mS  
Power Consumption  440mW 500mW 
Supply Voltage 5.3VDC 5.5VDC 7.5VDC 
Analog Input Resolution  10bit  
Capacitive Sensing Threshold 10pF 11pF 12pF 
 
2.4 Epipe Specifications 
The main technical parameter specifications of the controller are 
detailed in Table 1. We obtained the values for the power 
consumption and capacitive sensing threshold parameters from 
measurements on two Epipes that we built. The physical 
dimensions are 400mm X 40mm X 20mm, and it weighs 500g.  
2.5 Initial Impressions  
The Reaktor patch described above has provided an effective 
means of evaluating the performance and expressive resolution of 
this controller. The feel and sensitivity of the interface is uniform, 
and has thus far proved to be extremely reliable.  The response of 
the controller to the rapid finger ornaments typical of Irish 
traditional music has proved very satisfactory, and pleasing 
glissandi can be produced naturally and accurately. 
3.  LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Due to our limited prototyping facilities, the form factor of the 
Epipe is not cylindrical as a traditional pipe would be. To 
minimize the wiring of this complex circuit, it was necessary to 
keep the tonehole sensing pads as close to the electronics as 
possible, which was achieved by placing them on the opposite 
side of the same printed circuit board. The only type of PCB that 
could be curved with a radius as tight as that required are flexible 
PCBs, but these are unsuitable for this application because of their 
fragility and high cost [6]. Thus the toneholes are cut into a flat 
surface. Given greater resources, it would be preferable to have 
the touch sensors as small gold-plated pin like structures that 
would protrude through the wall of a cylindrical plastic tube. 
The sensitivity of our capacitive sensors is ultimately limited due 
to the parasitic capacitances of the analog multiplexers, since this 
capacitance is effectively in parallel with the capacitance being 
measured. It is essential that direct skin contact be used, as skin 
conductivity is heavily relied upon so as to achieve a capacitance 
to ground greater than the switching threshold for minimum finger 
pressure. At present, if the fingers of the performer are 
exceptionally dry, extra pressure is required to activate the 
sensors. Therefore, this controller would not work if for example 
the performer wore gloves, or had prosthetic fingers. For future 
revisions of this hardware, we will attempt to address this issue, 
with the ultimate goal of having non-contact type sensing, where 
the sensing plates will be buried under the surface of the pipe 
wall.  
4. CONCLUSIONS 
We have designed and built what we believe to be the first wind 
instrument based controller that incorporates open tonehole 
coverage sensing. Preliminary tests indicate that it provides for 
very rich and expressive control of physically modeled 
synthesized sounds. The component cost of this controller comes 
to less than $100, which is very cost effective, considering the 
specialized nature of the interface. 
5. REFERENCES 
[1] C. Cannon, S. Hughes, S. O’Modhrain ‘Epipe: Exploration 
of the Uilleann Pipes as a Potential Controller for Computer 
Based Music’ In proc. NIME03, p3-8, 2003 
[2] C.Cadoz, L.Lisowski, J.L.Florens – ‘Modular Feedback 
Keyboard’ - International Computer Music Conference, 
Glasgow 1990. 
[3] T. Machover  ‘Hyperinstruments: A Progress Report.’ MIT 
Media Lab Internal Research Report, 1992 
[4] D.S.Young ‘ The Hyperbow Controller: Real-time Dynamics 
Measurement of Violin Performance’ in proc. NIME 02, 
p65-70, 2002 
[5] G. Scavone ‘The PIPE: Explorations with Breath Control’ in 
proc. NIME03, p15-18, 2003 
[6] D.K.Numakura ‘Flexible Circuits: Applications and 
materials’ in Coombs’ printed circuit handbook, fifth edition, 
ch 56 ,1999 
[7] Yamaha Corporation, WX5, 
http://www.yamahasynth.com/pro/wx5/intr1.html 
 