Telemetron: A Musical Instrument 
for Performance in Zero Gravity 
Sands Fish 
MIT Media Lab 
75 Amherst Street
Cambridge, MA, 02114, USA
sands@mit.edu
Nicole L’Huillier
MIT Media Lab 
75 Amherst Street
Cambridge, MA, 02114, USA
nicolelh@mit.edu
ABSTRACT 
The environment of zero gravity affords a unique medium for new 
modalities of musical performance, both in the design of instruments, 
and human interactions with said instruments. To explore this 
medium, we have created and flown Telemetron, the first musical 
instrument specifically designed for and tested in the zero gravity 
environment. The resultant instrument (leveraging gyroscopes and 
wireless telemetry transmission) and recorded performance represent 
an initial exploration of compositions that are unique to the physics 
and dynamics of outer space. We describe the motivations for this 
instrument, and the unique constraints involved in designing for this 
environment. This initial design suggests possibilities for further 
experiments in musical instrument design for outer space. 
Author Keywords 
Musical instrument design, musical gesture sensing, humans, space 
technology 
CCS Concepts 
• Applied computing → Sound and music computing; Performing 
arts;  
1.INTRODUCTION 
The history of the design of musical instruments, while extremely 
diverse, is constrained to the conditions of gravity on Earth. As 
humanity progresses to a species that increasingly travels and lives in 
space for longer durations, concerns broaden from that of simply 
surviving in space to what human culture will be like in this new 
environment. To this end, as part of the MIT Media Lab’s Space 
Exploration Initiative, we have built and tested the first musical 
instrument specifically designed to be played in zero gravity. This 
instrument, named the “Telemetron”, consists of a chamber 
containing a number of electronic “chimes” outfitted with gyroscopes 
and wireless communication, allowing for a manipulable instrument 
that captures the poetic motion of objects in zero gravity, and 
translates this movement into music. The instrumented interior 
components collide with each other and the walls of the chamber 
when shaken. Because of the conditions of zero gravity, the chimes 
stay afloat indefinitely. Until they are damped out, they continue to 
move and collide. Sound from the instrument is created by detecting 
collisions and the speed of rotation of each of the internal  
components via gyroscope and translating these rotational values to 
messages on independent MIDI channels. The resulting aggregate 
events create a concert of sounds as each of the internal components 
are subject to the same agitation.  
2.RELATED WORK 
Instruments based on colliding elements and the friction of grains 
have been created in various forms. Our device has a legacy in these 
instruments as well as the dynamics of wind chimes.  
2.1.Design & Construction for Floating Objects 
While not designed for zero gravity, wind chimes have similar 
dynamics to our design. Bart Hopkin wrote the book “Wind Chimes: 
Design and Construction”, published by Experimental Musical 
Instruments [5]. In it, he details considerations for creating suspended 
instruments that generate music by the collisions of their constituent 
parts. The Telemetron has a number of elements in common with this 
style of musical object, from the size and shape of each element, to 
the tuning of the set of components to create the intended 
composition. 
2.2.Motion and Gesture Detection In Electronic 
Instruments 
The design of the Telemetron also draws from designs that leverage 
the detection of speed and motion. Instrumented elements with 
inertial sensors have been known for many decades. In their paper 
“Portable percussion MIDI controller” Guarnizo and Rios [4] 
describe their “accelerometer drumsticks” that leverage the detection 
of 3-axis motion in order to create MIDI messages.  
Other novel gestures and interactions have been leveraged for the 
creation of musical notes. Georg Essl and Sile O’Modhrain created 
the Scrubber [2] and the Pebblebox [3], taking advantage of the 
unique interactions afforded by friction and physical grains of 
material. Inertial performance has also been explored in the wireless 
gestural accelerometer-based instruments created for “The Urban 
Musical Game” by Rasamimanana, et al. [11] 
Further experiments with gestural control came from the design of an 
augmented baton. Keane and Wood’s MIDI Baton [6] integrate 
gesture response in real time. Teresa Marin and Joe Paradiso’s 
“Digital Baton” [8] added functions, integrating pressure sensors to 
augment natural gestures with additional ability to capture 
interactions from the performance. Paradiso and Hu created 
“Expressive Footwear” [9], augmenting the foot to capture the poetic 
human gestures of dance. Related work was done in wireless IMU 
sensors designed to capture the expressive gestures of dancers [1], 
providing precursor work to the new expressive gestures we have 
attempted to capture with our work in a new set of environmental 
conditions. Also relevant to this space is the gesture capture work that 
315
Matt Reynolds and team did with Neil Gershenfeld for the 
Karamasov Brothers [10], enhancing their juggling batons, 
expanding the expressive capacity of a performance that involves the 
human body interacting with an instrument spinning in free fall.  
2.3.Instruments In Space 
We have additionally been inspired by the history of instruments 
that have traveled to space with human travelers. A number of 
instruments, designed for performance on earth, have been 
performed in space. Some of the earliest examples of this are the 
harmonica and set of bells taken on the Gemini 6a mission. Other 
instruments that have been carried to space include a keyboard, a 
flute, a guitar, and a didgeridoo. While ultimately a fated mission, 
Robert McNair brought a saxophone on the Space Shuttle Challenger 
flight with the intention of recording a solo on the NASA shuttle 
orbiter.  
Each of these instruments needed to be vetted before flight, as their 
construction poses potential hazards, from potential electromagnetic 
radiation in an electric keyboard to the flammable nature of the 
acoustic guitar, pointing to the unique design considerations of 
instruments both intended for space and not. 
Astronauts who have brought instruments to the International Space 
Station have referred to them as a “link to home” [12], evidence of 
how material culture from Earth plays a unique and important 
emotional component in outer space. 
3.DESIGN 
There are a unique set of design constraints to consider when creating 
an instrument both for zero gravity, and for the momentary dynamics 
of a parabolic flight, which led to material, functional, and spatial 
choices in the design of Telemetron. Polycarbonate and sufficiently 
thick metal were chosen to mitigate the risk of shattering, preventing 
the chance of small pieces floating and endangering others in the 
craft during flight,  and avoiding the possibility of impalement.  
While the shape of a dodecahedron was chosen in part because it 
would reduce sharp angles that might pose danger, we consider this a 
poetic choice. The form nods to suggestions that the shape of the 
universe is a dodecahedron [7], as well as to the form of the Cupola 
observatory on the International Space Station. 
3.1.Physical Interaction and Restraint 
In order to provide the unique degree of safety required during zero 
gravity flights, the Telemetron was outfitted with a series of handles 
that functioned both to manipulate the instrument as well as to hold 
onto it so that it would not injure others during gravity transitions. In 
addition, an eyebolt was added to one of the instrument faces to 
secure it to the floor of the aircraft. Attaching the instrument to the 
floor via climbing rope and carabiner constrained its radius of 
movement a distance that prevented contact with other experiments, 
without unnecessarily constraining the motion of performance.  
3.2.Hardware & Electromechanical Systems 
Due to the nature of electromechanical system of accelerometers, this 
sensor is not sufficient to capture motion in zero gravity. Gyroscopes 
were necessary to capture rotational momentum that we hoped to 
translate into MIDI notes during zero gravity performance. For each 
“chime” we included inside of the Telemetron, we build a circuit 
containing a 3-axis digital gyroscope, an nRF24L01 transceiver for 
data transmission, and an A VR microcontroller to integrate these 
components. Each of these circuits were enclosed in an aluminum 
cylinder thin enough not to inhibit RF transmission. 
Attached to a collector/synthesizer laptop via USB cable was a 
receiver module of identical design to the circuit used for the chimes, 
though without a gyroscope module. This receiver module was 
programmed to receive datagrams from the multiple chimes, and 
retransmit each of these to a MIDI processing and capture program 
designed to split each set of rotational momentum values into a 
separate MIDI channel, such that each chime could be represented as 
an independent MIDI instrument and synthesized separately. 
3.3 Software 
Upon retransmission from the receiver module, gyroscope values 
were captured by custom software written in the Processing 
language. This software translated each of the chime IDs into MIDI 
channels. Each of these MIDI channels were then used to transmit 
gyroscope data. In order to represent two of the axes of rotation, the 
X-axis values were interpolated to MIDI pitch values, and the Y-axis 
values were interpolated to velocity values. These parameters, 
combined into single notes, creating dynamic notes that were a direct 
result of the motion of each chime. These MIDI notes were then 
recorded via MIDI bus in Logic Pro X for synthesis, performance, 
and data capture.  
Figure 1. The design of the Telemetron chamber.
Figure 2. The chimes floating inside of the Telemetron.
316
4.RESULTS 
The instrument was flown with and performed by its two creators 
(Sands Fish and Nicole L’Huillier) on a flight chartered by Zero G 
corporation, along with a number of other (unrelated) experiments. 
The flight progressed through 20 parabolas, starting with two 
parabolas to simulate Martian gravity, and one parabola to simulate 
Lunar gravity. The remaining 17 parabolas created a micro-gravity 
environment equivalent to the zero gravity conditions of outer 
space. Each parabola lasted for approximately 17 seconds, 
providing a series of brief opportunities for performance and 
recording. Each of these parabolas are identifiable in the time-series 
visualization of captured MIDI notes. 
A number of gestures—including spinning, shaking, and setting the 
object into a controlled drift—were tested during the series of 
performances during the flight. These gestures focused how zero 
gravity might afford performances that would not be possible in 
earth’s gravity. We were able to, for example, set the instrument 
spinning and remove our hands from it completely, allowing for an 
interactive dance with the instrument that would otherwise not be 
possible.  
Reviewing the synthesis of data captured from the 18 parabolas 
recorded (Figure 3) after the flight, it is clear that, in contrast to 
some generative performances designed around randomness, the 
Telemetron tends to convey a sense of collective performance, as 
each of the chimes impacts and affects the others.   
5.CONCLUSIONS 
It is clear from our initial performance of the Telemetron that the 
environment of zero gravity, found in space and simulated in 
parabolic flights, affords a unique set of physical dynamics and 
allows for a range of modalities that are not possible on Earth. The 
multi-element design of the Telemetron allows for a performance 
that captures the dynamics of objects in zero gravity, while, like 
wind chimes, allows a single gesture to create a concert of events. 
This provides the ability for the physics of zero gravity dynamics to 
be “performed”. We have observed that the shape of the chamber 
constrains these dynamics in a unique way and that different 
chamber shapes could be constructed to refine the type of 
interactions of its internal elements, creating a different 
performance. Zero gravity also affords the opportunity to set objects 
in motion that will continue autonomously until damped by air 
friction or collisions, providing unique gestural opportunities, 
perhaps extending to the possibility of interaction with a number of  
instruments by a single performer. In general, we believe zero 
gravity provides a large potential space for experimentation in the 
design of musical instruments, resulting in novel forms of 
composition unlike any composed by humans before. 
6.REFERENCES 
1.R. Aylward, S. D. Lovell, J.A. Paradiso. (2006) A compact, 
wireless, wearable sensor network for interactive dance 
ensembles. In: International Workshop on Wearable and 
Implantable Body Sensor Networks (pp. 65-70). 
2.G. Essl and S. O'Modhrain. 2005. Scrubber: an interface for 
friction-induced sounds. In Proceedings of the 2005 conference 
on New interfaces for musical expression (NIME '05). National 
University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 70-75.  
3.G. Essl, S. O’Modhrain. Perceptual integration of audio and 
touch: A case study of pebblebox, Sonic Interaction Design - 
Case studies, S. Serafin and K. Franinovic, Eds. MIT Press, 
2013. 
4.E. A. S. Guarnizo and L. M. R. Rios, Portable percussion MIDI 
controller 2015 20th Symposium on Signal Processing, 
Images and Computer Vision (STSIV A), Bogota, 2015, pp. 
1-7. doi: 10.1109/STSIV A.2015.7330416 
5.B. Hopkin. 2005. Wind chimes design and construction: a book 
and audio CD, Nicasio, CA: Experimental Musical 
Instruments. 
6.D. Keane, P. Gross. The MIDI Baton. International Computer 
Music Association. V ol. 1989 
7.J.P. Luminet, J. R. Weeks, A. Riazuelo, R. Lehoucq, and J. P. Uzan. 
2003. Dodecahedral space topology as an explanation for weak 
wide-angle temperature correlations in the cosmic microwave 
background. Nature 425, 6958 (2003), 593–595. DOI:http://
dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature01944 
8.T. A. Marrin and J. A. Paradiso. (1997). The Digital Baton: A 
versatile performance instrument. Proceedings ICMC 97, 313–
316. 
9.J.A. Paradiso and E. Hu. 1997. Expressive footwear for computer-
augmented dance performance. Digest of Papers. First 
International Symposium on Wearable Computers (October 
1997). DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/iswc.1997.629936 
10.M. Reynolds, B. Schoner, J. Richards, K. Dobson, and N. 
Gershenfeld. 2001. An immersive, multi-user, musical stage 
environment. In Proceedings of the 28th annual conference on 
Computer graphics and interactive techniques (SIGGRAPH 
'01). ACM, New York, NY , USA, 553-560. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1145/383259.383324 
11.N. Rasamimanana, F. Bevilacqua, J. Bloit, N. Schnell, E. Fléty, A. 
Cera, U. Petrevski, and J. Frechin, The urban musical game: 
using sport balls as musical interfaces. CHI EA ’12 
Proceedings of the 2012 ACM annual conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, 2012.  
12.Anon. 2003. Space Station Music. (September 2003). Retrieved 
January 27, 2018 from https://web.archive.org/web/
20111026163708/http://science1.nasa.gov/science-news/
science-at-nasa/2003/04sep_music/ 
Figure 4. The first zero gravity Telemetron performance.
Figure 3. MIDI data collected on each flight parabola.
317