Satellite CCRMA: A Musical Interaction and Sound
Synthesis Platform
Edgar Berdahl
Center for Computer
Research in Music and
Acoustics (CCRMA)
Stanford University
Stanford, CA, USA
eberdahl@ccrma.stanford.edu
Wendy Ju
Center for Computer
Research in Music and
Acoustics (CCRMA)
Stanford University
Stanford, CA, USA
wendyju@ccrma.stanford.edu
ABSTRACT
This paper describes a new Beagle Board-based platform for
teaching and practicing interaction design for musical appli-
cations. The migration from desktop and laptop computer-
based sound synthesis to a compact and integrated con-
trol, computation and sound generation platform has enor-
mous potential to widen the range of computer music instru-
ments and installations that can be designed, and improves
the portability, autonomy, extensibility and longevity of de-
signed systems. We describe the technical features of the
Satellite CCRMA platform and contrast it with personal
computer-based systems used in the past as well as emerging
smart phone-based platforms. The advantages and trade-
oﬀs of the new platform are considered, and some project
work is described.
Keywords
NIME, Microcontrollers, Music Controllers, Pedagogy, Texas
Instruments OMAP, Beagle Board, Arduino, PD, Linux,
open-source
1. INTRODUCTION
As instructors of CCRMA’s course in Physical Interaction
Design for Music [17], we have noticed that many of incred-
ibly novel and innovative musical instruments and installa-
tions created in our course over the years have very short
lives; even projects demonstrated at the NIME conference
[18, 15, 19, 8, 3, 1, 4, 14, 6] are often inoperable just a
year afterwards. Conversations with researchers and musi-
cians at a wide variety of other institutions indicate that
this is phenomenom is not isolated to CCRMA alone, and
that, even for the very-motivated, it takes enormous eﬀort
to keep NIME instruments in a functional and performable
state. This lack of longevity and robustness creates a situ-
ation where 1) the quality of music produced by NIME in-
struments is limited by the fact that the instruments do not
last long enough for musicians to develop expertise, to com-
pose great scores, or reﬁne the initial instrument designs,
and 2) the quality of shared learning from NIME instru-
ments is limited by the fact that the instruments are seldom
transfered or built upon except by the same researchers who
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’11,30 May–1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Figure 1: Satellite CCRMA
originated a particular design. While the rapid obsolescence
of new musical controllers might be caused by the relatively
short attention span of students or by the focus on novelty
within the community, we believe that some element of the
blame might be placed on the computer platforms that are
at the heart of most NIME instruments.
Satellite CCRMA (Figure 1) is a musical interaction de-
sign platform designed to support the creation of new in-
struments for musical expression as well as sound installa-
tions. It incorporates a single-board OMAP-based Linux
computer, an Arduino-based microcontroller, and a bread-
board for electronics prototyping. By creating a platform
which includes a small, inexpensive and autonomous Linux
computer, we hope to free NIME designs from the con-
straints and obstacles associated with platforms which use
more general-purpose laptops and desktop workstations.
This paper describes the Satellite CCRMA platform de-
sign, its underlying rationale, our initial forays into intro-
ducing this platform to students in our Physical Interaction
Design for Music course, and what we have learned so far.
While it will be many years before we can empirically de-
termine whether our platform is indeed longer-lived than
the alternatives, our interim assessments of the aﬀordabil-
ity, adoptability and the extensibility of the platform give
us great optimism that that the platform will be of great use
to a large number of people within the NIME community
and beyond.
2. PLATFORM DESCRIPTION
2.1 Hardware
The Satellite CCRMA platform is centered around the OMAP35x
embedded processor line from Texas Instruments, which
can run Linux. We currently use the Beagle Board (see
the maroon-colored board in Figure 1), which features the
OMAP3530 processor. The processor incorporates a su-
perscalar ARM Cortex-A8 core running at 600MHz as well
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
173
as an a TMS320C64x+ 16-bit ﬁxed-point DSP running at
430MHz. The Beagle Board connects by way of a USB
hub incorporating Ethernet to the Arduino Nano, which is
inserted into a solderless breadboard (see Figure 1, rear).
The following list shows the parts that we used in our ini-
tial Satellite CCRMA design with our students during the
Autumn quarter in 2010:
• Beagle Board Rev C4 1
• Arduino Nano2
• Solderless breadboard
• 4GB (or larger) SD card
• GWC Technology HE2440 USB 2.0 4-Port Hub with
Ethernet Adapter
• Two GT Max adjustable-length USB cables
• Ethernet cable
• 2.5A 5V switching power adaptor (For example DVE
DSA-15P-05 US)
Since this deployment, we have begun moving the plat-
form to the similar Beagle Board XM. Depending on the
intensity of the output sound and the loudspeaker size re-
quired, we suggest supplementing the kit with compact mo-
bile speakers so that sound production can be localized to
the instrument.
2.2 Software
We have prepared a special SD card image for the platform
that boots Ubuntu Linux into an environment with pre-
installed Linux audio applications including the Jack audio
server, Pure Data Extended, Faust, JackTrip and ChucK.
Because Satellite CCRMA can easily be connected to the
Internet, many new packages can be easily installed (e.g.
sudo apt-get install lynx). Other packages may need
to be compiled for the ARM architecture; however, cross-
compiling may not be necessary because the SD card in-
stallation comes with the gcc tools preinstalled. The SD
card image is especially valuable because we have tested
it—otherwise, compiling a new SD card image from scratch
can easily require multiple days of work. For more infor-
mation on our SD card image and the community we are
building for artists, please see the following link:
https://ccrma.stanford.edu/~eberdahl/Satellite
In our class, we currently have students program their
sound synthesis engines using Pure Data Extended. This
graphical environment allows rapid prototyping by connect-
ing together objects using patch cords. For example, a stu-
dent can login to his or her Satellite CCRMA kit remotely
over Ethernet, load the audio server using the command
qjackctl &, start the audio server, and ﬁnally start Pure
Data Extended by typing pd &. This causes an X-Window
to be forwarded over the Ethernet connection, including
something similar to the Pure Data Extended patch shown
in Figure 2.
3. MOTIV ATION
A generic architectural diagram for musical interaction de-
sign platform is shown in Figure 3. Although the speciﬁc mi-
crocontrollers, computer operating systems, hardware, soft-
ware, ﬁrmware, communications protocols, etc used by dif-
ferent members of the NIME community diﬀer, this diagram
1See http://beagleboard.org/hardware
2See http://www.arduino.cc/en/Main/ArduinoBoardNano
Figure 2: Demonstration patch in Pure Data
reﬂects the fact that most musical interaction platforms use
both a microcontroller (to collect and process sensor data,
and also to control actuators) and a microprocessor (to per-
form more computational challenging tasks such as sound
synthesis). What we have observed is that the weak link, as
far as longevity and robustness are concerned, is the com-
puter housing the microprocessor. Because computers are
expensive, people seldom devote separate computers to their
NIME designs; instead they use the same machine that they
are writing emails and theses on as the critical engine of
their new musical instruments. These instruments thus suf-
fer collateral damage every time we upgrade our operating
systems, or install a new version of Java, or switch to new
hardware.
actions
events
states
actions
display
graphics
sound
SENSOR
CIRCUIT
MICRO-
CONTROLLER
COMPUTER input
output
ELECTRONIC
CIRCUIT
}
}
keyboard, mouse, camera . . .
speakers, displays . . .
Figure 3: Physical Interaction Design Platform Ar-
chitecture
At a base level, any system that we would use in our
class would need to be aﬀordable (students balk at paying
more than $150–what they pay for textbooks in a normal
class), adoptable (able to be picked up and put to novel
use within a school term), and extensible (able to support
a wide variety of ideas that we the instructors didn’t think
of when we gave the students the systems). We also had
the following criteria in mind when we were developing the
system:
3.1 Longevity
Most acoustic musical instruments stay operable for many
years with minimal maintenance. Hence, as soon as a mu-
sician acquires a musical instrument, he or she can often
assume that he or she can practice, learn repertoire, com-
pose, and even make adjustments to the instrument for
many years to come. Hence, the longevity of an acoustic
musical instrument promotes the development of virtuosity.
As we mentioned before, we believe that one of the chal-
lenges to longevity in prior music interaction platforms was
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
174
(a) Quadrofeelia
 (b) Tub
 (c) Daft Datum
Figure 4: Some student projects made with Satellite CCRMA
that they relied on the use of a non-dedicated computer to
stay within a reasonable price point.
3.2 Independence/Autonomy
One of our objectives in our design was to have the Satellite
CCRMA platform be stand-alone. To this end, we set up
the operating system so that it could boot reliably without
a keyboard, mouse or monitor. We strove to minimize the
number of wires that needed to be connected to the system.
We particularly focused on eliminating the need for the spe-
cialized cables that Beagle Board commonly use. Each ad-
ditional cable or connector or AC adapter that had to be
connected to the system at design or performance time was
viewed as a liability, for the misplacement of any piece of
the system is an obsolescence risk. Conﬁgured with battery
power and lithium-ion powered speakers, it is possible to
sense, synthesize and generate sound from just the Satellite
itself.
We hope that the Satellite CCRMA platform will pro-
mote the development of long-lived projects by promoting
independence of external systems. This is why the plat-
form incorporates both a microcontroller for sensing and
a processor for synthesizing sound. Although it is possi-
ble to connect Satellite CCRMA to the internet over either
an Ethernet connection or wirelessly, we recommend that
designers consider permanently disconnecting ﬁnal projects
from the Internet so that they are as independent as is prac-
tical.
3.3 Native Floating Point Computation
These projects require synthesis algorithms to synthesize
the sound, but these can be computationally demanding.
Furthermore, although it is possible to implement most
sound synthesis algorithms using integer computations or
ﬁxed-point computations, this process can be challenging
and time consuming. Indeed, David Zicarelli once quipped
that he had heard that a programmer “could either write
ﬁxed-point code or stay married.” Such diﬃculties could
distract students from design goals, forcing them to focus on
speciﬁc engineering problems. Finally, many open-source li-
braries for synthesizing sound, such as Pure Data Extended,
require ﬂoating-point computations. For this reason, it was
important that the Satellite CCRMA platform was capa-
ble ofnatively carrying out ﬂoating-point computations, as
supported by the OMAP3530 processor.
3.4 Compactness
To promote ﬂexibility and integration into other objects, the
Satellite CCRMA is compact. The Beagle Board itself has a
3”x3.5” footprint, and the Satellite CCRMA board ﬁts into
a 5.25”x7”x2” envelope, even with a generate breadboard for
electronics onboard. This is small and light enough that it
easily could be attached to a violin. Small systems are easier
to carry around, which meant that students were more likely
to take their projects home to work on. The upcoming beta
release of Satellite CCRMA will be even more compact as
it is based on the Beagle Board xM with on-board Ethernet
and USB support, so the GWC Technology HE2440 hub
with Ethernet as shown beneath the Beagle Board in Figure
1 will not longer be required.
Only one of the projects in our course demanded a form
factor too small for the Satellite CCRMA. In that project,
the students made three tennis-ball sized balls that held Ar-
duinos, a PIC-based sound synthesizer chip, a speaker and
a battery. Looking forward, it would be an interesting chal-
lenge to see what the minimum size of the Satellite CCRMA
platform could be while still using standard connectors.
3.5 Reconﬁgurability and Extensibility
The open source and open hardware nature of Satellite
CCRMA promotes reconﬁgurability and extensibility, which
we found to be crucial to supporting the wide range of
project ideas that our students had. For us instructors,
the fact that Linux drivers for Ubuntu were already avail-
able for a large number of external USB devices made it
possible, for example, to quickly set up the Ethernet/USB
hub and the Arduino for our students. For our students, it
meant that they could add new hardware (such as bluetooth
dongles, web cameras, and multi-channel audio devices) and
new software (such as emacs, alpine, cwiid, jwm) with rel-
ative ease.
The incorporation of the Arduino Nano and breadboard
was also an important aspect to the Satellite CCRMA plat-
form. To some degree, the Arduino was extraneous, because
the Beagle Board’s expansion port includes multiple serial
interfaces and general-purpose I/O lines. However, we felt
that it was very useful to be able to leverage our previous
Arduino-based curriculum to help our students think about
how to design interfaces and controls that were appropri-
ate to the use, context, expression and metaphors they had
selected. In the future, we will examine whether the exten-
sibility oﬀered by the Arduino over the native Beagle Board
I/O is worth the foot print it takes up.
3.6 Community support
We previously mentioned how leveraging open source hard-
ware and software made the Satellite CCRMA platform easy
to reconﬁgure and extend. The open-source platform also
makes it easier to develop a system of community support.
Beginning users can leverage examples so that they can get
the platform up and running, while advanced users can ﬁnd
out how to tweak the system so that they have more con-
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
175
trol over the projects that they develop. For example, the
source code for any portion of the software can be obtained,
modiﬁed, recompiled, and then loaded onto an SD card for
use. Similarly, the schematics and layouts for all of the core
parts are available, enabling users to make custom boards
based on the current state of the platform to meet any spe-
cial needs.
Inspired by the community-based support and develop-
ment eﬀorts of platforms such as Processing [13] and Ar-
duino [9], we have created a newsgroup aimed especially at
artists to help address questions about the platform:
http://groups.google.com/group/satelliteccrma. To help
bootstrap the learning process, we provided our students
with working code examples; these are available to other
instructors, students or developers on the Satellite CCRMA
site.
4. RELATED WORK
4.1 Prior platforms
In the past, our course has been taught with platforms based
on the Basic Stamp [17], the AVRmini [20], and the Arduino
[9]. Other past and current microcontroller-based platforms
used for creating musical controllers include I-CubeX’s Digi-
tizer[11], STEIM’s SensorLab and junXionboard, Microchip
PIC-based Create USB interface [12], and CNMAT’s uosc.
All of these systems are meant to be interfaced with a com-
puter, which receives data from the microcontroller (via se-
rial, openSoundControl [21], MIDI formats, for example) to
synthesize sounds in software. While these systems all do
an admirable job of translating physical phenomena from
the real world to signals which can be translated to sound,
they require the presence of a laptop or desktop computer
to perform real-time sythesis of sound.
4.2 Similar platforms
Far fewer platforms are designed to replace the laptop or
desktop computer in the physical interaction architecture.
One notable platform is the Audiopint [10] platform. The
Audiopint, a 17cm x 17cm ”mini-itx” VIA Epia EN1500
motherboard running Ubuntu Linux housed in a Pelican
case, functions as a low-cost and ﬂexible audio eﬀects pro-
cessor and syntehsizer. It uses Pure data [16] to synthesize
sound. Another platform is the Gluiph [7], which features
Pure data running on a complex programmable logic device
(CPLD).
Satellite CCRMA builds on the ideas embodied by the
Audiopint and Gluiph. The choice of the Texas Instru-
ments’ OMAP-based Beagle Board provides Satellite CCRMA
with a small footprint (the Beagle Board itself is 3” wide
x3.125” long x0.625” tall, and the platform footprint is 7”
x 5.5”x2”), relatively low power consumption, and the po-
tential for broader platform support from the wider OMAP
and Beagle Board development community. The cost of
Satellite CCRMA, critical to the cost-sensitive artists and
musician community, is lower than either platform ($125 at
time of submission). Also, the use of a standard Linux op-
erating system makes it easy to extend the system through
opensource software and the use of USB-based computer
peripherals and drivers available on-line. Finally, the incor-
poration the bread Board and Arduino helps to orient the
use of the system towards the development of novel musical
controllers and sound installations.
4.3 Alternative platforms
One viable alternative to the Satellite CCRMA system is
the use of low-cost netbooks in place of laptops. At the
time of this paper’s submission, low-end netbooks capable
of running Pd cost $300-$400 USD. Although little has been
published about the use of netbooks as musical system plat-
forms, we believe it is only a matter of time before people
start to dedicate inexpensive netbooks to their instruments.
The catch is that, as small as netbooks are, the minimum
size and layout of netbooks is dictated by typical laptop us-
age. Even though the cost of integrating features such as
a screen, a lithium-ion battery and wiﬁ and bluetooth ca-
pability to the Satellite CCRMA system would likely cost
more than a similarly equipped netbook, the cost and diﬃ-
culty of hacking and reconﬁguring a netbook into a format
that can be easily incorporated into an instrument would
likely neutralize any potential savings.
Another alternative to using the laptop or desktop com-
puter as a music platform is to use mobile phones or iPods.
In earlier mobile music platforms, the phones were just used
for their autonomous sensing capabilities, and an external
PC was used to generate the sound, but more recently,
sound synthesis on-the-phone has been pioneered using the
Synthesis ToolKit on the Symbian OS [5], and the MoMu on
the iPhone OS [2]. The advent of the Android OS phones
and tablets is likely to greatly decrease the cost of compact
autonomous systems with the computational ability to gen-
erate sound, so that these devices will be cheap enough to
dedicate to speciﬁc instrument or installation designs. How-
ever, it is fairly diﬃcult as yet to interface external sensors
with these systems, which greatly limits the range of mu-
sical control and interaction capabilities of platforms based
on these systems. Most strategies involve using Bluetooth
wireless, which introduces some latency due to the Blue-
tooth protocol.
5. PROJECT HIGHLIGHTS
(a) System
 (b) With top opened
Figure 5: SoundFlinger
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
176
(a) Stompbox
 (b) Bottom FX Pedal
 (c) Top FX Pedal
Figure 6: Example Stompbox featuring Beagle Board-xM
To illustrate the range of what is can easily be accomplished
with Satellite CCRMA as a platform, we present these ex-
amples of what our students created for the class projects.
Many of the students were new to the Arduino when they
started the class, and all of the students were new to the
Beagle Board and embedded Linux.
5.1 Independent Musical Instrument
Quadrofeelia, by Jiﬀer Harriman, Mike Repper, Linden Melvin,
and Locky Casey, (see Figure 4(a)) shows that Satellite
CCRMA can be employed to construct anindependent mu-
sical instrument that does not require connections to any
external computers. A musician plugs the 5V power supply
into a wall outlet, and then the 1/4” audio output jack pro-
duces an output signal that can be connected to a guitar
ampliﬁer or public address system. As the musician ma-
nipulates the sensors embedded in the instrument, output
sound is produced in response. Quadrofeelia bears resem-
blance to a slide guitar, but with more abilities for retuning
the chord tunings and inversions due to the buttons manip-
ulated by the right hand.
5.2 Independent Dance Interface
Standard sensing devices typically employed for gaming are
incorporated into Daft Datum, a musical instrument played
by the feet, by Rosie Cima, Ravi Kondapalli, and Ben-Zhen
Sung. A dance pad is hidden beneath the performer’s feet
and sends data to Pure Data over USB using thehid ob-
ject. To discover the vendor and product IDs for the dance
pad, the dmesg command can be executed in Linux directly
after plugging in the dance pad. No further conﬁguration
is necessary. To change the sound synthesis mode, the per-
former presses buttons on the Wiimote as shown in Figure
4(c). The Wiimote communicates with Pure Data over a
remarkably small Wiﬁ USB dongle that can be setup as de-
scribed on the following Wiki:https://ccrma.stanford.
edu/wiki/Making_a_Wii_remote_talk_to_Pure_Data_(PD)
5.3 Video-based Interactive Installation
The T¨ub, by Marc Evans, Bj ¨orn Erlach, and Mike Wilson,
demonstrates the video capabilities of Satellite CCRMA.
The KWC-1301 USB Webcam is supended above a tub of
water (see Figure 4(b), top center) and transmits images to
Pure Data running on the Beagle Board stored underneath
the tub. Objects in Pure Data’s Graphics Environment
for Multimedia (GEM) generate sound samples by scanning
along circles in the images. If the water is still, then there
is almost no sound, but waves in the water create buzzing
sounds, whose timbre evolves with the wave motion. Instal-
lation visitors can induce waves in the water using a variety
of techniques: poking the water with their hands, pulling
the edge of the tub with their hands, poking the water with
tubes, blowing water through tubes, etc.
5.4 Multichannel Audio in a Collaborative In-
stallation Piece
The Sound Flinger, by Chris Carlson, Hunter McCurry, and
Eli Marschner, demonstrates that Satellite CCRMA is com-
patible with an external sound interface. The device, as
shown in Figure 5, allows users to play back snippets of
live recorded sounds through four output audio channels
provided by the SIIG IC-710112 USB Soundwave 7.1 Dig-
ital audio adapter, which is placed underneath the Beagle
Board circled in red in Figure 5(b).
5.5 Audio Effects Stompboxes
Because Satellite CCRMA incorporates audio codecs and
native ﬂoating-point computation, implementing digital au-
dio eﬀects is relatively straight-forward even for novices.
The design history of audio eﬀects incorporates a rich past
of audio eﬀects controlled primarily by knobs, switches, and
even sometimes pedals. Figures 6 and 6(b) (left) show an
example stompbox, which incorporates a footswitch and two
extra large LEDs. The stompbox demonstrates that Satel-
lite CCRMA can also be employed for teaching audio digital
signal processing (DSP) in an embedded systems context.
Appropriate languages for DSP include Faust, C++, Pure
Data, ChucK, etc.
6. SATELLITE CCRMA WEBSITE
The main website for the project can be found below, which
provides links to videos of project presentations, the Satel-
lite CCRMA newsgroup, Wiki, and SD card images:https:
//ccrma.stanford.edu/~eberdahl/Satellite/
7. FUTURE
Since the beginning of this project, we have already had
one major hardware change, from the OMAP 3530-based
Beagle Board to the OMAP 3730-based Beagle Board-xM.
While we believe the OMAP-based Beagle Board family to
be a promising platform for the design of new interfaces for
musical expression, the core aim of the Satellite CCRMA
project is to develop standalone computational capabilities
for musical interfaces in an open-source setting. As such,
we are tracking related platforms such as the Hawk Board,
Panda Board, Crane Board, or GumStix, in case any of
these should become more viable for our project goals. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
177
any case, it is our intent to maintain a similar set up of
core platform software across hardware changes, and also
to make migration from one platform to the next graceful
for users.
We have found that the existing platform is stable and
easy enough for NIME students to use, reconﬁgure and ex-
tend within the conﬁnes of a single school term. In the fu-
ture, we hope to see if the Satellite platform helps promising
projects grow beyond their short-term novelty ”stunt”phase
to become more mature musical instruments. In particular,
we hope to see whether inventors develop more expertise
with their designed installations and instruments, perhaps
by making more reﬁnements, developing greater expertise
in playing their instrument, or by making scores for the sys-
tems’ unique capabilities. We also intend to perform more
detailed analysis to see if the Satellite CCRMA system helps
students to more fully understand full-scale system design.
8. CONCLUSIONS
In conclusion, we found that the introduction of the Satellite
CCRMA platform has provided our students with a more
full-featured, robust and ﬂexible system for lab exercises
and musical interaction design projects. This platform ex-
tends the portability, scalability and support community of
our previous microcontroller-based system to the micropro-
cessor as well. We have found the platform is useful for
instrument-based and installation-based systems, and we
are actively promoting the platform to see if it is useful in
a wide variety of other applications as well.
9. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
In addition to Chris Chafe, Fernando Lopez-Lezcano, Bill
Verplank, Max Mathews, Perry Cook, Julius Smith III,
Michael Gurevich, Carr Wilkerson, and the open-source
community, we would like to thank our students who helped
us test the initial release of Satellite CCRMA: Chris Carl-
son, Locky Casey, Roseann Cima, Bj¨orn Erlach, Marc Evans,
Francesco Georg, Jiﬀer Harriman, Ravi Kondapalli, Eli Marschner,
Hunter McCurry, Linden Melvin, Michael Repper, Mike Ro-
tondo, Spencer Salazar, Ben-Zhen Sung, and Mike Wilson.
This research was made possible by a generous equipment
donation from Texas Instruments.
10. REFERENCES
[1] A. Bowen. Soundstone: a 3-d wireless music
controller. In Proceedings of the 2005 conference on
New interfaces for musical expression , pages 268–269.
National University of Singapore, 2005.
[2] N. J. Bryan, J. Herrera, J. Oh, and G. Wang. MoMu:
a mobile music toolkit. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on New Interfaces for
Musical Expression (NIME), Sydney, Australia , 2010.
[3] J. Carlile and B. Hartmann. OROBORO: a
collaborative controller with interpersonal haptic
feedback. InProceedings of the 2005 conference on
New interfaces for musical expression , pages 250–251.
National University of Singapore, 2005.
[4] L. Dahl, N. Whetsell, and J. V. Stoecker. The
WaveSaw: a ﬂexible instrument for direct timbral
manipulation. InProceedings of the 7th international
conference on New interfaces for musical expression,
pages 270–272. ACM, 2007.
[5] G. Essl and M. Rohs. Mobile stk for symbian os. In
Proc. International Computer Music Conference,
pages 278–281. Citeseer, 2006.
[6] M. Gao and C. Hanson. LUMI: live performance
paradigms utilizing software integrated touch screen
and pressure sensitive button matrix. InProceedings
of the 2009 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical
Expression, 2007.
[7] S. Kartadinata. The gluiph: a nucleus for integrated
instruments. In Proceedings of the 2003 conference on
New Interfaces for Musical Expression , page 180.
Citeseer, 2003.
[8] R. Lugo and D. Jack. Beat boxing: expressive control
for electronic music performance and musical
applications. In Proceedings of the 2005 conference on
New interfaces for musical expression , pages 246–247.
National University of Singapore, 2005.
[9] D. Mellis, M. Banzi, D. Cuartielles, and T. Igoe.
Arduino: An open electronic prototyping platform. In
Proc. CHI, 2007, 2007.
[10] D. Merrill, B. Vigoda, and D. Bouchard. Audiopint:
A robust Open-Source hardware platform for musical
invention.Pd Convention, 2007.
[11] A. Mulder. The I-Cube system: moving towards
sensor technology for artists. In Proc. of the Sixth
Symposium on Electronic Arts (ISEA 95) , 1995.
[12] D. Overholt. Musical interaction design with the
create usb interface. In Proc. ICMC2006,
International Computer Music Conference, New
Orleans, 2006.
[13] C. Reas and B. Fry. Processing: a learning
environment for creating interactive web graphics. In
ACM SIGGRAPH 2003 Web Graphics, page 1. ACM,
2003.
[14] D. Schlessinger and J. O. Smith. The kalichord: A
physically modeled Electro-Acoustic plucked string
instrument. InProceedings of the International
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
(NIME), pages 98–101, 2009.
[15] H. Shiraiwa, R. Segnini, and V. Woo. Sound kitchen:
designing a chemically controlled musical
performance. In Proceedings of the 2003 conference on
New interfaces for musical expression , pages 83–86.
National University of Singapore, 2003.
[16] H. C. Steiner. Building your own instrument with pd.
In Proceedings of the 1st International Pd Conference,
Graz, Austria. Citeseer, 2005.
[17] B. Verplank, C. Sapp, and M. Mathews. A course on
controllers. In Proceedings of the 2001 conference on
New interfaces for musical expression , pages 1–4.
National University of Singapore, 2001.
[18] C. Wilkerson, C. Ng, and S. Seraﬁn. The mutha
rubboard controller. In Proceedings of the 2002
conference on New interfaces for musical expression ,
pages 1–4. National University of Singapore, 2002.
[19] S. Wilson, M. Gurevich, B. Verplank, and P. Stang.
Microcontrollers in music HCI instruction: reﬂections
on our switch to the atmel AVR platform. In
Proceedings of the 2003 conference on New interfaces
for musical expression, pages 24–29. Citeseer, 2003.
[20] S. Wilson, M. Gurevich, B. Verplank, and P. Stang.
Microcontrollers in music HCI instruction: reﬂections
on our switch to the atmel AVR platform. In
Proceedings of the 2003 conference on New interfaces
for musical expression, pages 24–29. Citeseer, 2003.
[21] M. Wright and A. Freed. Open sound control: A new
protocol for communicating with sound synthesizers.
In Proceedings of the 1997 International Computer
Music Conference, pages 101–104, 1997.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
178