Voice Coil Actuators for Percussion Robotics 
 
Robert Van Rooyen  
rvanrooy@uvic.ca 
 
Andrew Schloss  
aschloss@uvic.ca 
 
George Tzanetakis  
gtzan@cs.uvic.ca 
 
University of Victoria, 3800 Finnerty Road, Victoria, BC V8P 5C2 
 
ABSTRACT 
Percussion robots have successfully used a variety of actuator 
technologies to activate a wide array of striking mechanisms. 
Popular types of actuators include solenoids and DC motors .  
However, the use of industrial strength voice coil actuators 
provides a compelling alternative given a desirable set of 
heterogeneous features and requirements that span tr aditional 
devices. Their characteristics such as high acceleration and 
accurate positioning enable the exploration of rendering highly 
accurate and expressive percussion performances. 
 
Author Keywords 
Percussion, robotics, actuators, closed loop control 
 
ACM Classification 
H.5.5 [Information Interfaces and Presentation] Sound and Music 
Computing – Signal Analysis, Synthesis, and Processing, I.2.9 
[Artificial Intelligence] Robotics – Propelling Mechanisms, Sensors 
I.2.8 [Artificial Intelligence] Problem Solving, Control Methods, and 
Search – Control Theory 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Human percussion performances involve extremely complex 
biomechanics, instrument physics, and musicianship.  The 
development of a robotic system to closely approximate the 
complexity of perform ance of its human counterpart  not only 
requires a deep understanding of the range of motion, but also a 
set of technologies with a level of performance that can match 
or exceed  empirical meas urements in multiple dimensions. 
There are a variety of electro -mechanical devices and 
configurations to choose from that offer the level of 
performance required for percussion robotics . However, only a 
subset of the devices represent viable options. 
Through calibrated non -invasive acquisition and analysis of 
the 40 percussive rudiments, a typical  range of motion with 
respect to striking implement tip motion was determined  [1]. 
This was accomplished by developing a simple low cost motion 
capture system using an off -the-shelf high frame rate video 
camera [2]. The actual motion data was extracted from the 
video footage using open source tools, which enabled 
subsequent analysis of timing, velocity, and position. 
With an understanding of  the range and speed of strikin g tip 
implement motion, a mechatronic system was designed using 
an industrial voice coil actuator (VCA).  Unlike solenoids and 
DC motors, VCAs offer high -precision continuous linear 
control of motion  with minimal power when coupled with an 
adequate position encoder and application-specific closed-loop 
servo controller.  In this paper we will discuss the related 
technologies and how they were fashioned into a basic 
prototype for evaluation. 
 
 
 
 
2. RELATED WORK 
Musical robots have used a variety of actuators that  include 
solenoids [3, 4, 5] , brushed/brushless DC motors  [3, 4, 5, 6] , 
and stepper motors [4]. These electromechanical devices offer a 
simple low cost solution that can be adapted to a wide variety 
of applications. An exceptional example of this is the Man and 
Machine Robot Orchestra at Logos [5]. The orchestra is 
composed of over 45 individual systems spanning organs, 
wind, string, and percussion instruments. Each of the 
instruments uses a dedicated MIDI controller that can activate a 
complex set of actuators that are tailored to  specific 
instrument’s capabilities and tonal range.  In addition to 
precision timing of instrument events, pulse width modulation 
is used to control the velocity of solenoids and DC motors. 
Positioning of instrument controls is achieved by using closed 
loop servo systems. Finally, voice coil act uators in the form of 
modified loud speakers are employed to drive monophonic 
wind instruments. 
The Machine Orchestra developed by Kapur et al., fuses 
musical robots with human performers  and is part of a 
pedagogical vision to teach related technical skill s and 
encourage international collaboration  [4]. The orchestra is 
composed of seven robotic instruments as well as several 
laptops with musical interfaces that enable human performers 
to interact with the instruments in real -time. Each robot utilizes 
a variety of actuator technologies such as solenoids and DC 
motors that are ultimately directed by a dedicated control 
module that is connected to a central server. The set of human 
performers communicate with the se rver over a dedi cated 
Gigabit network from laptops using low -latency OSC 
messages. The result is a fantastic exploration of composition, 
sound, and visual arts with notable international performances. 
Extensive research and development of a percussion robot 
named “Haile” by Weinberg and Driscoll links a mechatronic 
system with improvisation in order to promote human -robot 
interaction [7].  The robot is designed to interpret human 
performances in real-time and provide an accompaniment in an 
improvised fashion by utilizing both auditory and visual cues.  
The robot was designed to embody human characteristics in 
terms of its form and uses a linear motor and solenoids. The left 
arm uses a motor and solenoid for precise closed loop 
positioning of a strike, which yields greater control over 
volume and timbre. In contrast, the right arm uses a single 
solenoid which can strike at a higher rate than the left arm.  
Each arm is controlled by a dedicated microprocessor that is 
directed by a networked singl e board computer that enables 
low-latency communication with a laptop computer. 
Voice coil actuators were used for the improvisational 
robotic marimba player named “Shimon” that was developed 
by Hoffman and Weinberg  [3]. Like H aile, this robot explored 
human interaction that included visual elements. The robot is 
composed of four arms with solenoids for the striking 
implements and voice coils for lateral arm movement.  
Non-acoustic instruments such as digital musical instruments  
have benefited from the use of voice coil actuators to provide 
vibrotactile feedback  [8]. Independent control in the form of 
frequency and amplitude within the audio spectrum offers a 
1
rich medium for expressing real -time instr ument responses to 
the performer. By integrating a loudspeaker into the body of an 
instrument and driving it with a performance derived signal, an 
increased level of musician engagement was observed. 
3. VOICE COIL ACTUATORS 
High-resolution, powerful, quiet, and fast  motion demands 
actuators with low position quantization, high acceleration, low 
mass, low friction, low hysteresis , and no backlash. Although 
solenoids possess some of these characteristics, there are 
inherent limitations that include a lack of precision motion 
control. In contrast, VCAs, when instrumented with position 
encoders, can achieve a remarkable level of performance when 
coupled with appropriate driver electronics and closed loop 
servo control. Other types of actuators such as DC motors an d 
servos have be en used effectively in the context of percussion 
robots [6]. H owever, VCAs offer a unique combination of 
characteristics that make them a compelling alternative for use 
in musical robots . They represent the simp lest form of non-
commutated motors, which increases robustness, reliability, and 
performance. The basic VCA design has been in use since it 
was first invented by Oliver Lodge in 1898 in the creation of a 
moving coil dynamic loudspeaker, which is the origin  of the 
“Voice Coil” moniker [9]. 
3.1 Actuator Fundamentals 
Voice coil actuators are linear motors with a permanent magnet 
and coil winding whose motion is dictated by the Lorentz force  
principle [10]. This force is a product of the current and 
magnetic flux as defined in Equation 1, where 𝐹 is the force in 
Newtons, 𝑘 is a constant, 𝐵 is the magnetic flux density in 
Teslas, 𝐿 is the length of wire in meters, 𝐼 is the current in 
amperes, and 𝑁 is the number of conductors. 
 
𝐹 = 𝑘𝐵𝐿𝐼𝑁 (1) 
 
Since all of the variables in Equation 1  for a given motor are 
fixed with the exception of  𝐼, the generated force is directly 
proportional to the input current. In addition, a change in the 
direction of current results in a change in direction of force.  As 
shown in the cutaway of  Figure 1, the use of a stationary 
permanent magnet with a moving coil attached to a linear 
bearing yields an actuator with low mass and low friction. 
 
Ferromagnetic Cylinder
Permanent Magnet
Permanent Magnet
Linear BearingShaft
Coil
Coil
Coil Bobbin
 
Figure 1. VCA Cutaway. 
 
The stroke of a typical VCA can range from 0.125 inches to 
6 inches with a relatively constant force that drops off at less 
than 5 percent at the stroke extremes. Since it is a direct drive 
device, there is no backlash, which enables precision 
positioning and high acceleration rates. 
Rapid coil movement has the side effect of generating back 
EMF that is proportional to the speed, current, and magnetic 
field strength. This phenomenon reduces the current and limits 
the acceleration. H owever, these limitations  are often 
acceptable in many applications. Further, the VCA can be used 
to detect motion that is directed by an external force as defined 
by Equation 2, where 𝐸 is in V olts, 𝑘 is constant, 𝐵 is the 
magnetic flux density in Teslas, 𝐿 is the length of the 
conductor, 𝑣 is the velocity of the conductor, and 𝑁 is the 
number of conductors.  Motion detection can be used to detect 
haptic feedback events such as striking implement tip impact 
with a drum head. 
 
𝐸 = 𝑘𝐵𝐿𝑣𝑁 (2) 
 
3.2 Actuator Control 
Since the VCA coil bobbin and shaft are free to move along a 
single axis, there is nothing to hold the assembly in place. In 
fact, without any mechanical stops, the bobbin assembly will 
simply fall out of the permanent magnet housing. In a similar 
fashion, if current is applied to the coil, the assembly will either 
shoot out of the housing or be driven closed based on the 
direction of current flow. Therefore, the key to controlling a 
VCA is a closed control loop, which also implies some form of 
position sensing. 
There are several forms of position sensors that include 
optical disk linear quadrature encoders and proximity devices 
such as Hall Effect sensors. The former typically uses dual 
infrared LED emitter and detector pairs as illustrated in Figure 
2 to generate quadrature output signals, whereas the latter relies 
on a localized magnetic field strength detector.  Other forms of 
position sensors include mechanical systems and variable 
resistive elements. 
 
Optical Disk
Lines +5V
GND
I
B
A
 
Figure 2. Optical Encoder. 
 
 The quadrature encoder outputs 𝐴, 𝐵, and 𝐼 as depicted in 
Figure 2 provide a set of signals that can be decoded for speed, 
direction, and index. The frequency of 𝐴 or 𝐵 are a proportional 
indication of speed in terms of pulses per second, which can be 
converted to units such as RPM since the diameter and the total 
number of lines are known. The phase relationship will change 
between 𝐴 and 𝐵 to leading or lagging  depending on the 
direction of rotation. Finally, an index pulse 𝐼 can be generated 
once for e very full rotation of the disk. In many cases, a 
quadrature decoder chip is used to present an absolute position 
value, which can be used directly for closed loop control. 
A proportional, integral, and derivative or PID controller is a 
common motion contro l method to set and maintain the 
absolute position of a closed loop system [11]. As illustrated in 
Figure 3, the weighted sum of 𝑢(𝑡) in Equation 3 is a control 
variable that is used to minimize the error value between the set 
point 𝑟(𝑡) and the measured process value 𝑦(𝑡). 
 
 
Figure 3. PID Controller. 
 
𝑢(𝑡) =  𝐾𝑝𝑒(𝑡) + 𝐾𝑖 ∫ 𝑒(𝜏)𝑑𝜏 + 𝐾𝑑
𝑑𝑒(𝑡)
𝑑𝑡
𝑡
0  (3) 
2
Referring to Equation 3, the first term accounts for the 
present value of the error, the second term integrates past 
values of the error, and the third term embodies future trends 
based on the current rate of change.  Each of the constants 𝐾𝑝, 
𝐾𝑖, and 𝐾𝑑 are non-negative coefficients that must be tuned for 
a specific application in order to optimize responsiveness while 
eliminating oscillations and reduci ng overshoots.  With proper 
tuning, the PID controller offers a fast and stable means to 
move a VCA between positions or simply maintain its current 
position. 
3.3 Actuator Driver 
An H-Bridge circuit is typically used to control the speed and 
direction of a VCA from a microprocessor. A good example of 
such a device is the Texas Instruments LMD18200. Common 
binary logic control inputs include PWM, DIR, BRAKE , and 
ENABLE. The PWM signal controls the speed of the motor 
based on the duty cycle. The DIR input dictates which pair of 
power MOSFET devices is enabled. For example, to move the 
motor forward a diagonal set of MOSFETs  would be driven by 
the input PWM signal whilst the opposite set remain off.  
Switching to the opposite diagonal set would result in reverse 
motion. In order to stop the motor quickly, the BRAKE signal 
effectively shorts the motor inputs by enabling the appropriate 
pair of MOSFETs based on the DIR input. Lastly, de -asserting 
the ENABLE signal will turn off all of the MOSFET devices , 
allowing the motor to move free ly. Integrated H-Bridge drivers 
will often include other features such as thermal sensing, 
automatic overcurrent detection and shutdown, and current 
sensing. 
3.4 Actuator Comparison 
When compared to other actuator technologies such as 
solenoids and DC motors, VCAs offer compelling performance 
characteristics as demonstrated by comparative metrics. J . 
Long, et al. proposed a methodology for evaluating striking 
mechanisms in the context of musical instruments  [12]. This 
very informati ve work added to some of the earlier seminal 
research conducted by Ajay Kapur , Trimpin, and others 
towards the goal of developing high -quality robotic drumming  
systems [13]. 
The principal performance metrics in the aforementioned 
study were composed of latency, maximum loudness, dynamic 
consistency, and maximum repetition rate. Although an exact 
reproduction of the test environment was not available, a 
relatively similar approach was used to perform comparable 
measurements. Notable differences include the use of a 14” 
Pearl Session Studio Classic drum with snare disabled, a 
Roland RT-10S vibration transducer attached to the top of the 
drum head located 150mm from the strike pos ition, and a 24V 
VCA driver voltage. 
3.4.1 Latency 
The plot in Figure 4 shows linear VCA actuator to drum head 
impact latency in comparison  to several solenoid designs that 
had been previous evaluated by J. Long, et al . after 
compensating for MIDI and microcontroller latencies [12]. This 
shows that VCA latency performance is roughly on par with the 
“Linear Solenoid with Pivot ” design that has been  used 
extensively in robotic percussion systems. It is very important 
to note that the mechanical design with respect to transferring 
actuator motion to a striking implement plays a large role in the 
performance characteristics of the overall solution. Imp roper 
mechanical translation of actuator motion can result in poor 
performance despite the selection of an adequate 
electromechanical actuator for a given application. 
 
 
Figure 4. Actuator Latency. 
3.4.2 Maximum Loudness 
The bar chart in Figure 5 shows the comparative maximum 
loudness of a linear VCA in the context of the study conducted 
by J. Long, et al. [12]. Although the drum type was 
fundamentally different as indicated in section 3.3, the VCA 
loudness measurement should general ly indicate excellent 
relative performance. 
 
 
Figure 5. Maximum Loudness. 
 
As shown in Figure 6, the loudness level is proportion al to 
the preparatory height as expected. However, the level plateaus 
beyond 220  mm. Further, one can see that that the VCA 
achieves 9 2% of maximum loudness a t a height of 20 mm, 
which would indicate very high acceleration within a short 
stroke.  
 
 
Figure 6. VCA Loudness vs. Height. 
3.4.3 Dynamic Consistency 
Consistency in dynamics as a function of height can be 
expressed in terms of percentage standard deviations for a fixed 
number of strikes. The consistency of the linear VCA is lower 
than most of the other actuators that have been characterized by 
J. Long et, al. as enumerated in Table 1 [12]. Further 
investigation will be needed to understand and potentially 
3
improve this metric. Potential sources of inconsistency include 
low tolerance linear to rotary coupling components and bearing 
play. 
 
Table 1. Dynamic Consistency Percentage. 
 
3.4.4 Maximum Repetition Rate 
As shown in Figure 7, the linear VCA achieved 3 4 strikes per 
second at a height of 16mm, which ranked a close third when 
compared to the set of actuators that had been evaluated by J. 
Long et, al. [12].  
 
 
Figure 7. Maximum Repetition Rate. 
3.5 Actuator Range of Motion 
Before a robotic system can be developed to model a human 
performance, research must be conducted to understand the 
associated range of motion on the target instrument. Attributes 
such as timing, velocity, and position in multiple dimensions 
represent a complex interaction between the musician and the 
instrument. Seminal work by Sofia Dahl has served to lay the 
groundwork of our understanding of striking implement motion  
[14]. In addition, a study was conducted to acqu ire and analyze 
the unencumbered human performance motion in a non -
invasive manner [15]. The results of this study informed a set 
of constraints for a robotic system that can closely approximate 
human motion while maintaining a fundamental goal of a 
robust and practical design. 
An example of a Double Stroke Open Roll rudiment at 110  
bpm is shown in Figure 8. By using a tipped snare drum head, 
both the X and Y axis calibrated motion was captured and 
analyzed at a sample rate of 240Hz to inform the constraints of 
the robotic system [16]. Note that the Z axis was also evaluated, 
however it was determined to contain minimal motion data with 
respect to the 40 rudiments.  The elimination of Z axis motion 
dramatically reduce s the complexity of a robotic syste m and 
therefore has become a practical constraint of the design. 
 
 
Figure 8. Double Stroke Open Roll. 
4. EXPERIMENTAL PROTOTYPE 
A 1DOF prototype was developed using an industry standard 
VCA, off -the-shelf PWM driver, optical position  encoder, 
custom interface board, general purpose USB control board, 
and custom console application hosted on a PC as illustrated in 
Figure 9. 
 
 GVCM-051-051-01
Perfboard
Quadrature
Decoder
Ribbon Cable
Ribbon 
Cable
[1]
Ribbon 
Cable 
[1]
control
VPWR
PWR
USB
Code Wheel
Power
Supply
power
MIDI I/F
USB
Current
Monitor
SM-57
RT-10S
Thermistor
DC Fan
Relay
Regulator
Filter
USB
 
Figure 9. Prototype Schematic. 
 
The mechanical system as shown in Figure 10 was composed 
of commercially available general purpose comp onents that 
included aluminum panels, bearings, fasteners, rod ends, a 
hollow shaft, and a tripod mount. In addition, several custom 
components were designed and machined to translate linear 
VCA motion to appropriate  rotary striking implement tip 
motion that included position monitoring using an optical disk 
quadrature encoder.  
 
 
Figure 10. Mechanical Prototype. 
 
The integrated prototype can be seen in Figure 11, which 
also includes a PC laptop, 24V 90W power supply, and USB 
MIDI interface as illustrated in Figure 9. A demonstration of 
the prototype is available at http://tinyurl.com/jlvavta. 
 
 
Figure 11. Integrated Prototype. 
type low medium high
Direct Striking Linear Solenoid 5.05 (4 mm) 7.12 (6 mm) 9.52 (8 mm)
Shindengen Rotary Solenoid 6.99 (10 mm) 7.4 (100 mm) 3.22 (190 mm)
Linear Solenoid with Pivot 3.5 (10 mm) 3.53 (20 mm) 4.25 (30 mm)
Ushio Rotary Solenoid 4.34 (10 mm) 2.36 (55 mm) 1.44 (100 mm)
Pneumatic Striker N/A 10.83 (50 mm) N/A
Analog Servo 4.34 (10 mm) 5.21 (65 mm) 6.08 (120 mm)
Digital Servo 2.93 (10 mm) 3.71 (65 mm) 3.16 (120 mm)
Linear VCA 8.72 (10 mm) 8.66 (20 mm) 11.22 (30 mm)
4
4.1 PID Tuning 
Adjusting the application -specific PID gain constants in 
Equation 3 requires an iterative approach that starts with 
proportional gain. By setting the integral and derivative term 
gains to zero, the proportional component can be adjusted for a 
basic response. If the proportional gain is too high, the system 
will oscillate, whereas if it is too low, the response time will be 
unacceptably slow and inaccurate. As a general rule of thumb, 
one should start with low proportional gain and no integral or 
derivative gain  [17]. The proportional gain is then increased 
until it starts to oscillate then reduced by a factor of two. At this 
point, a small integral gain can be introduced until the system 
begins to oscillate after which it should also be reduced by a 
factor of two. Finally, derivative gain is introduced to anticipate 
and react quickly to position al changes that are internally or 
externally induced . Ultimately, f ine tuning of all three gains 
will result in a stable loop with minimal overshoot and a quick 
set point response time, which mus t be verified both at rest and 
in motion. The set of plots in Figure 12 illustrate examples of 
PID tuning behaviors. 
 
Figure 12. PID Tuning. 
4.2 Calibration 
Positioning the striking implement tip requires a point of 
reference, which ostensib ly should be the drum head surface. 
Discovering the geometry of the drum as a calibration step is 
critical to subsequent motion control algorithms that make 
assumptions about striking implement tip elevation, timing, and 
expected impact position [18]. Calibration is achieved by gently 
lowering the striking implement tip until it contacts the drum 
head surface . This is followed by  briefly applying additional 
force while resetting the quadrature encoder position counter to 
become the “home” position. Next, the striking implement tip is 
gently raised until it contacts the upper extent of the mechanics, 
which is then followed by applying increased force while 
recording the quadrature encoder position counter value for the 
“top” position. The typical values for the home and top position 
on the prototype were 0 and 750 respectively. Given the 
location at which the striking implement is mounted to the 
center of rotation, the tip sweeps a vertical height of 18”, which 
yields an effect quadrature encoder counter resolution of 0.024” 
per bit.  
4.3 Playback 
The ability to accurately set the striking implement position in 
real time inherently enables the playback of pre -recorded or 
live motion data. The blue motion capture plot shown in Figure 
13 is the extracted normalized Y axis left hand motion of the 
original performance plot that was i ntroduced in Figure 8. The 
red playback plot in Figure 13 shows the normalized Y axis 
optical encoder position of the 1DOF prototype as it rendered 
the normalized captured performance  data. Although they are 
similar, there are notable distortions that can be attributed to  
sample rate,  PID controller bandwidth , and the overall 
performance of the mechatronic system. Further mechanical 
improvements and PID performance tuning will ideally assist in 
reducing undesirable artifacts. 
 
 
Figure 13. Captured vs. Playback. 
4.4 Bounce 
Percussionists take  advantage of a drum head impact by 
allowing the striking implement to bounce from the first strike 
through a timely reduction in downward pressure and then 
reapplying pressure at the right time to induce a second strike. 
This method is used successively for the formation of triple and 
quadruple strikes, which form the foundation of drum rolls 
between the alternating left and right hands as shown in Figure 
8. 
Since VCA driver strength is controlled by a PWM signal, 
the prototype can also increase or reduce downward pressure at 
will, in addition to controlling the absolute position of the 
striking implement tip. As shown by the optical encoder 
position plot in Figure 14, this method was used to affect 
double, triple, and quadruple strikes in a similar  fashion to a 
human performer. 
 
 
Figure 14. Multiple Strikes. 
 
The key ingredients in creating multiple strikes through drum 
head bounce are impact event detection, pressure adjustment, 
and precision timing.  Impact events can be detected by 
calibrated absolute position or haptic feedback as discussed in 
section 3.1. Once the impact has been detected, the controller 
must reduce the downward pressure by adjusting the PWM 
signal to the VCA driver. It is the reduced downward pressure 
that allows the striking tip implement to “bounce” up from the 
taught drum head. The final component of a multi-strike 
articulation is the timing of when downward pressure should be 
increased again to force a second impact event. As suggested 
previously, this process is simply repeated with appropriate 
pressure and timing values to form triple and quadruple strikes. 
The pressure magnitude changes and timing associated with 
multiple strikes can either be precomputed profiles or adaptive 
in nature through the use of training algorithms on specific 
drums. The latter method is highly recommended since the type 
of drum and head tuning will impact the characteristics of the 
successive strikes in terms of strength and timing as it relates to 
the BPM of a particular performance. 
5
5. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper we have shown that the use of VCAs for 
percussion robots is a viable alternative to traditional solenoids 
and DC motors.  Although VCAs are expensive, t he 
combination of high acceleration, low latency, low hysteresis, 
and precision positioning result in an effective means to control 
striking implement tip motion. Through comparative analys is 
and experimentation we have demonstrated that the application 
of VCAs and  associated control/training algorithms can 
successfully contribute to the evolution of percussion robotics. 
Future work includes enhancing the existing prototype by 
adding a secon d degree of freedom to control the lateral or X 
axis impact location of the striking implement  tip. Mirroring 
the 2DOF system to the other side of the robot will serve to 
complete a left and right hand design. Further development of 
signal processing perfo rmance and resolution will reduce 
rendered artifacts and increase fidelity in multiple dimensions.  
Both quantitative and qualitative studies will be used to steadily 
improve software, hardware, and mechanical components 
towards the goal of approximating human performances using a 
practical and robust design. 
With a self -contained and capable VCA based robotic 
percussion platform, further exploration of motion control and 
learning algorithms can be conducted to render pre -recorded 
motion, live, and composed performances that begin to nudge 
existing boundaries of timing, dynamics, and timbre  fidelity 
[19]. Additionally, t he introduction of stochastic processes 
offers the opportunity to imbue renderings with human qualities 
that make each performance unique and pleasing to the listener  
[16].  
For live or playback performances, a  MIDI continuous 
controller interface and Open Sound Control ( OSC) network 
message support will  be added to enable normalized absolute 
striking tip positioning. Although a MIDI continuous controller 
is limited to a range of 0-127, two controllers can be used to set 
the course and fine values for an effective range of 0-16383 at a 
command overhead cost of 6 bytes or ~2ms at 31.25K b aud. In 
contrast, OSC network messages natively support 32 -bit 
integers and arbitrary length payloads for high resolution low 
latency control when used over a gigabit network.  
6. BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 
[1]  "Percusive Arts Society," [Online]. Available:  
http://www.pas.org/index.aspx. [Accessed 27 December 
2014]. 
[2]  R. Van Rooyen and G. Tzanetakis, "Pragmatic Drum 
Motion Capture System," in New Interfaces for Musical 
Expression, Baton Rouge, 2015.  
[3]  G. Hoffman and G. Weinberg, "Shimon: an interact ive 
improvisational robotic marimba player," in Extended 
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 
Atlanta, 2010.  
[4]  A. Kapur, M. Darling, D. Diakopoulos, J. W. Murphy, J. 
Hochenbaum, O. Vallis and C. Bahn, "The Machine 
Orchestra: An Ensemble of Human Laptop Performers and 
Robotic Musical Instruments," Computer Music Journal, 
vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 49-63, 2011.  
[5]  L. Ma es, G. -W. Raes and T. Rogers, "The Man and 
Machine Robot Orchestra at Logos," Computer Music 
Journal, vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 28-48, 2011.  
[6]  J. Murphy, D. Carnegie and A. Kapur, "Little Drummer 
Bot: Building, Testing, and Interfacing With a New 
Expressive," in ICMC, Athens, 2014.  
[7]  G. Wienberg and S. Driscoll, "The interactive robotic 
percussionist: new developments in form, mechanics, 
perception and interaction design," in Proceedings of the 
ACM/IEEE international conference on Human -robot 
interaction, Arlington, 2007.  
[8]  M. T. Marshall and M. M. Wanderley, "Examining the 
Effects of Embedded Vibrotactile Feedback on the Feel of 
a Digital Musical Instrument," in New Instruments for 
Musical Expression, Oslo, 2011.  
[9]  O. J. Lodge, "Improvements i n magnetic telegraphy and 
telephony". UK Patent GB189729505, 1898. 
[10]  D. Collins, "Voice Coil Actuator Basics," Linear Motion 
Tips, A Design World Resource, 25 August 2016. 
[Online]. Available: 
http://www.linearmotiontips.com/voice-coil-actuator-
basics/. [Accessed 13 November 2016]. 
[11]  Wikipedia, "PID Controller," Wikipedia, 13 November 
2016. [Online]. Available: 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PID_controller. [Accessed 3 
November 2016]. 
[12]  J. Long, J. W. Murphy, J. Kapur and D. Carnegie, "A 
Methodology for Evaluating Robotic Striking Mechanisms 
for Musical Contexts," in New Instruments for Musical 
Expression, Baton Rouge, 2015.  
[13]  A. Kapur, Trimpin, E. Singer, A. Suleman and Tzanetakis , 
George, "A COMPARISON OF SOLENOID -BASED 
STRATEGIES FOR ROBOTIC DRUMMING," in 
International Computer Music Association , Copenhagen, 
2007.  
[14]  S. Dahl, "Striking Movements: A Survey of Motion 
Analysis of Percussionists," Acoustic Science and 
Technology, Denmark, 2012. 
[15]  R. Van Rooyen, A. Schloss and G. Tzanetakis, "Snare 
Drum Motion Capture Dataset," in New Interfaces for 
Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, 2015.  
[16]  R. Van Rooyen, A. Schloss and G. Tzanetakis, "Snare 
Drum Performance Motion Analy sis," in New Instruments 
for Musical Expression, Brisbane, 2016.  
[17]  C. Hardy, "The Basics of Tuning PID Loops," Integrated 
Systems, 9 April 2014. [Online]. Available: 
http://innovativecontrols.com/blog/basics-tuning-pid-
loops. [Accessed 25 November 2016]. 
[18]  J. Murphy, A. Kapur and D. Carnegie, "Better Drumming 
Through Calibration: Techniques for Pre -Performance 
Robotic Percussion Optimization," in New Interfaces for 
Musical Expression, Michigan, 2012.  
[19]  M. Krzyzaniak, "Timbral Learning for Musical Robots," 
Arizona State University, Tempe, 2016. 
 
 
6