Andante: Walking Figures on the Piano Keyboard to
Visualize Musical Motion
Xiao Xiao, Basheer Tome and Hiroshi Ishii
MIT Media Lab
75 Amherst St.
Cambridge, MA 02142
[x_x, basheer, ishii]@media.mit.edu
ABSTRACT
We present Andante, a representation of music as animated
characters walking along the piano keyboard that appear to
play the physical keys with each step. Based on a view of
music pedagogy that emphasizes expressive, full-body com-
munication early in the learning process, Andante promotes
an understanding of music rooted in the body, taking ad-
vantage of walking as one of the most fundamental human
rhythms. We describe three example visualizations on a
preliminary prototype as well as applications extending our
examples for practice feedback, improvisation and compo-
sition. Through our project, we reﬂect on some high level
considerations for the NIME community.
Keywords
Piano, Augmented Reality, Yamaha Disklavier, Visualiza-
tion, Learning, Embodiment
1. INTRODUCTION
“Music is sound in motion.”
— John de Lancie, oboist and pedagogue
To many musicians, a profound sense of motion lies at the
heart of every masterful performance. The performer must
ﬁrst understand how the music ﬂows and then translate that
understanding into bodily movements that render sound in
the physical world [9].
Piano pedagogue Abby Whiteside describes the concept
of “basic rhythm” which coordinates both the ﬂow of mu-
sic and the whole body engagement of a performance [18].
Rhythm is not meant in the sense of metrics, or the regular
succession of beats and accents but rather as the long line
that holds together a musical statement, a sentiment echoed
by composer Edgard Var` ese [16].
People naturally attune to basic rhythm while listening
to music—swaying their bodies, tapping their feet [6]. But
when learning to play music, the sense of basic rhythm too
often goes by the wayside [18]. Eager to avoid mistakes, the
student focuses on producing correct sequences of notes, los-
ing sight of lines holding the notes together. Rather than
channeling long, expressive lines with the whole body, at-
tention narrows on mechanisms to sound individual notes.
We introduce Andante, a graphical representation of mu-
sic as animated ﬁgures projected on the fallboard of a player
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’14,June 30 – July 03, 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Figure 1: Visualization of a canon with one ﬁgure
as each voice (top); A duet with virtual accompani-
ment (bottom)
piano. Stepping along the keyboard, the virtual ﬁgures ap-
pear to “play” the physical keys. As walking is one of the
most fundamental human rhythms, we use it to promote an
understanding of line, rhythm and characterization rooted
in the body.
This paper articulates two views of music learning while
situating our work among prior projects. We then explain
our design rationale and frame a space of applications using
a series of prototyped examples.
2. BACKGROUND
2.1 Music Tutorial Systems
The vast majority of music learning systems have been de-
signed with an understanding of the learning process where
the primary focus is training the student to play correctly.
Typical systems for piano learning use lights and colored
shapes to point out the correct sequence and timing of notes,
usually derived from a written score [15]. Examples range
from electronic keyboards with light up keys to visualiza-
tions similar to the Guitar Hero model where blocks rep-
resenting notes descend onto virtual or physical keyboards
augmented with projection [4, 1, 2, 24]. Some systems auto-
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
629
mate feedback on a variety of criteria to notify and penalize
students of mistakes [12].
Consideration for the physicality of playing is generally
limited to technical problems. In the case of piano, sev-
eral systems have been designed to convey proper ﬁngering,
both haptically and visually. Haptic systems involve tactile
feedback units attached to ﬁngers [5]. Visual representa-
tions range from abstract to literal, such as elaborations of
block graphics colored to represent ﬁngering, virtual hand
models for demonstration, and video of full-scaled physical
hands shown in situ at the keyboard [17, 8, 21].
Many learning systems claim to support the beginner
and discount developing natural expression as beyond the
target scope. When considered, expression is approached
intellectually—decomposed into elements such as timing,
articulation and dynamics, each analyzed and scored for
correctness along with notes.
While the conventional view among designers of pedagog-
ical tools isolates the intellectual, physical and emotional
aspects of music, the three are seen as inextricably linked
for many who perform and teach at the highest levels of
musicianship.
2.2 Alternate View of Learning
Bassist Victor Wooten oﬀers the analogy of an infant bab-
bling when beginning to speak, learning words and muscular
control at once while all the time constantly expressing [20].
It seems absurd to impose correct pronunciation and rules
of grammar onto the infant at the outset, even more so to
inﬂict penalties for every mistake in the process.
Bassoonist David McGill extends the analogy between
language and music, arguing that both written language
with its associated grammatical rules and musical notation
are artiﬁcial, external systems designed to permanently cap-
ture aural traditions that previously vanished in time [9].
While an infant learning to speak desires communica-
tion over correctness, the two are often reversed for the
ﬂedgling musician, who learns to play and read at once in
the beginning—memorizing vocabulary without learning to
speak with ease and expression.
Ease and expression in playing are often seen either as
elusive things to be coaxed out from years of rigorous, un-
avoidably unpleasant discipline or as the gift of a talented
few that cannot be taught [18]. However, notable peda-
gogues argue that expressive playing can and must be sys-
tematically but enjoyably taught from the beginning, and
it must not be isolated from learning notes [14, 18, 9]. Our
work explores the role technology can play in this view of
music pedagogy.
2.3 Artistic Inspirations
For inspiration, we look to more artistic works that give
form to musical gestures and motion through elegant blends
of the digital and physical.
Messa di Voce transforms the speech and songs of two vir-
tuoso vocalists into highly nuanced and expressive graphics
projected onto the space behind them [7]. Rouages aug-
ments electronic music performances using a mixed-reality
3D visualization of gears whose movement responds to the
performer’s gestures [3]. Our own earlier work MirrorFugue
plays back recorded performances on a player piano aug-
mented with projected video, making visible subtleties in
the performer’s musical embodiment such as breathing and
posture [22].
Across disparate genres of music, these pieces visualize
the intricate link between gesture of the body and of sound.
While none were explicitly designed to tutor music, enhanc-
ing sense of motion within the sound and tying that sense
with the body has vast potential for teaching the expression
and physicality of music.
3. DESIGN
Rather than initially focusing on correctness of notes and
mechanism, we aim to establish a “basic rhythm” in the
body right from the start. The design goal is then about
how to convey this sense, not just an intellectual under-
standing but a visceral one [13]. Instead carefully counting
time while playing; we want to feel the ﬂow of time.
Fortunately, most people already have a basic rhythm en-
grained in the body—from walking around everyday. More-
over, we already have a keen understanding of expression in
a walk. We can intuit from afar details of people’s identity
and mood just from their gait [19]. The art of animation
takes advantage of this understanding, crafting vivid char-
acters in our imagination through the movement of lines
and shapes.
We envision a visualization system for the piano, An-
dante, where animated ﬁgures walk along the keyboard play
the music, appearing to physically press a key with each
step. The ﬁgures give visual form to musical phrases, en-
couraging thinking beyond individual key strikes by con-
necting notes in lines of motion. As walks inherently com-
municate aﬀect, the ﬁgures convey at once both the notes
and the expression of a musical line through where and how
they step.
We built our prototype on a Yamaha Disklavier grand
piano with a replacement fallboard to enable projection [23].
A short throw projector is mounted 7.5ft overhead the piano
bench based on [22]’s setup. A custom Java program runs
the animations and drives the MIDI input and output from
the player piano. Animation frames, which show various
characters in silhouette, were made using traditional hand-
drawn techniques and Adobe Photoshop.
4. INTERACTION EXAMPLES
Andante is not meant to be a stand-alone self-teaching sys-
tem, neither in its current iteration nor as a concept. We
intend it to be one way to present and to interact with mu-
sic that could supplement the learning process. To demon-
strate potential usage, we describe three example applica-
tions, generalizing interactions from each. For generaliz-
ability of the type of music walking ﬁgures can eﬀectively
visualize, please see the Appendix.
4.1 Scaling the Keys
A single walking ﬁgure can visualize the motion of one mu-
sical line. We built a set of examples where characters tra-
verse the keyboard playing scales to explore visualization of
linear motion. An essential component of the musical vo-
cabulary, scales are used to construct melodies and are often
included as daily practice for students of all levels, though
often treated as a mindless exercises devoid of musicality.
We prototyped the C major, pentatonic and chromatic
scales, ascending and descending with adjustable tempo.
To show variations in scalar exercises, we made animations
with multiple ﬁgures playing the C major scale in contrary
motion and harmonized in thirds.
We also experimented with changing the characters’ ap-
pearance and gait, animating a fat man, a tip-toe sneak, and
an ostrich for the basic C major scale. Initial observations
from viewers seem to suggest diﬀerences in how ﬁgures look
and move noticeably altered the way a scale is perceived,
even with MIDI playback lacking in dynamics of our current
prototype.
Andante could encourage students to play scales with
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
630
Figure 2: Changing the look of characters—fat man (left), tip-toe sneak (middle), ostrich (right)
more shape and expression, imitating the movement of vari-
ous characters. Particular characters could also be assigned
to scales as a way of helping students remember by associ-
ation.
By adding user input, we can provide feedback on expres-
sive playing. A pianist can play a phrase, which is then re-
peated by a procedurally generated virtual character, with
nuances in timing, dynamics and articulation reﬂected in its
movement to visually reinforce expressive dimensions of the
phrase [11]. We can also render the same phrase with dif-
ferent characters, adjusting emotional parameters such as
“sadness” or “excitement” to experiment with diﬀerent ways
of phrasing. This way, a relative beginner can explore the
expressive dimensions of a melody and then learn to play
by imitating the character.
4.2 Walking Bass
Walking ﬁgures can also establish steady rhythm, especially
useful in bass accompaniments. In fact, the “walking bass
line” is a common pattern in both Baroque and Jazz style,
which evokes the rhythm of alternating steps. We proto-
typed a boogie woogie vamp, an iconic example of walking
bass in blues piano.
Though our prototype uses a fairly neutral ﬁgure, the dis-
tinctive character of various rhythmic styles, such as samba
and swing, can be accentuated with characters with corre-
sponding appearance and movement. Playing along with
these characters could teach the feeling of rhythms that are
diﬃcult to convey only as abstract concepts.
A student can also play against a character, focusing on
melodic improvisation while oﬄoading the accompaniment.
The animation acts as the rhythm section of an ensemble,
helping the player get into a groove.
4.3 Canon Perpetuus
Multiple ﬁgures can break down more complex composi-
tions into separate voices. We prototyped a visualization
for Canon BWV 10731 by J.S. Bach, a perpetual canon
that can be inﬁnitely looped as its ending wraps back to
the opening. Our visualization assigns a diﬀerently colored
ﬁgure to each of the canon’s four voices and allows the user
to turn each character on and oﬀ.
A student can learn a piece with more attention on com-
positional structure, inspecting the shape of each voice, in-
teraction between pairs of voices, and how all voices ﬁt to-
gether. Isolating subsets of voices can reveal compositional
techniques such as imitation, echo, and inversion through
the characters’ motion. The student can learn the piece one
voice at a time from each ﬁgure and practice while accom-
panied by the rest of the characters for a global perspective
early in the learning process
1http://imslp.org/wiki/Canon_in_A_minor,_BWV_1073_
(Bach,_Johann_Sebastian)
We can also use Andante as a composition tool, building
pieces through layers represented by ﬁgures. A composer
can record one layer at a time, keeping track of layers and
their interactions through the visualization. Representing
voices as characters can also help the composer create a
narrative throughout the piece.
5. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Through a series of early prototypes, we have introduced
an idea for representing music using animated ﬁgures walk-
ing on piano keys, situated our approach within a peda-
gogical perspective, and illustrated a space of applications.
We are currently planning the next iteration of software,
which will procedurally generate character animations in
real time, thereby allowing us to more quickly build new
visualizations. With the new software, we plan to build a
new set of examples, which we will evaluate for eﬀectiveness
in promoting expressive playing.
6. CODA
We oﬀer some ﬁnal reﬂections, facets of larger ideas reﬂected
by our individual project for the community to consider.
6.1 Visualizing Information
Despite many very evocative visualizations of music, the
convention in visually presenting musicalinformation tends
toward the symbolic to be perceived purely intellectually.
Expression is either abstracted into more symbols (e.g. sheet
music) or abstracted away entirely (e.g. the Guitar Hero
model). Andante proposes an approach for visualizing musi-
cal information that retains a visceral sense of expression at
its core with symbolic representational information layered
on top. For example, both the conventional abstract blocks
and our characters can be colored to represent harmonies.
In the conventional case, the entire representation of col-
ored blocks is abstract and symbolic. Andante combines a
symbolic representation with an inherently expressive one.
Though a piece of music contains vast amounts of infor-
mation, we experience it more as expressive statement than
intellectualized information. We posit that our approach is
more consistent with how people perceive music.
6.2 Expressive Experience
Our current prototype is very limited, especially in expres-
sion. With the exception of the canon, all notes are pro-
grammed to be played exactly the same way by the Disklavier,
with no variation whatsoever in dynamics, articulation and
timing. Even the animation is made from canned sequences
with no nuanced reactions to phrasing. Nonetheless, peo-
ple still perceive “expression” when confronted by Andante
in action. This raises the question of what makes people
perceive a musical experience asexpressive.
From observing our examples, we hypothesize two key
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
631
conditions: feeling the music through the body and feeling
a sense of direction within the music, which harken back
to Whiteside’s ideas of “basic rhythm” and full body en-
gagement. Though we cannot generalize from anecdotal
observation, these points merit further investigation.
6.3 Sensory Dimensions
That we are able to perceive expression within Andante
even with the most mechanistically reproduced notes sug-
gests that the experience of music goes beyond the hearing
of sound alone [10]. The contemporary Western musical
tradition holds dear the notion of “purity” of musical ideas
within the sonic realm, but before the invention of the au-
dio recording (and even today in certain societies), music
had always been enjoyed through many senses. We con-
clude with a call to action for the community: to design for
deeper experiences of music, multi-sensory and multidimen-
sional.
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work would would not have been possible without the
many conversations during Xiao Xiao’s piano lessons with
Donal Fox over the past ﬁve years. We are also grateful
to Yamaha for the generous loan of our Disklavier piano,
which enabled the implementation of these ideas. Special
thanks to Kiran Wattamwar and Christina Sun for assisting
the drawn animations; to Ruth Lingford and Dylan Ladds
for invaluable advice in animation technique; and to Ken
Perlin for the original inspiration of interactions with the
digital through animated characters. Thanks to the Tangi-
ble Media Group for continual support.
8. REFERENCES
[1] Guitar hero. http://guitarhero.com. Accessed:
2014–02–04.
[2] Synthesia. http://www.synthesiagame.com/.
Accessed: 2014–02–04.
[3] F. Berthaut, M. T. Marshall, S. Subramanian, and
M. Hachet. Rouages: Revealing the mechanisms of
digital musical instruments to the audience. In Proc.
NIME ’13, 2013.
[4] Casio. Lighted keys.
http://www.casio-usa.com/products/Digital_
Pianos_%26_Keyboards/Lighted_Keys/. Accessed:
2014–02–04.
[5] K. Huang, E. Y.-L. Do, and T. Starner. Pianotouch:
A wearable haptic piano instruction system for
passive learning of piano skills. InProc. IEEE ISWC
’08, 2008.
[6] M. Leman and R. I. Godøy. Why study musical
gestures. In R. I. Godøy and M. Leman, editors,
Musical Gestures: Sound Movement, and Meaning.
Routledge, 2010.
[7] G. Levin, Z. Lieberman, J. Blonk, and J. L. Barbara.
Messa di voce.
http://www.flong.com/projects/messa/, 2003.
[8] C.-C. Lin and D. S.-M. Liu. An intelligent virtual
piano tutor. In Proc. VRCIA ’06, 2006.
[9] D. McGill. Sound in Motion: A Performer’s Guide to
Greater Musical Expression. Indiana University Press,
2007.
[10] J. Pallasmaa. The Eyes of the Skin. Wiley, 1996.
[11] K. Perlin and A. Goldberg. Improv: A system for
scripting interactive actors in virtual worlds.
Computer Graphics, 29(3), 1996.
[12] S. W. Smoliar, J. A. Waterworth, and P. R. Kellock.
pianoforte: A system for piano education beyond
notation literacy. InProc. ACM Multimedia ’95, 1995.
[13] S. S. Snibbe and H. Raﬄe. Socially immersive media:
Pursuing best practices for multi-user interactive
camera/projector exhibits. InProc. CHI ’09, 2009.
[14] S. Suzuki. The Suzuki Concept: An Introduction to a
Successful Method for Early Music Education. Diablo
Press, 1974.
[15] Y. Takegawa, T. Terada, and M. Tsukamoto. A piano
learning support system considering rhythm. In Proc.
ICMA ’12, 2012.
[16] E. Var` ese. The liberation of sound. In E. Schwartz,
B. Childs, and J. Fox, editors, Contemporary
Composers on Contemporary Music. Da Capo Press,
1988.
[17] M. Weing, A. R ¨ohlig, K. Rogers, J. Gugenheimer,
F. Schaub, B. K¨onings, E. Rukzio, and M. Weber.
P.I.A.N.O.: Enhancing instrument learning via
interactive projected augmentation. In Proc.
UbiComp ’13, 2013.
[18] A. Whiteside. Indispensables of Piano Playing.
Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1955.
[19] R. Williams. The Animator’s Survival Kit. Faber &
Faber, 2002.
[20] V. Wooten. Music as a language.
http://http://ed.ted.com/lessons/
victor-wooten-music-as-a-language. Accessed:
2014–02–04.
[21] X. Xiao and H. Ishii. Mirrorfugue: Communicating
hand gesture in remote piano collaboration. In Proc.
TEI ’11, 2011.
[22] X. Xiao, A. Pereira, and H. Ishii. Mirrorfugue III:
Conjuring the recorded pianist. In Proc. NIME ’13,
2013.
[23] Yamaha. Disklavier pianos. Accessed: 2014–02–04.
[24] Q. Yang and G. Essl. Visual associations in
augmented keyboard performance. In Proc. NIME
’13, 2013.
APPENDIX
We address some elements of piano music that may seem
problematic to visualize on Andante. Though there is no
doubt a limit on the space of visualizable music, we hope
to demonstrate signiﬁcant variety within the space beyond
our limited examples.
1. Rests: All our examples feature continuous streams
of notes with no rests. For voices with breaks during
or between phrases, ﬁgures can fade in and out or de-
crease in brightness to maintain presence based on the
structure of the line.
2. Large Leaps In pianistic music, large leaps within a
melodic line are relatively rare. Animated ﬁgures can
actually enhance the perception of leaps as it visually
reinforces eﬀort to make the jump as demonstrated in
our canon example. More frequent leaps are often bet-
ter understood when heard as two distinct voices which
we would visualize as two distinct ﬁgures.
3. Harmonies While we often think of harmonies ver-
tically, a crucial aspect of harmony is the horizontal
movement of component parts [9]. The Canon exam-
ple highlights horizontal motion as each ﬁgure is as-
signed a diﬀerent color. Alternatively, ﬁgures in the
same same example can be colored according to un-
derlying chord changes to show harmonic progression
(e.g. red for tonic, yellow for dominant)
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
632