Proceedings of the 2002 Conference on New Instruments for Musical Expression (NIME-02), Dublin, Ireland, May 24-26, 2002  
 NIME02-01
Circles and Seeds: Adapting Kpelle ideas about music 
performance for collaborative Digital Music performance 
Niall Griffith, 
Sean O’Leary 
Donagh O’Shea 
Department of CSIS,  
University of Limerick,  
Limerick,  
Ireland 
email niall.griffith@ul.ie, sean@mle.ie, 
donagh.oshea@ul.ie
Ed Hammond 
Sile O’Modhrain 
Media Lab Europe, 
Sugar House Lane,   
Bellevue, Dublin 8, 
Dublin, Ireland  
email spock@media.mit.edu, sile@media.mit.edu 
 
Abstract 
The use of free gesture in making music has usually 
been confined to instruments that use direct mappings 
between movement and sound space. Here we demon-
strate the use of categories of gesture as the basis of 
musical learning and performance collaboration. These 
are used in a system that reinterprets the approach to 
learning through performance that is found in many 
musical cultures and discussed here through the exam-
ple of Kpelle music. 
Keywords 
Collaboration, Performance, Metaphor, Gesture 
INTRODUCTION 
Music is (by and large) a social activity. However, digital 
music technology, while not antithetical to collaboration has 
tended to emphasise the development of control by a single 
person, the composer. A composer may now choose to cre-
ate music that no acoustic instrument can play and (theoreti-
cally at least) is able to specify exactly what is happening at 
every moment in a piece. But ensemble collaboration in live 
performance also inspires as well as expressing. This 
interactive process is a core attribute of creativity that is 
highly complex and resistant to mechanisation. 
Traditionally, performance is mediated by systems of 
metaphor that bring together diverse instrumental resources. 
Metaphor is also used when people learn to play, 
communicating both aesthetic values and ideas about how 
the instrument should be played.  
In digital instruments where the sounds are synthesised 
and are decoupled from any physical form of instrument 
apart from the loudspeaker there are no concrete affordances 
that a student masters to play the instrument. The novice 
may face a tabula rasa  or unstructured sonic space. The 
interface is a parameter space. It is a set of knobs and sliders. 
Exploring and charting this opaque analytic interface is 
painstaking and because of the abstract or analytic nature of 
the control parameters it is difficult to encapsulate and 
communicate the aesthetic qualities that are discovered. 
These issues pose several questions. How is it possible 
to reincorporate collaboration in electronic music ensem-
bles? How does collaboration and ensemble playing relate to 
learning to play? Is it possible to enrich electronic instru-
ments by sharing knowledge of their characteristics through 
distributed systems? How is it possible to develop musical 
ideas embedded within the form of a musical instrument in a 
meaningful a way within an initially unstructured digital 
medium? 
One of the great innovations of digital electronics is 
networking. There is a metaphor in networking for collabo-
ration. Are there useful views of musical collaboration that 
we can transfer from collective traditional performance to 
collaborative electronic performance? As a start we looked 
at an instance of collective music making non-electronic 
musical context in which music is acoustic and collective. 
This is a description by Ruth Stone of the Music of the 
Kpelle of Liberia [2]. 
THE KPELLE OF LIBERIA 
For this project the key aspect of Kpelle music is the 
close link between learning, rehearsal and performance. 
Kpelle music is conceived as complex ‘bubbles’ in which 
multiple qualities and elements are negotiated. The ideal is 
unity through diversity. Stone observes that a Kpelle per-
formance seems to be a free-for-all. However, masters and 
mistresses of ceremonies oversee extended performances 
with diversely skilled musicians.  
The structure of Kpelle music is coeval with the process 
of collaborative delegation in performance. Expert Kpelle 
musicians define musical spaces involving different levels of 
complexity requiring different levels of skill to play. Nov-
ices are given roles that at the simplest level are unchanging- 
for example the most regular drum beat. Those playing the 
least variable ‘chorus’ parts start the performance. Addi-
tional layers of complexity are added as each part is re-
hearsed and ‘got down’. Performance emerges from re-
hearsal and rehearsal is where master musicians bring on 
novices into performance. These aspects are not separated. 
Expert musicians control the music through this hierarchical 
organisation and also through cues that initiate change in 
aspects of performance, e.g. tempo and rhythm. ‘The Kpelle 
consider the sounds themselves to be personified voices and 
conceive the sounds as combining in terms of social interac-
tion’ [2]. Kpelle music is an actively constructed process. 
The learning experience is primary for the novice because 
the musical function they perform is structural rather than 
improvisational. It is both simple and important. The narra-
tive created by the expert musicians relies upon the underly-
ing structural integrity the novices provide. As they gain in 
 
 NIME02-02
skill they transcend the structure to participate in the narra-
tive it underpins. Thus, the Kpelle align performance and 
learning with the support of complexity by simplicity and 
the movement of free improvisation over static structure. 
The balance of this relationship belies the strength of the 
social, psychological and intellectual purpose it serves. The 
question we have addressed is whether this powerful set of 
performance practices be formulated in a way that makes 
sense in the context of digital music. 
CIRCLES & SEEDS – METAPHORS OF 
PERFORMANCE & LEARNING 
The relationship between gesture and expression in mu-
sic is very important. As well as being intimately associated 
with the productivity of an instrument, through relating to 
and manipulating its form, shapes of movement have power-
ful evocative characters in themselves and offer a number of 
strong metaphors that link the spatial and temporal domains. 
Thus, it seems a useful start point to look at the relationship 
between expression and control in a non-traditional instru-
ment that has the potential for developing a new set of meta-
phors that will allow control of a synthetic instrument in a 
natural yet relatively unconstrained fashion. The instrument 
we have chosen to experiment with is the MIT Media Lab 
Sensor Chair [1]. The Sensor Chair allows a seated player to 
move their hands within a free space approximately 600mm 
x 600mm x 300mm. The movement of the players hands is 
tracked and converted to a set of x,y,z coordinates. The chair 
has been used in a number of performance situations includ-
ing Penn and Teller and the Brain Opera[1].  
In general such instruments have involved direct map-
pings of control or productivity e.g. Matthew’s Radio Baton. 
This directness is both an advantage and a disadvantage. It is 
direct, thus typically movement in one axis might be pitch 
and in another dynamics. Because it is direct it is immedi-
ately accessible to the novice. However, directness is also 
linearity or rigidity and because the space is uncalibrated it 
is also relatively crude. Interaction is continuous rather than 
discrete and thus more difficult to control all the time.  
The approach we have taken is to bring together the 
need to overcome the relative imprecision of an uncalibrated 
space with the attraction of a more subtle or learnable inter-
face and the inherent transparency and content of gestures as 
a means of communicating between performers and of struc-
turing productivity. This is coupled to passing material from 
one instrument to another to allow one performer to trans-
form and alter material played by another. 
The gesture metaphor we have focussed upon in this 
first demonstration is the circle. This has the advantage of 
being simple to execute and yet offering a variety of possi-
bilities of scale, position, speed, distortion (various ellipses, 
with different declinations, etc.) and direction. Also, circles 
have powerful metaphorical, properties that include musical 
associations. The circle is a cycle and cycles of metre, 
rhythm, pitch or timbre are the vehicle of repetition, varia-
tion and development that is so important in making and 
listening to music.  
The system is implemented as a set of MAX patches 
that receive, classify and use gestures. In the current proto-
type the gestures are recognised using an ART self-
organising neural network classifier [1]. The circles are used 
to invoke and control processes that rework a musical seed 
provided by a keyboard. The chair itself has no inherent 
productivity, being simply a vehicle for adapting and chang-
ing the seed material provided by the keyboard. The gestures 
are used to control different parameters of the performance. 
Visual feedback is given for the gesture played. New seed 
material may be introduced as the performance progresses. 
As with the Kpelle gestures can also be used to change the 
musical context: to move from one section, tempo etc., to 
another. This affects the transformations that may occur. 
FUTURE WORK 
The future aims of this research are too allow a much 
greater degree of openness in the interactivity of instru-
ments. One of the most interesting possibilities is that this 
paradigm will allow a more deeply embedded interaction 
between instruments that will allow the locus of musical 
interaction to move away from that between the results of 
instrument productivity to one of interactivity that is mani-
fest in changes in the structure of an instrument. Tradition-
ally interaction is between musical elements, voices etc that 
are performed independently. A player plays and then modi-
fies what they play to fit with others. But an essential con-
straint is that between an instrument and its physical set-up. 
Violinists cannot play like saxophonists or pianists. The 
advent of instruments that have no concrete affordances 
allows a more interactive approach to the definition of an 
instrument. This idea also finds a resonance in the issues 
around how complex unstructured analytic control interfaces 
may be learned and used effectively. The idea that musicians 
will be able to surf a space of sonic relationships bound 
together by sets of gestures that form spatial analogies of the 
control processes they invoke is intuitively appealing. It also 
allows for the development of approaches that reflect the 
contextual and hierarchical nature of human motor action 
and activity in general that seems so strongly aligned to our 
linguistic and musical abilities.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Carpenter, G.A., Grossberg, S., Rosen, D.B. ART 
2-A: An Adaptive Resonance Algorithm for Rapid 
Category Learning. Neural Networks, 4, pp. 493-
504 (1991). 
[2] Paradiso, J., Electronic Music Interfaces, 
<http://www.media.mit.edu/~joep/SpectrumWeb/
SpectrumX.html>, expanded from ‘New ways to 
play electronic music interfaces’ IEEE Spectrum, 
December 1997 (1998) 
[3] Stone, R. Let the Inside Be Sweet: The Interpreta-
tion of Music Events Among the Kpelle of Liberia. 
Indiana University Press. Bloomington, Indiana 
(1982). 
 
 
 