Touch Screen Collaborative Music: Designing NIME for 
Older People with Dementia 
 
Stu Favilla 
Faculty of Art, Health Sciences & Design  
Swinburne University of Technology,  
Melbourne, Australia 
sfavilla@bigpond.com 
Sonja Pedell 
Faculty of Art, Health Science s & Design 
Swinburne University of Technology,  
Melbourne, Australia 
spedell@swin.edu.au   
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper presents new touch -screen collaborative music 
interaction for people with dementia. The authors argue that 
dementia technology has yet to focu s on collaborative multi -
user group musical interactions. The project aims to contribute 
to dementia care while addressing a significant gap in current 
literature. Two trials explore  contrasting musical scenarios: the 
performance of abstract electronic mus ic and the distributed 
performance of J.S. Bach’s Goldberg Variations . Findings 
presented in this paper  demonstrate that people with dementia 
can successfully perform and engage in collaborative music 
performance activities with little or no scaffolded ins truction. 
Further findings suggest that people with dementia can develop 
and retain musical performance skill s over time. This paper 
proposes a number of guidelines and design solutions . 
Keywords 
Touch-screen technology; Collaborative Interaction; 
Dementia 
1. DEMENTIA AND MUSIC 
Defined as a syndrome, dementia is a collective name for 
several degenerative brain disorders, which include Alzheimer’s 
disease (the most common form of dementia), de mentia of the 
Lewy Bodies , and Frontotemporal dementia [21]. Attribut ed to 
injury or disease, d ementia can affect people at any age and is 
progressive and eventually fatal. It affects  memory, co gnition, 
behaviour and emotion. Alzheimer’s International reports global 
dementia numbers to increase fourfold in the vicinity of 135 
million by 2050 (Alzheimer’s International, 2013).  
 Within dementia care, m usic therapy is used to control mood, 
problem behaviours and even reduce the need for some 
pharmacological and physical treatments  [15]. Music therapy’s 
aim to “promote communic ation, relationships, learning, 
mobilisation expression, organisation and other therapeutic 
needs” provide s meaningful engagement for people with 
dementia continuing right to the final stages of the disease  [21]. 
Both receptive (music listening) and active types of music 
therapy (where participants are actively involved playing 
instruments) are tailored to suit the individual’s particular needs 
(ibid). Music therapy sessions are often carried out in groups 
embracing improvisation and supporting reminiscence activities. 
Growing evidence (although mostly anecdotal) is revealing  
musical memory’s robustness, oftentimes spared right into the 
later stages of the disease [6].  
1.1 Touch Screens and Dementia 
Touch screen and tablet technologies are playing a valuable role 
in de mentia care. Studies such as [20], [21 ] demonstrate how 
touch screen tablets, such as the iPad, can be effective in both 
the care facility and home environments . Touch screen 
technologies have been used to support reminiscence, aid recall, 
increase interpe rsonal interactions, promote intergenerational 
relationships, improve staff and resident relationships and 
enhance quality of life. Easier to use than a computer and more 
portable, the use of touch screen technology “encourages 
increased interpersonal interaction and a  positive social 
environment.” [20, pp.27] 
 At present there are few published studies investigating music 
interaction with dementia users [16][18][14]. Although ambient 
music iPad  apps such as Trope & Bloom [6] are often installed 
onto dement ia care iPads , there have been no published studies 
investigating their use. Collaborative and multi -user music 
interaction, a special focus within the NIME community, has yet 
to be trialled and documented for older people with dementia .  
 Upton et al ., [20] suggest that touch screen tablets require a 
scaffolded (one -to-one mentoring) interaction approach in 
dementia care . Although this may demonstrate itself over time 
to be the most appropriate model for dementia user interaction, 
a one-carer-to-one-dementia user model is neither practical , nor 
possible to provide in most care facilities.  Situated groups of 
people with dementia, around tables or in sitting areas are 
common. In this scenario, c ollaborative and multi -user music 
activities could be valuable, where a single care giver can 
mentor/scaffold an ensemble of people with dementia.  
 Touch screen tablet computers have been used to  create 
powerful and expressive controllers for digital music. Jazz 
Mutant’s LEMUR controller has demonstrated the power of 
multi-modal and multi -touch control.  Contemporary iPad Apps 
including Midi-touch and TouchOSC [7] are well suited to 
developing collaborative [1], multi-user [9] performance 
systems whereby a number of performers iPads each transmit to 
a single host compute r. The host computer interprets the control 
gestures and produces the resulting sound, which is amplified 
for the musicians (and audience).  
 The gathering of controllers to a single host computer creates 
opportunities where many players can actively contribute to the 
formation of just one sound, create a texture or part in the 
musical fabric, or participate in complex interactions. 
Additionally the computer can provide  agency in the creative 
process where algorithms compose  melody, harmonization, 
audio-mixing or engage  random and generative processes. The 
success of a system depends on the balance of complexity and 
expressivity [1] and on how well the player is engaged and 
encouraged [8].  
2. RESEARCH STUDY 
We set ourselves the task of designing a NIME  project  to 
collaboratively engage a group of older adults with dementia 
using a range of music touch screen applications. 12-14 
participants were recruited from an activity group of elderly 
people with dementia (and their carers) organised by Wyndham 
City Council  as part of their ageing -well program. The cou ncil 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on 
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME’14, June 30-July 4, 2014, Goldsmiths, London, UKCopyright remains 
with the author(s). 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
35
had purchased 12 iP ads wit h the objective to engage older 
people with dementia in technology use . The management 
realised that the older people  had no  iPad experience, and that 
the centre had no suitable applications to engage this group over 
an extended period . Our initial aims were to explore the 
potential of iPads and music while focusing on the needs and 
capabilities amongst those in our group of participants. We 
wanted to discover the potential and limits of such an activity 
and co -design (with the dementia participants) controllers and 
music interactions that were enjoyable and engaging.  
 The group met at a community centre facility during their 
routine Friday morning activity session. The 12 iPads wer e 
managed via a sync/recharge station and a central computer and 
another laptop was used to develop music interaction software 
using Max5 object orientated programming language. 
Interactions and performances were recorded for study 
comparisons. 
 The study involved four stages:  
1. Preliminary observation of p articipant interactions 
with existing music apps 
2. Collaborative design of a music controller  
a. Abstract electronic sound 
b. Distributed performance of Bach  
3. Interaction studies identifying skill development  
 For stages 2 and 3, a separate laptop computer was used to 
host music sound and interaction software. Portable personal 
speaker system s were connected to this computer for the 
participants to monitor their performance .  
 Data was collected in various forms, in itially through 
journaling observations and voluntary interviews, and then by 
recording iPad gestural control data and video. IPad controller 
software was designed in TouchOSC and set to transmit to a 
single host laptop computer. The host computer software  was 
composed in Max5 alongside data recording and analysis 
software engines.  
2.1 Data collection: Observations 
The first visits to the centre were spent getting to know the 
group of participants. This was an essential and important step 
in our research process and it took a number of weeks to 
establish trust and a good rapport. Activities undertaken during 
this phase of the research included playing games on the iPads 
together, exploring existing commercial music apps and  singing 
around a piano (played by one  of the researchers). 
 The exploration of commercial music apps proved very 
enlightening. These music apps consisted of the Tiny Piano  
(http://www.tinypiano.com/ ) and Rhythm Pad  apps 
(http://rhythmpad.com/). Neither of these applications kept any 
of the pa rticipants engaged for very long ( approx. 5 minutes). 
Through observations we concluded the main reasons for this 
were: 
1. Screen controls and objects were way too small (both 
to see and locate with the fingertip)   
2. iPad speaker sound was  too quiet 
3. The sounds  demonstrated a blunted expression (i.e. 
same attack and dynamic)  
4. Interaction was limited to one -shot triggering of 
sounds  
In addition, p articipants commented on the toy -like quality of 
these apps. Riley, Alm, & Newell [14] discuss the importance of 
engaging older people with dementia without patronising them. 
Most of the participants also struggled to operate the apps 
successfully. This poses an interesting design challenge.  
 
Further, close and careful observation revealed that many of t he 
group participants suffered from other age -related conditions 
including:  
 
1. Poor vision, due to macular degeneration and 
glaucoma (restricted fields of vision) 
2. Significant hearing loss 
3. Loss of touch and tactile sensitivity  (tactile agnosia) 
4. Motor tremors and mild spasms r estricting fine motor 
control (apraxia) 
5. Short and limited attention  span 
6. Cognitive impairment and mild aphasia 
 People with aphasia experience gaps in their recognition of 
speech, words, letters, symbols and numbers. As it is caused by 
degenerative disease  and or injury, one patient’s expression of 
aphasia is often unique [22]. 
 These age -related factors represent a considerable challenge 
for NIME designers. The multi -modality of touch screen 
interaction clearly offers  potential though. For example, we 
observed at the beginning of each session that most of the 
participants could not find (or remember ) how to physically 
switch their iPad s on. The power switch for the iPad is small 
and around the side of the tablet. O nce the tablets were on and 
displaying the log-in window  however , all participants would 
effectively accomplish the  “slide and unlock”  gesture to reach  
the tablet desktop screen. The swiping gesture was remembered 
from one session to the next, whereas the pushing of a small 
black plastic button was  not. 
 We also observed a number of participants who had difficulty 
making capacitive contact with the touch screen surface. As far 
as we can ascertain this is due to the  lack of  moisture of the 
surface skin  of their fingertips , the amount or distribution of 
pressure, (due to apraxia and /or tactile agnosia ) or a 
combination of both. 
3. INSTRUMENTS 
Our approach was to adopt a collaborative design process using 
TouchOSC and Max5. Given these design constraints we opted 
for a simple controller approac h and  plann ed to maximise the 
expressive capabiliti es of the interactions . We also decided to 
amplify the sounds using external speakers (or headphones). To 
test our idea of music expression and simple control 
mechanisms we decided to put the participants  in an unfa miliar 
musical setting, i.e. abstract electronic music.  
 Our first offering to the dementia group was an  abstract 
synthesis instrument consisting of nine touch buttons arranged 
in a grid and a 2D  (x/y)  touchpad controller situated left (see 
figure1). We coupled these controllers via OSC (via WiFi) to an 
unusual abstract synthesis sound engine in Max5  comprising a 
simple FM synthesis algorithm, modulation tones and ring 
modulator effects. This sound engine was located on a laptop, 
which in turn was coupled to an audio interface and four 
loudspeakers. The parameters of the Max patch  were mapped 
across the 2D touchpad to maximise a large range of sound 
transformation. Particular settings of the algorithm were saved 
as snapshots using the preset object and this allowed each of the 
nine buttons to play distinct sounds as departure points for 2D 
x/y control pad improvisation.  
 
 
Figure 1. iPad Controller 1, 2D Touchpad  and 9 Buttons 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
36
 The system produced a large array of abstract yet expressive 
sounds including tone s, whines, chortles, groans, roars, whistles 
and pops. First a sound is selected, using one of the nine 
buttons. Then by moving the x/y control pad, a large range of 
transformations and modifications could be made to the sound 
in real-time.  
 “Sound is very good— very interesting. I like this!”  says one of 
the participants who loved the controller. The participant played 
with the app for well over an hour and had never played a  
musical instrument nor heard of electronic music before. The 
care-staff were all very surprised to see his enjoyment and 
engagement in the activity.  
 
 
Figure .2 The Author & Participant Playing 
  Also other participants explored the controller in depth and 
played together  in a number of improvised jam sessions. The 
simple layout requ ired a min imum in scaffolding  and 
mentoring, which consisted of a minimal 20  second 
demonstration. The facilitation of a separate loudspeaker greatly 
aided the enjoyment of music making. “There are many 
different sounds and things you can do,”  commented one 
participant. A trace of x/y control pad movements over 5 
minutes (see fig 3. left) compared to the author’s (see fig ure 3. 
right) demonstrates a prolonged and methodical exploration.  
 We discovered right -handed players would sometimes 
accidently activate  the buttons with their palm or other fingers 
while playing the x/y pad. Other participants that had previously 
played music commented that the controller bore no 
resemblance to any musical instrument. A few participants 
refused to play saying that the sou nds (although interesting) 
were just noise or just too weird.  
 
 
Figure 3. Five Minute Trace of Jam session (participant’s 
interaction on the left and author’s on right side) 
3.1 Bach’s Goldberg Variations 
Responding to ongoing feedback, a number of controller 
iterations were trialled with the participants . The buttons were 
arranged to resemble a piano keyboard. The x/y control pad was 
re-located in the lower right and additional speaker panning 
controls were added (then later removed) . The controllers were  
also rendered in four different colours  for ensemble se ttings, 
green, orange, red and purple (see fig ure4 Controller Iterations). 
 
  
Figure 4. iPad Controller Iterations  
 During this trial  phase  the iPads ’ music activity shifted to a 
more conventional sti mulating musical setting, tha t of Bach. 
The interaction centred on controlling the expression of a  pre -
recorded keyboard performance of  Bach’s Goldberg Variations. 
This pre-recorded MIDI performance was data -stripped in real -
time. The x/y pad was mapped to  control the attack (loudness & 
brightness along the x-axis), while the duration of each note was 
mapped to the y-axis, (notes being shortest towards the bottom 
of the screen).  
 Two participants would play as a duo , each iPad controlling 
either the bass ( left-hand) or treble (right -hand) parts. Th e 
distribution of performance roles allow s participants to 
collaboratively re-interpret the performance. The MIDI file data 
was recorded by a concert pianist and contained a great deal of 
expressive information, i .e. ornamentation, touch and timing. 
The control mapping preserved the timing and ornamentation 
yet allowed for the control of dynamics, touch and note duration 
(extending from very short staccato through to broad legato 
playing). 
 The keyboard was used to  select different instrument sounds 
ranging from acoustic grand pianos, forte piano, harpsichord, 
guitar, harp etc. together with a range of modern electric pianos, 
Wurlitzers and clavichords. The sounds were equalised, blended 
and mixed with reverberation . Care was taken to present high 
quality realistic sounds each with its own distinct 
characteristics. 
 Care was also taken to reward the participant’s movements 
with rich and responsive sonic detail. The quality of the 
engagement was strongly evident during these trials with 
participants commenting on the beauty and the quality of the 
musical experience. There was little need for explanation, 
simple demonstration sufficed . After a period of exploration, the 
participants were encouraged to listen to each oth er’s playing 
and then respond. At this point the interaction would change, as 
each participant listened and adjusted to one another’s 
dynamics, touch and expression. Often players would adjust 
their note durations to be in opposite, accentuating their own 
parts in the mix (see figure 5).   
  
Figure 5. Two participant’s joystick traces over 30 seconds 
Other styles of piano music including Jazz and Ragtime were 
also trialled. However, the contrapuntal lines of the Bach 
examples were better suited to collaborative play where each 
participant could clearly identify their own part and how their 
actions related to changes in the sound and expression of the 
music. 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
37
4. INTERACTION STUDIES 
Collaborative performance became a focus for a range of 
investigative work exploring changes in interaction over time. 
Video, audio, MIDI, OSC data alongside careful observation 
and staff feedback were gathered for study and analysis. Of 
special interest were a smaller group of four people who 
participated throughout all of the data re cording sessions. Two 
of these participants in particular , had been disinterested during 
the previous iPad activities including games , Google searches 
and reminiscence activities.  
 These two p articipant’s touch -pad traces  demonstrated a 
change (refinement ) in interaction style across a six week trial 
period with the Bach interactive activity. This was also 
confirmed by music and video data. Certain features emerged 
such as shorter deliberate movements (changing note durations), 
leaving the 2D controller in a specific place for a period, bursts 
of focused ac tivity within a specific sector and long sideways 
sweeps changing musical dynamics.  
 These examples of actions (see examples in figure. 7 ) 
contrasted markedly with the ir initial style of play  (see 
examples figure. 6) . The initial style of play  typically  
maintained a slow steady speed, with minimal changes to 
direction and circuit tracing around th e perimeter of the 
touchpad. This develo pment of style over time signalled  a shift 
from exploratory to performatory action [10] or development of 
adroit action [4]. The emergence of  performative data features 
suggests that these two participants developed  and retained 
performance skill during the six week trial period.   
  
Figure 6. 1min exploratory actions (2users, week1) 
  
Figure 7. 30sec of performative actions (same users, week 6) 
  
 However, further studies with more participants are needed to 
confirm these findings. Nonetheless they are quite intriguing as 
they suggest that older people, with progressed dementia, are 
not only capable of performing and enjoying musical computer 
interaction, but also able to develop and retain performance skill 
over time.   
 
5. DESIGNING FOR DEMENTIA 
Our experience working with older people with dementia and 
iPads suggests that success is dependent  on the quality of the 
musical interaction. To assist other NIME researchers, 
composers and musicians wishing to design for older people 
with dementia we propose the following eight guidelines.  
5.1.1 Rich and stimulating exploration 
We f ound that a number of participants were happy to play 
bizarre abstract electronic sounds and Bach’s Goldberg 
variations. Unlike the commercial iPad apps that we also 
trialled, both the ele ctronic and Bach interactions provided a 
large variation of expressiveness with a simple layout affording 
exploration. 
5.1.2 Appropriate amplification  
The quality of play is dependent on the quality of auditory 
feedback. The participants loved their own speakers and loved 
to hear the sounds of other participants through their own 
respective speakers around the table.  
5.1.3 Responsive and expressive interaction  
We also found the participants tuned in quickly to the 
expressive attributes of the interaction. They delighted in the 
discovery of bizarre chortles and beating effects. They enjoyed 
the detail of the sounds and their capacity to change the music’s 
character. 
5.1.4 Provide participants with identifiable roles  
Successful collaborative play required clearly defined roles for 
each participant (such as playing the bass for example). They 
required separate fold-back speakers and benefited from being 
seated facing or side-by-side.  
5.1.5 Encourage participants to engage each other  
When participants listened to each other and played together the 
results were quite surprising. Some of the participants who were 
socially withdrawn clearly benefited from the inclusive and non-
competitive activity. 
5.1.6 Reward movement but allow for rest 
All the participants in our group needed to rest during their 
musical interactions either from tiredness, spasms, pain or oth er 
related injuries. It is essential to take this into account when 
designing music interfaces for older people. Force feedback, 
haptile pressure sensors and  auto centring controls are not 
appropriate for older people with dementia.  
5.1.7 Simple design but not p atronizing  
Older people with dementia respond to simple and easy to use 
control interfaces. However, the participants in our study group 
responded well to rich and complex musical situations. IPad 
apps such as Tiny Piano  and Rhythm Pad  were considered by 
many of them to be suited for children.  
5.1.8 Minimal scaffolding (short demonstration)  
The participants in our group were much more interested in 
doing rather than being shown how to do something . Touch 
screen music interaction has the potential to provide end less 
hours of enjoyment and interest and help introduce dementia 
users to technology in group settings (see figure 8). 
 
 
Figure 8. Group Setting  
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
38
6. CONCLUSIONS  
This paper present ed new iPad controllers and interactive music 
software for engaging older peop le with dementia. We have 
identified a number of key design challenges for  researchers 
concerning older people with dementia.  This paper also  
demonstrates dementia to be a relevant new area for NIME 
research.    
 Results from two trials establish ed that ol der people with 
dementia can successfully participate in collaborative music 
performance activities for extended periods (up to 90 minutes) 
with little or no scaffolded instruction. A six week trial suggests 
there is potential for older people with dementi a to acquire and 
retain performative action (skilled performance) in a 
collaborative music setting.  
 The project offers eight  design guides that can be adapted to a 
wide range of musical styles and scenarios. Our work  suggests 
that careful attention to so und, collaborative interaction and 
touch screen control are essential for success.   
7. NEXT STEPS 
The findings  of this study are currently limited by the size, 
scope and spread of dementia types and stages within the 
investigated group of participants . Although our group 
represents a typical cross-section of dementia stages and types, 
typical of day care centres, targeted studies with larger groups, 
could reveal  therapeutic effects attributable to touch screen 
music activity.  
 Touch screen music interaction  also has the potential for use 
in the home and through network interaction the power to 
connect socially isolated participants with their carers or be used 
to monitor participants’ engagement and activity levels 
remotely. Work also needs to be done to develop musical 
scenarios involving larger numbers of participants. Our next 
collaborative projects are for four participants, four 
loudspeakers and one musician (laptop).  
 
 
Figure 9. iPad Quartet  
8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
We would like to thank the City Council of Wyndham for this 
friendly and constructive research collaboration.  Technical 
details can be found at www.bentleather.com/dementia.html  
9. REFERENCES 
[1] Blaine, T., and Fels, S. Contexts of collaborative musical 
experiences. Proceedings of the 2003 conference on New 
interfaces for musical expression  (National University of 
Singapore Singapore, Singapore), (2003), 129-134. 
[2] Brodaty, H., and Cumming, A. Dementia services in 
Australia. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry 25, 
no. 9 (2010), 887-995. 
[3] Cahill, S., Macijauskiene, J.,  Nygård, A-M., Faulkner, J.-
P., and Hagen, I. Technology in dementia care. Technology 
and Disability (IOS Press) 19, 2, (2007), 55-60. 
[4] Cannon, J & Favilla, S., 2012 , The Investment of play: 
Expression and Affordances in Digital Musical  Instrument 
Design, In Proceedings of ICMC, Non -Cochlear Sound, 
Ljuljana, 459-466. 
[5] Chilvers, P., & Eno, B., 2009 -2011 Bloom & Trope, 
https://itunes.apple.com/au/app/trope/id312164495?mt=8    
[6] Cuddy, L., and Duffin, J. Music, memory, and Alzheimer’s 
disease: is music recognition spared in dementia, and how 
can it be assessed? Medical hypotheses (Elsevier) 64, 2 
(2005), 229-235. 
[7] Fischer, R. 2008-13, TouchOSC 
http://hexler.net/software/touchosc  
[8] Ingram, A. Critical Review: Does music therapy have a 
positive impact on language functioning in adults with 
dementia? Reviews Western University Canada 2012 , 
http://www.uwo.ca/fhs/csd/ebp/reviews/2011 -12/ 
[9] Jordà, S. Multi-user instruments: models, examples and 
promises. Proceedings of the 2005 conference on New 
interfaces for musical expression  (National University of 
Singapore Singapore, Singapore), (2005), 23-26. 
[10] Kilbourn, K, & Isaksson, J. “Meaning throu gh doing: The 
role of affordances over time.” Paper for the Sixth 
Nordcode Seminar & Workshop, Design Semiotics in Use , 
2007: 6-8.  
[11] Largillier, G., Joguet, P., & Olivier, J., 2004, LEMUR a 
modular multitouch controller 
http://www.jazzmutant.com/lemur_overview.php   
[12] Nepal, B., Ranmuthugala, G., Brown, L., and Budge, M. 
Modelling costs of dementia in Australia: evidence, gaps, 
and needs. Australian Health Review , Jan 2008. 
[13] Richards, P. 2010-13 MIDI Touch, Domestic Cat 
https://itunes.apple.com/au/app/midi -
touch/id398930935?mt=8   
[14] Riley, P., Alm, N., and Newell, A. An interactive tool to 
promote musical creativity in people with dementia. 
Computers in Human Behavior (Elsevier Ltd) 25, 3 (2009) , 
599-608. 
[15] Sherratt, K., Thornton, A., and Hatton, C. Music 
interventions for people with dementia: a review of the 
literature. Aging & Mental Health 8, 1 (2004), 3-12. 
[16] Topo, P. Technology Studie s to Meet the Needs of People 
With Dementia and Their Caregivers: A Literature Review. 
Journal of Applied Gerontology  28, 1 (2008), 5-37. 
[17] Thicket, 2013 Interval Studios https://itunes.apple.com/ 
us/app/thicket/id461778014?mt=8  
[18] Topo, P., et al. Assessment of a music -based multimedia 
program for people with dementia. Dementia 3, no. 3 
(2004), 331-350. 
[19] Ulyate, R., and Bianciardi, D. The interactive dance club: 
Avoiding chaos in a multi -participant environment. 
Computer Music Journal  26, 3 (2002), 40-49. 
[20] Upton, D., Upton, P., Jones, T.,  Jutlla, K., Brooker, D., 
and Grove, H. Evaluation of the impact of touch screen 
technology on people with dementia and their carers within 
care home settings. UK: University of Worcester , 2011. 
[21] Vink, A., Birks, J., Bruinsma, M., and Scholten,  R. Music 
therapy for people with dementia. Cochrane Database of 
Systematic Reviews (Wiley Online Library) 4 (2003).  
[22] Wan, C., Rüber T., Hohmann A., and Schlaug, G. The 
therapeutic effects of singing in neurological disorders. 
Music Perception, Jan 2010. 
[23] Waycott, J., Pedell, S., Vetere F. et al. Actively engaging 
older Adults in the development and e valuation of Tablet 
Technology. Proceedings of OZCHI '12 , Melbourne, 
Australia: ACM, (2012) 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
39