Snyderphonics Manta Controller, a Novel USB Touch-
Controller 
 
 
Jeff Snyder 
Princeton University 
310 Woolworth Center 
Princeton, NJ 08544 
jeff@scattershot.org
  
 
 
ABSTRACT 
The Snyderphonics Manta controller is a USB touch controlle r 
for music and video. It features 48 capacitive touch sensors, 
arranged in a hexagonal grid, with bi-color LEDs that are 
programmable from the computer. The sensors send continuous 
data proportional to surface area touched, and a velocity-
detection algorithm has been implemented to estimate attack 
velocity based on this touch data.  In addition to these 
hexagonal sensors, the Manta has two high-dimension touch 
sliders (giving 12-bit values), and four assignable function 
buttons. In this paper, I outline the features of the controller, the 
available methods for communicating between the device and a 
computer, and some current uses for the controller. 
 
Keywords 
Snyderphonics, Manta, controller, USB , capacitive, touch, 
sensor, decoupled LED, hexagon, grid , touch slider , HID, 
portable, wood, live music, live video 
1. INTRODUCTION 
In early 2008, I invented the Manta to solve my own 
performance dilemmas, and to give myself a more expressive 
interface with my computer audio software. I soon found, 
however, that other composers and performers were interested 
in the capabilities of the device, so I redesigned the instrument 
to be possible to manufacture in small quantities and released it 
as a commercial product in May 2009 . There are, as of my 
current writing, around 130 Manta users worldwide, and many 
of them use the controller for purposes I never originally 
imagined or intended. 
2. DESIGN FEATURES 
2.1 Sensor Layout 
The most salient feature of the Manta is the hexagonal sensor 
lattice. There are six rows of eight sensors each, totaling 48 
hexagonal sensors. Each sensor is capable of sending 
information about how much surface area is covered by the 
performer’s finger, independent of the other sensors. If you use 
the sensors as each triggering separate “notes”, then this can be 
seen as an implementation of polyphonic aftertouch. The data 
sent by each sensor is slightly less than 8 bits, since digital 
conversion is performed at 8-bit resolution , which is reduced by 
a built-in headroom1. In addition to the hexagonal sensors, there 
are two touch sliders that send centroid data at 12-bit 
resolution, and four assignable function buttons, which are the 
same technology as the hexagons but are visually distinct from 
them on the layout t o simplify their use as user-defined special-
purpose buttons. The sensor layout is fixed, but the data the 
sensors send is general and could be used for any purpose the 
user wishes. One could argue a significant disadvantage to a 
fixed sensor layout in an age when the interface trend is toward 
infinitely flexible touch-screen interfaces, but there are also 
several advantages to a fixed sensor layout in a musical 
instrument. For one, an unchanging physical distance between 
the sensors encourages the development of muscle memory on 
the instrument. Also, it allows for the use of subtle tactile 
feedback, which would be harder to implement on an interface 
like a touchscreen.  
 
Figure 1: The Snyderphonics Manta controller 
2.2 The Hexagonal Lattice 
The main inspiration for the use of the hexagonal lattice pattern 
was an interest in the theoretical work of Ervin Wilson, whose 
microtonal keyboard designs are in turn inspired by the 
regularized keyboard designs of the 19 th century, like those of 
Paul von Jankó or Robert Bosanquet[1][3] , However, the 
limited number of available “keys” on the Manta, when 
compared to a design such as Bosanquet’s, reduces the 
possibilities for redundant unison notes in a pitch layout, 
removing some of the advantages of Bosanquet’s layout, such 
as unbroken identical scale “shapes” regardless of key center. 
Similar developments that focus on button instruments like the 
                                                                    
1 This headroom is necessary to compensate for sensor drift 
(due to temperature and EM noise) , which is monitored and 
compensated for by the firmware. 
 
Permission to make digital or ha rd copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy  
otherwise, to  republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.  
NIME’11, 30 May–1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway. 
Copyright remains with the author(s).  
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
413
accordion have adapted the Jankó/Bosanquet idea, but adapted 
it to be more useful with a limited number of buttons , by 
removing the vertical unisons and replacing them with octaves. 
For instance, the Wicki-Hayden system2 implements this 
change, while also rearranging the pitch assignments between 
rows to put fourths and fifths nearby, as opposed to the Jankó 
design, which places semitones in this position. Therefore, if 
one intends to use the Manta as a keyboard interface with 
pitches assigned to the hexagons, accordion layouts are more 
appropriate to the limited number of sensors on a Manta, and 
the 48-sensor arrangement allows for a simple implementation 
of the layout shown in Wicki’s patent 3, with the omission of 
three repeated pitches 4. Nevertheless, any Wicki-Hayden 
keyboard cannot achieve the advantage of truly transposable 
scale shapes, avoiding so called edge-effects, without at least 
100 sensors5, so one of the primary advantages of regularized 
keyboards is compromised for the sake of size and portability. 
Since my intentions for the instrument were not necessarily to 
always use the sensors as “keys” assigned to particular pitches, 
this compromise was a design choice and involved a tradeoff 
between sensor size, cost of sensing components, and overall 
device footprint.   
 Considered as a more general concept, the hexagonal grid 
affords the user three degrees of close relationships between 
directly adjacent sensors, which are, in the case of the Manta, 
horizontal and the two diagonals. These adjacencies can be 
inspiring for avoiding more standard rectangular grid control 
mappings. There are, of course, several similar applications of 
the hexagonal lattice to music controllers, such as those 
designed by C-Thru Music 6, Thumtronics 7, Starr Labs 8, Cortex 
Design9, and Opal 10, and all of these are building upon either 
the Jankó layout or some variant of the Euler/Reimann 
Tonnetz11. However, to my knowledge, the Manta is the only 
commercial touch controller that combines this type of layout 
with the benefits of capacitive touch sensing. 
2.3 LED feedback 
Each hexagon and function button can be backlit in either red 
or amber, and this functionality can be computer-controlled. By 
default, the amber LED behind a sensor turns on when the 
sensor is touched, but this direct coupling can be deactivated 
with a command from the computer, after which the LEDs are 
completely under computer control. This functionality opens up 
several possibilities for more complex or context-specific visual 
feedback, and its primary inspiration was the Monome 
controller, designed by Brian Crabtree and Kelli Cain 12. 
                                                                    
2 The Wicki-Hayden system is so named because it was 
originally discovered by Kaspar Wicki and patented in 1896, 
and later independently discovered by Brian Hayden and 
patented in 1986 
 
3 Swiss patent Nr. 13329 
4 The Wicki patent diagram is for a 51-note bandoneon. 
5 This limitation is discussed in a paper on the Wicki-Hayden 
keyboard by Robert Gaskins at 
http://www.concertina.com/gaskins/wicki/index.htm 
6 http://www.c-thru-music.com/ 
7 http://www.thummer.com/ 
8 http://www.starrlabs.com/ 
9 http://www.cortex-design.com/projects_terp1.htm 
10 http://www.theshapeofmusic.com/ 
11 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tonnetz 
12 http://monome.org/ 
2.4 Capacitive Touch Sensing 
Capacitive touch sensing is the basic sensing apparatus for the 
Manta. I was particularly inspired by the 100-series touch 
controllers designed by Donald Buchla 13, which I had the 
opportunity to use while studying for my doctorate at the 
Columbia University Computer Music Center. While these 
touch controllers were not polyphonic in the same way the 
Manta is, I found the control they afforded to the user to be 
very satisfying, and I decided that a surface-area-based 
capacitive sensing design would give me the expressive 
capabilities I wanted as a performer. Capacitive sensing in 
electronic musical instruments goes back at least to the 
Theremin, and has been used in musical instruments throughout 
the 20th Century. Examples of effective musical instruments 
using this technology include the Trautonium by Friedrich 
Trautwein, the left-hand controls of the Electronic Sackbut by 
Hugh Le Caine, the Multiply-Touch-Sensitive keyboard by Bob 
Moog and Thomas Rhea, the Wasp by EDP, the Synthi-AKS 
by EMS, and the Sal-Mar Construction by Sal Martirano, and 
the EVI and EWI by Nyle Steiner. 14 The technology has seen a 
recent resurgence in other markets due to the current trend of 
capacitive touch screens and buttons implemented by portable 
devices like the iPod and iPhone15. I find it to be a very useful 
sensing method for musical purposes, although I think the 
typical approach for modern devices of placing a glass or 
plastic sheet above the sensors reduces the tactile feedback to 
the point where the usability of the approach is significantly 
diminished. I designed the Manta to give the users direct 
contact with the metal traces of the sensors, which are etched 
onto a circuitboard laminate so that there is some amount of 
tactile feedback. This also makes sliding, glissando gestures 
more satisfying to the user, since the friction of the surface is 
less than that of glass or most plastics, such as that used on the 
iPad.  
2.5 Velocity Detection 
Early in the development of the Manta, I found that while the 
continuous sensor data the Manta outputs was very inspiring 
and suggested many expressive uses, I was also often interested 
in getting standard note-on and note-off data, with velocity. 
This is the information usually conveyed in the keyboard 
controller paradigm.  On a standard electronic music keyboard, 
when you press a key, the keyboard reports which key you 
pressed, and how fast that key went down.  This value is called 
velocity, and is usually mapped to amplitude of the resulting 
sound. When you release the key, the information about which 
key was released is sent. Note-on and note-off are trivial to 
implement in a capacitive touch-sensing system by simply 
determining a threshold of capacitance measurement and 
reporting when that threshold is crossed, possibly with some 
hysteresis and de-bouncing. However, “velocity” data is much 
harder to determine on an interface with no moving parts. It is 
impossible to measure the time it takes for a key to go down if 
the key doesn’t move.  
 After much experimentation and collaboration with Angie 
Hugeback, a statistician and postdoctoral researcher at the 
University of Washington, I found a technique that produces a 
reasonably reliable velocity data based on information gathered 
from two successive samples above the “on” threshold. The 
technique involved training on example data, and using 
machine learning to generate an algorithm that could be applied 
                                                                    
13 http://www.buchla.com/ 
14 A good overview of many of these instruments is available at 
http://web.media.mit.edu/~joep/SpectrumWeb/SpectrumX.ht
ml 
15 http://www.apple.com/ 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
414
to the continuous data stream. Because the Manta was designed 
to be a commercial product, and cost is therefore a factor, the 
design I chose limits me to a minimum scan rate of around 6-
8ms for each sensor.16 This means that by the time two 
successive samples above the threshold have been collected, the 
elapsed time is just past the threshold of human latency 
perception. This meant that two samples is all I can use without 
the velocity algorithm feeling too slow, and the 6-8ms scan rate 
also guarantees that most of the sensor information happening 
within the very fast action of the initial key touch has been lost. 
Nevertheless, we were able to produce a surprisingly successful 
algorithm, which we implement in the host computer software 
rather than the Manta hardware to avoid the additional 
computation time it would add to the MCU loop. The addition 
of this velocity-detection algorithm allows the host computer to 
output both traditional note-on/note-off with velocity and the 
more unusual polyphonic continuous data simultaneously; the 
user can choose which data to use and which data to ignore, or 
combine the two data streams for a note-on with polyphonic 
aftertouch effect. 
3. MANTA COMMUNICATION 
There are currently three ways to communicate with the Manta 
on a computer – the Manta Max object, MantaCocoa, and 
libManta. I am in the process of developing the MantaMate, a 
dedicated hardware device that will communicate with the 
Manta without the use of a multimedia computer. 
3.1 The Manta Max Object 
The Manta is a USB controller, with a built in mini- B female 
connector. Since it is mostly HID class compliant, the built-in 
HID drivers on the Windows and Mac OS X operating systems 
correctly identify it 17. However, because it is a vendor-specific 
HID device, another layer of software is needed to present the 
data to other programs that may want to use it, such as 
Max/MSP or Abelton Live. There are currently three ways to 
access the data from the Manta, and to send data to the Manta. 
The first way is via the [manta] Max/MSP object development 
by Brad Garton and myself. The [hi] object was not usable for 
this purpose since it does not include the ability to send output 
reports (which are needed to control the LEDs), so we 
developed a custom object, written in C, that pulls the data 
from the HID driver and presents it to Max/MSP, and also 
allows for Max/MSP users to send data to the Manta. 
Additionally, it makes it possible to route the data from the 
Manta to other applications using the Max/MSP free runtime 
                                                                    
16 I wanted to avoid any solution that uses the audio interface 
for the computer to handle the data stream from the device, 
and I also wanted to avoid bogging down the host computer 
with 54 dimensions of fast data (the 48 hexagons, the 4 
function buttons, and the 2 sliders). This rules out approaches 
like those implemented in David Wessell’s 2-D touch design 
[5], or Madrona Labs device [2]. However, I believe in the 
final design by Madrona Labs, they have integrated the DSP 
into the hardware. When designing the Manta, I chose not to 
use a dedicated DSP chip, so my scan possibilities are more 
limited. The 6-8ms latency includes processor overhead and 
USB transfer rate. 
17 When programming the original Manta firmware, I used a 
16-byte USB output report. This is actually outside the HID 
spec (4-byte maximum is specified), but I didn’t notice the 
problem because both Mac OS X and Windows ignored the 
issue. Further testing shows that Linux complains, but the 
issue is easily sidestepped by using libUSB instead of libHID, 
accessing the raw USB reports. Spencer Russell implemented 
this workaround. 
environment and a patch that sends the Manta data over MIDI 
or OSC. The Manta Max object is available from the 
Snyderphonics website18. Damon Holzborn has added to this 
work by creating a Max For Live patch that utilizes the [manta] 
object and easily interfaces the Manta with Abelton Live.  
3.2 MantaCocoa, The Manta OSC router 
Jan Trützschler von Falkenstein has written a standalone 
program in Cocoa for Mac OS X that presents the data from the 
Manta as OSC messages, and receives OSC messages to 
control the LEDs and various operation modes of the Manta. 
This program makes the use of the Manta easier for Mac users 
who don’t wish to use Max/MSP. MantaCocoa is especially 
popular among SuperCollider users who perform with the 
Manta. MantaCocoa is available from Jan Trützschler’s 
website19. 
3.3 libManta 
Spencer Russell has released a beta version of libManta, a C++ 
library to present a simple, consistent, cross-platform API to 
those programming applications for the Manta. It is based on 
libUSB, and takes care of the asynchronous polling of the USB 
driver and the formatting of the bit packets that the Manta 
understands.  
 libManta is available at http://gitorious.org/libmanta and is 
released under the GNU Public License. Spencer has also been 
working on a Flext object for the manta, which works on PD as 
well as Max/MSP, and includes Linux support, as well as an 
open-source cross-platform OSC router for the Manta. 
Christopher Jacoby has recently joined the development team 
and is nearing a beta release of a standalone Manta MIDI router 
for Mac and Windows built on the libManta library. 
3.4 The MantaMate 
I am currently working on the hardware for a new device that 
will allow the Manta to more easily interface with voltage-
controlled analog synthesizers. It is basically an embedded 
USB host, with four 16-bit DACs, and eight 12-bit DACs. I call 
the device the MantaMate, and it is currently in the prototyping 
stages. It is conceived with the goals of enabling 4-note 
polyphony for a wide range of voltage controlled synthesizers, 
communicate with the Manta without the use of a computer, 
have sufficient accuracy and resolution for the implementation 
of unusual tuning systems on analog synthesizers, and support 
both OSC over Ethernet and MIDI.  
 I intend to release the MantaMate as a commercial product 
once the prototype has been fully developed and tested. I 
conceive of the MantaMate as not just an interface for the 
Manta, but also as a general-purpose format converter for 
musical communication – allowing the conversion between 
OSC, USB-HID, USB-MIDI, MIDI, and CV standards. It is 
not, however, an embedded computer, as it is not designed to 
be able to run an operating system 20. 
4. USES FOR THE MANTA 
Manta users have found several ways to put the capabilities of 
the controller to use. I’ll outline a few of them here. 
4.1 Microtonal Keyboard  
In my own music, I have primarily used the Manta as a 
microtonal keyboard. I have developed what I consider the 
                                                                    
18 http://www.snyderphonics.com 
19 http://falkenst.com/ 
20 It is based on at Atmel AVR32 series of MCUs, not an ARM 
architecture. Therefore, it’s not possible to, for instance, run 
PD patches or Chuck programs on it. 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
415
“concert version” of the instrument, which consists of two 
Mantas side-by-side on top of a custom-built wooden resonator. 
My standard software patch considers each hexagonal sensor a 
separate note, and maps the continuous data from that sensor as 
the amplitude of that note. This allows the performer to fade in 
each note of a chord independently, and control the relative 
volumes of the pitches with careful precision. It also allows for 
a very expressive tremolo effect. Putting the two Mantas side-
by-side achieves a 96-note playing surface, without sacrificing 
the portability much, since they stack up to around 0.7” thick 
and roughly the length and width of a 15-inch laptop during 
transport.  The wooden resonator has an electromagnet attached 
to a spruce “top”, which is driven by an amplified signal from a 
computer running a Max/MSP patch. This gives the “concert 
Manta” a characteristic sound by acoustically filtering its 
digitally synthesized voice. Usually, I write music to be played 
on the Manta by other people, combined with an ensemble of 
other instruments I have designed. I see it as the keyboard 
family in my invented orchestra. The hexagonal lattice helps to 
avoid the equal-tempered expectations performers have about 
standard piano keyboards. I describe the microtonal system I 
use on the Manta in detail in my doctoral dissertation , 
Exploration of an Adaptable Just Intonation System[4]. 
 Other users, such as composer Stephen James Taylor 21, also 
find the Manta appropriate for this purpose. It’s also, of course 
usable as a controller for standard 12-tone equal temperament, 
in which case the unusual keypad layout can serve to avoid 
stereotyped keyboard habits.  
4.2 Interface for Live Processing 
Sam Pluta 22, an NYC-based composer and electronics 
performer, was an early adopter of the Manta, and was 
extremely helpful in early beta development of the hardware. 
He performs live, improvised electronic music on the Manta. 
He wrote his own custom software in SuperCollider, which 
allows him to record, manipulate, and process audio coming 
into his computer f rom a microphone. He usually performs in 
combination with acoustic players, such as the trumpet player 
Peter Evans, grabbing, stretching, distorting, and otherwise 
transforming their performances into strange and otherworldly 
textures23. He often treats each sensor as a control for a 
particular function, sometime using the continuous data, 
sometimes the velocity data, and sometimes just the simple 
on/off data. He finds the continuous values from the sensors to 
be extremely useful to, in his words, “really get your fingers on 
the data in your computer” 24. As a gigging musician in NYC, 
where one generally needs to get to a gig via subway, he finds 
the compactness and portability of the manta to be especially 
suited to his needs. 
 Other users have also applied the Manta to a similar live-
processing purpose, including Christopher Jon, the keyboardist 
and synthesist for the band Android Lust25, who uses the Manta 
live to process the voice of the lead singer. He uses the 
centroid-detection mode built into the [manta] Max/MSP 
object26 to control DSP effects applied to the singer’s 
microphone input by sliding his hand around the hexagon grid.  
                                                                    
21 http://www.stephenjamestaylor.com/ 
22 http://www.sampluta.com/ 
23 You can hear some of these improvisations on the 2011 
recording “Sum and Difference”, from Carrier Records. 
http://carrierrecords.com/ 
24 From personal correspondence with Sam Pluta 
25 http://www.androidlust.com/ 
26 The centroid detection mode was developed by R. Luke 
Dubois, and finds a centroid when a large area of the 
hexagonal grid is covered by the hand, such as when the user 
 
4.3 Unusual Uses for the Manta 
I have a band with the composer Victor Adan 27, in which we 
each use a Manta to control old pen-plotters we have bought on 
E-bay. The band is called the Draftmasters 28, and we perform 
music by sending commands to the plotters and amplifying the 
motors that move the pen with electromagnetic pickups. Each 
piece by the Draftmasters uses the hexagonal layout differently 
– in some cases many of the sensors are X/Y coordinates for 
the pen to move to, in others they send different pen speed 
commands to change the frequencies the motors generate. We 
collect the Manta data in Pd, send it to a python script, and then 
output it to the plotters as serial commands in HPGL. 
  Dan Iglesia29, a composer and video artist living and working 
in NYC, uses the Manta to control live 3D video, generated 
with OpenGL in realtime. He wrote the custom software he 
uses in Jitter and simultaneously controls the audio and the 
video from the Manta controller live. 
5. Future Development 
In the future, I hope to finish the MantaMate hardware to make 
interaction with both newer and older analog synthesizers more 
simple, as well as the control of MIDI hardware and networked 
devices. Also, I believe that Spencer Russell’s libManta, when 
fully released, will make development of host computer 
software for the Manta much easier. I consider the Manta 
hardware itself to be stable and unlikely to undergo significant 
changes, or at least I aim to make any future changes 
backward-compatible. Further development is mostly focused 
on creating software that makes the Manta easier to use and 
more robust for software applications.  
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
My thanks to Brad Garton, Sam Pluta, Jan Trützschler von 
Falkenstein, Spencer Russell, Angie Hugeback , Christopher 
Jacoby, and Damon Holzborn. 
7. REFERENCES 
[1] Bosanquet, R.H. An Elementary Treatise on Musical 
Intervals and Temperament . Diapason Press, London, 
1876. 
[2] Jones, R., Driessen, P., Schloss, A., Tzanetakis, G., A 
Force-Sensitive Surface for Intimate Control. In 
Proceedings of New Interfaces for Musical Expression  
(NIME). 2009. 
[3] Keislar, D. History and Principles of Microtonal 
Keyboards. Computer Music Journal  11, 1 (Spring 1987), 
18-28. 
[4] Snyder, J. Exploration of an Adaptable Just Intonation 
System. D.M.A. Thesis, Columbia University, New York 
City, NY, 2011. 
[5] Wessel, D., Avizienis, R., Freed, A. and Wright, M., A 
Force Sensitive Multi-touch Array Supporting Multiple 2-
D Musical Control Structures. Proceedings of New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression  (NIME), 2007, 41-45. 
                                                                                                            
applies two or three fingers in close proximity. The discrete 
layout of the sensors makes this sensing method much less 
accurate than a similar function on a touch-screen, but it is 
still musically useable as a low-resolution x-y controller. 
27 http://www.victoradan.net/ 
28 http://vimeo.com/4611451 
29 http://music.columbia.edu/~daniglesia/ 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
416