FingerSynth: Wearable Transducers for Exploring the
Environment with Sound
Gershon Dublon
MIT Media Lab
75 Amherst St
Cambridge, MA 02142
gershon@media.mit.edu 2nd. author
Joseph Paradiso
MIT Media Lab
75 Amherst St
Cambridge, MA 02142
joep@media.mit.edu
ABSTRACT
We present the FingerSynth, a wearable musical instrument
made up of a bracelet and set of rings that enables its player
to produce sound by touching nearly any surface in their
environment. Each ring contains a small, independently
controlled exciter transducer commonly used for auditory
bone conduction. The rings sound loudly when they touch
a hard object, and are practically silent otherwise. When
a wearer touches their own (or someone else’s) head, the
contacted person hears the sound through bone conduction,
inaudible to others. The bracelet contains a microcontroller,
a set of FET transistors, an accelerometer, and a battery.
The microcontroller generates a separate audio signal for
each ring, switched through the FETs, and can take user
input through the accelerometer in the form of taps, ﬂicks,
and other gestures. The player controls the envelope and
timbre of the sound by varying the physical pressure and the
angle of their ﬁnger on the surface, or by touching diﬀerently
resonant surfaces. Because its sound is shaped by direct,
physical contact with objects and people, the FingerSynth
encourages players to experiment with the materials around
them and with one another, making music with everything
they touch.
Keywords
wearable, transducer, synth, glove
1. INTRODUCTION
Despite their widespread use in art and increasing use in
consumer products, exciter transducers continue to fasci-
nate people by seemingly magically producing sound in ob-
jects, and through bone conduction, inside our heads. In
recent years, a new class of small, eﬃcient transducers have
been used in a variety of products to produce auditory and
haptic feedback. In this paper we present the FingerSynth,
a new musical instrument that leverages these technological
developments and the magical powers of vibratory trans-
duction to let its wearer play music on anything and any-
one. The FingerSynth consists of a bracelet and a set of
ﬁve independently driven transducer rings that make sound
when they touch a hard surface. The bracelet generates
audio signals and contains the battery and charging cir-
cuitry, as well as an accelerometer to enable gesture-based
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’14,June 30 – July 03, 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Figure 1: The FingerSynth enables its wearer to
play music anywhere while exploring the resonant
qualites of objects around them.
user interaction and mode switching. Each ring is tuned
to a diﬀerent note in a given scale, allowing the wearer to
play simple melodies and harmonies by touching diﬀerent
objects in their environment. When not in contact with an
object, the instrument is silent. If the player touches their
own (or another person’s) head, the sound is audible only to
the contacted person, through bone conduction. The player
controls the envelope and timbre of the sound by varying
the physical pressure and the angle of their ﬁnger on the
surface, or by touching diﬀerent objects and materials. Be-
cause its sound is shaped by direct contact with objects and
people, the FingerSynth encourages players to experiment
with the materials around them and with one another.
1.1 Background
The idea of vibratory excitation and bone conduction in
art goes back several decades; Laurie Anderson’s ground-
breaking 1978 installationThe Handphone Table invited
pairs of participants to sit opposite each other, elbows on a
specially-equipped table and heads in their hands, and hear
sound conducted through the table to their arms and inner
ears [1]. Artist Wendy Jacob uses transducers at both in-
frasonic and audible ranges in her work with deaf students
and collaborators, blurring the line between audition and
tactile vibration [5].
Several individuals and companies have made instruments
that use trigger sensors on the ﬁngertips and produced sam-
pled sound through a single speaker in the wristband; among
these are two products: ThinkGeek’s ﬁnger piano toy and
the Piano Gloves from Brando [2]. While similar in form fac-
tor, these examples lack the connection to the environment
that the FingerSynth brings through its directly physical
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
134
wave shaping and audio-tactility. While not an instrument,
the PianoTouch from Huang et al. [4] uses vibration motors
on each ﬁnger and audible sound to accelerate piano learn-
ing; the motors indicate which ﬁngers the wearer would use
to play the sound they are hearing. Though we have not ex-
plored this possibility, we believe the vibrating transducers
in the FingerSynth could be used in this capacity as well,
while also allowing users to play back the patterns they have
learned.
2. THE FINGERSYNTH
The FingerSynth hardware consists of ﬁve cotton ﬁnger hats
wired to a wrist-worn device, with the transducers held in
small pockets on each ring. Balancing size, form factor and
desired loudness, we chose the Dayton Audio BCT-1 bone
conducting transducers. We found the hard attachment in-
terface of the BCT-1 to be ideal for the application, where
the transducer is not well coupled to the surface and the
object is hard but not necessarily resonant; most alterna-
tives use ﬂexible adhesive rings to attach to the surface,
and are better suited to excite hollow objects or ﬂat pan-
els. A custom-designed enclosure contains the electronics,
consisting of an 8-bit microcontroller (ATmega328) running
at 20MHz, a set of switching FET transistors, an Ana-
log Devices ADXL345 accelerometer and a lithium polymer
battery with charging circuitry. The microcontroller pro-
duces waveforms that are fed to the transistors, which drive
the transducers. The system can output square waves and
saw tooth waves, the latter synthesized using wave tables.
Analog-like output is achieved using the microcontroller’s
built-in high-frequency PWM outputs and the inherent low-
pass ﬁltering of the transducers. Due to clock speed limita-
tions and the necessity for ﬁve simultaneous voices, the Fin-
gerSynth ﬁrmware outputs signals no higher than 1200Hz,
corresponding to note D6. Five-voice synthesis pushes the
8-bit microcontroller close to its limit, though some pro-
cessor cycles can be spared because there is no need for
envelopes or sequencing.
2.1 User Interaction and Play
Using simple hand gestures captured by the onboard ac-
celerometer, players can control the synthesizer as they play.
To save processor cycles for synthesis, we use the accelerom-
eter’s internal gesture recognition to interrupt the processor;
upon detection of a gesture, the processor reads the inter-
nal memory of the sensor to verify the gesture and extract
more features (direction, magnitude, etc). The system de-
tects single and double taps on the wrist to switch voices
and scales, respectively, while leftward and rightward ﬂicks
of the wrist decrement and increment the output notes by
predetermined intervals (5 notes in the given scale).
Envelopes and timbres for each voice are a direct result of
the physical pressure and the angle of each of the player’s
ﬁngers on the contacted surface. Because the ﬁltering is
mechanical, these parameters are extremely sensitive and
responsive to the player’s actions. The broadband energy
in the sharp edges of the square and sawtooth voices also
provides substantial dynamic range for expressive control.
Tremolo eﬀects can be achieved by subtly vibrating the ﬁn-
ger. The timbre of the sound is also a function of the ma-
terial qualities of the object producing it: hollow objects
(boxes, musical instruments) produce a louder and fuller
sound; metal objects tend to ring; glass windows carry the
sound further; cups project the sound. The unique response
of each object makes the FingerSynth fun to try in diﬀerent
environments and with others.
The player’s own body serves as another exciting space
for audio-tactile exploration. The chest cavity resonates
Figure 2: Experimenting with a diﬀerent objects.
deeply, while the head (through bone conduction) is in-
audible to others but extraordinarily loud for the player.
We have yet to fully characterize the experience of playing
the instrument on the body (except to verify that it is in-
deed worthwhile to pursue), but for now direct readers to [3]
for a thorough treatment of directed vibration and musical
experience.
3. FUTURE WORK
The FingerSynth turns everything in the wearer’s world
into an interactive surface for playing music, encouraging
exploration and play. Going forward, we intend to minia-
turize the wristband and further develop the ﬁrmware to
support wavetable FM synthesis for more complex voices.
These synthesizer improvements would necessitate growing
the space of input gestures to allow users to manipulate syn-
thesis parameters directly, perhaps by adding a gyroscope.
Finally, we would like to include the option of connecting
the transducers to an oﬀ-board sound source, like a mobile
phone. Feeding the transducers a live stream of the wearer’s
voice, for example, would enable users to converse in a loud
place using bone conduction, holding each other’s heads in
a pose resembling the Vulcan mind meld.
4. REFERENCES
[1] L. Anderson. The handphone table.
https://www.moma.org/pdfs/docs/press_archives/
5652/releases/MOMA_1978_0088_81.pdf, August 1978.
Accessed: 2014-01-31.
[2] Brando. Electronic piano gloves.
http://usb.brando.com/electronic-piano-gloves_
p02063c035d015.html. Accessed: 2014-01-31.
[3] E. Gunther, G. Davenport, and S. O’Modhrain.
Cutaneous grooves: composing for the sense of touch.
InProceedings of the 2002 Conference on New
Instruments for Musical Expression, Dublin, Ireland,
May 2002.
[4] K. Huang, E. Y.-L. Do, and T. Starner. Pianotouch: A
wearable haptic piano instruction system for passive
learning of piano skills. InProceedings of the
International Symposium on Wearable Computers,
2008.
[5] W. Jacob. Floor, waves and signs, silent mixer.
http://wendyjacob.net/?page_id=133, 2009-2013.
Accessed: 2014-01-31.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
135