 
ABSTRACT
This report presents a novel interface for musical performance 
which utilizes a record-player turntable augmented with a 
computation engine and a high-density optical sensing array.  The 
turntable functions as a standalone step sequencer for MIDI events 
transmitted to a computer or another device and it is programmed 
in real-time using visual disks.  The program instructions are 
represented on printed paper disks directly as characters of English 
alphabet that could be read by human as effectively as they are 
picked up by the machine’s optical cartridge.  The result is a 
tangible interface that allows the user to manipulate pre-arranged 
musical material by hand, by adding together instrumental tracks to 
form a dynamic mix.  A functional implementation of this interface 
is discussed in view of historical background and other examples 
of electronic instruments for music creation and performance 
incorporating optical turntable as a central element.
Keywords
Interaction, visualization, tangible interface, controllers, optical 
turntable, performance.
1. INTRODUCTION
The idea of a musical instrument based on the coupling of optical 
technology with a turntable is not new. In fact, some of the 
earliest electronic instruments used a rotating turntable platter in 
conjunction with a photocell, since both technologies were among 
the earliest tools of playback and electronic instrumentation.  
Having gone through several decades of evolution, however, the 
development of such instruments had all but ceased in 1970’s.
The next section outlines a brief lineage of optical turntable 
instruments.  This research is accompanied by a functional 
prototype of a new musical interface that seeks to establish a 
continuity with the historical tradition, while taking inspiration 
from a contemporary breed of music created and/or played with a 
disk-jockey turntable.  The focus of the project is two-fold.  First, 
to revive an extant metaphor of an optical turntable as a musical 
instrument.  Second, to suggest that this kind of instrument can 
form a new link between two types of contemporary music and 
their audiences, which can be categorized roughly as turntable 
‘mix’ music and popular electronic music.  
One of the earliest intersections of these genres was the famous 
remix of the song Trans-Europe Express by German electropop 
pioneers Kraftwerk, featured on the 1982 single Planet Rock  by 
DJ Afrika Bambaataa. [1]  Although there is a world of difference 
between the roots of futuristic music performance in Düsseldorf 
and an open-air party held in the Bronx, the two have found a 
common thread that gave rise to a multitude of popular and dance 
music styles of today, such as hip-hop, techno, electro, house, etc.  
This commonality is best seen in relation to a pre-cursor of  
contemporary popular music genres, rock’n’roll.    In contrast to 
the emotional image of a rock performer in the middle of a guitar 
solo, the DJ and electronic musician appear as cool and often 
expressionless manipulators of sonic material that seemingly 
generates itself.  The two genres also share a similarity in their 
rhythmic approach to musical composition.  The electronic 
musician programs his or her drum machines, synthesizers, and 
sequencers.  DJs too refer to the act of arranging tracks during 
performance as ‘programming.’  The primary function of a disk 
jockey is that of a dynamic sequencer, manipulating and combining 
tracks from various records together to form a musical collage 
known as the remix.
Nevertheless, there is big divide between the two types of music, 
owing  to the difference in the capability of respective performance 
tools.  The turntable is understood as a playback device for 
manipulation of recorded material, limited by comparison to an 
electronic instrument.  On the other hand, it is often the case that in 
live performance, programmable synths and software arrangements 
leave the electronic musician with little room for interaction beyond 
the equivalent of turning knobs, whether real or virtual.  From this 
perspective, the turntable offers a superior interaction modality and 
one that is engaging for the audience to watch.  
The aim of the Diskotron project is to chip away at the difference 
between two genres of contemporary popular music by putting real 
programming power literally into the hands of a disk-jockey or, 
looking at it the other way, to provide an electronic musician with 
a tool for manipulating the performance material interactively in an 
engaging manner.  
A New Mix of Forgotten Technology: Sound Generation, 
Sequencing and Performance Using an Optical Turntable
Nikita Pashenkov
Murkin Laboratory
2-16-17 Jingumae, Arakawa Bldg. 303
Shibuya-ku, Tokyo, Japan 150-0001
nik@ratstar.com
Figure 1: Diskotron, a functional hardware prototype of a new 
optical turntable instrument 
 
2. BACKGROUND
What we might call optical turntable instruments had their genesis 
in the early part of last century.  For example, the first wavetable 
synthesizers used glass or film disks, where a looped sound 
was encoded as an optical track, circling the disk in a series of 
concentric rings.  The simplest instrument based on this technique 
was Cellulophone (“Cellule PhotoÈlectrique”) invented by the 
French engineer Pierre Toulon in 1927. Cellulophone used rotating 
disks with a ring of up to 54 equidistant slits cut into them. A light 
source positioned above the disk flashed through the slits onto a 
photoelectric cell below, connected to a vacuum tube oscillator. 
An inverse proportion of the number of slits on each disk thus 
determined the frequency of the sound produced by it. [2]
A slightly more sophisticated instrument used a picture of the 
actual waveform to generate sound. Welte Light-Tone Organ 
(1936), designed by E. Welte in Germany, utilized several optically 
controlled tone generators. A glass disk was printed with 18 
different waveforms rotated over a series of photoelectric cells, 
filtering the light beam that controlled the sound timbre and pitch. 
[3] Ivan Eremeef and Leopold Stokowski used a comparable 
strategy in Syntronic Organ (1936), an instrument that was able to 
produce “one-hour of continuous variation” created by an optically 
generated tone using film disks.  Similar instruments include Radio 
Organ of a Trillion Tones (1931) and the Polytone Organ (1934) by 
A. Lesti and Fredrick Sammis, USA. [4] 
A precursor to the instruments described above was truly ahead 
of its time.  Piano Optophonique created in 1916 by the Russian 
Futurist painter Vladimir Baranoff-Rossine generated sounds and 
projected revolving patterns onto a wall or ceiling by directing a 
bright light through a series revolving painted glass disks, filters, 
mirrors and lenses.  Rossine’s colorful disks were made audible as a 
result of the variations in opacity of the paint, which filtered a light 
source shining through them. [5]
The most complex instrument based around photocells coupled to 
the vacuum tube oscillators was RCA Synthesizer (1952), invented 
by the electronic engineers Harry Olsen and Hebert Belar.  While 
this instrument used visual paper graphs rather than circular disks 
for input, the turntable also provided an essential functionality: 
the audio produced by the synthesizer was recorded by an internal 
lacquer disk cutter. By re-using and mixing the disk recordings, a 
total of 216 sound tracks could be assembled together. [6]
In addition to wavetable synthesis, the optical turntable also 
provided a basis for some early sample-playback instruments.  
For example, Hardy-Goldwaithe Organ  (1930) was a keyboard 
instrument that utilized optical disks with 71 sampled notes 
encoded on them.  Turntable-based optical sample players even 
had a brief commercial existence in the early 70’s in the guise of 
the aptly named optical-organ Optigan. [7]  This low-cost keyboard 
instrument played sounds generated from graphic representations 
of waveforms contained on interchangeable 12” celluloid discs, 
which were sold at department stores like Sears.  A ‘professional’ 
version of Optigan was later marketed under the name Orchestron. 
Among the musicians who utilized it were the progressive rock 
group Yes, and Kraftwerk.  
There is one example of a contemporary instrument that explores 
the unique potential of the optical turntable.  Photosonic Instrument, 
conceived and developed by the French musician Jacques Dudon 
since 1984, utilizes optical disks that filter a light falling onto 
a photocell just like its predecessors.  The inventor’s original 
contribution was to add an optical grating filter as an additional 
stage of light filtering. Using a graphical representation of complex 
musical shapes, combined with manipulation of the light and filter 
by hand, Dudon is able to achieve advanced forms of articulation 
and timbre shaping, switch between samples, and to blend or cross 
fade between various sounds. [8]
3. IMPLEMENTATION
The history of precedents for this project, as detailed in the 
previous section, has one feature in common: optical turntable 
instruments that have existed are all based on analog technology 
of past decades.  The idea behind Diskotron is to couple the visual 
disk metaphor to a digital processing core.  This provides the initial 
imperative to focus the project on qualities that differentiate it from 
its analog cousins.  Therefore, the starting aim was to build a digital 
sequencing instrument that could be used as an interface for real-
time structuring and manipulation of musical events.  
3.1 Hardware
The hardware platform for this project is built around a type of 
record player known as a linear-tracking turntable.  This type of 
turntable was chosen as it allows for precise positioning of the 
cartridge over the surface of the disk as well as a means of its 
actuation (the existing turntable motor and gear setup are utilized, 
but the connections are rewired to a locally-controlled motor 
driver chip).  A rectangular plate that folds over the back portion 
of the rotating platter provides a chassis on which the turntable 
electronics are positioned.  The ‘motherboard’ circuit is composed 
of three processors, each running a set of dedicated tasks.  The 
block diagram in Figure 3 outlines the functional breakdown of 
augmented turntable’s hardware.
The data flow begins at the optical cartridge circuit.  The cartridge 
features a high-density optical array (TSL3301 by Texas Advanced 
Optoelectronic Solutions), a focus lens array, target illumination 
LEDs, and a few passive electronics components.  The TSL3301 is 
a small-factor chip that contains a 300-dpi, 102 pixel linear optical 
sensor array with integrated 8-bit analog-to-digital converters. [9]  
The optical sensor is controlled by a  processor that accumulates 
the pixel data and passes it on to the central processor.  For this 
prototype, an SX-18 micro from Ubicom was utilized, running at 
50Mhz to enable speedy integration and data collection. [10]  
  
At the next stage, the pixel data is fed to the central processor, 
currently implemented using an RCM2300 module by Rabbit 
Semiconductor. [11]  This unit is clocked at 20Mhz and provides 
ample space in RAM and flash memory (256K each) to allow a 
small-scale image processing program to be implemented on the 
chip.  RCM2300 thus has sufficient processing power and memory 
to host a program that accumulates image data into a running 
buffer, resolves it into discrete pixel values, and performs simple 
character recognition.  
Figure 2: Examples of disks used by Welte Light-Tone (left) 
and Piano Optophonique (right)
 In order to resolve pixel values correctly, a special optical ‘clock’ 
track is provided at the edge of the innermost circle on each paper 
disk.  The clock track consists of equidistant markings that are 
picked up by a small module with two reflective photo-interrupter 
sensors mounted on it.  The module’s output is connected to the 
central processor, which is able to calculate the direction and speed 
of the turning disk using simple two-sensor geometry.  
Once the central processor extracts several data characters 
representing a single command, it writes their 8-bit value to the  
PIC16F877 processor, which represents the last stage in digital data 
flow on board the turntable.  This processor’s primary function is 
to convert the received values into an out-going MIDI stream.  In 
addition, an integrated 8-channel A/D converter on the PIC services 
an external module that contains several potentiometers.  These 
tuning knobs can be used to adjust several built-in parameters 
of the optical sensor array.  As one might expect from an optical 
instrument, settings for exposure, gain, and offset of the received 
signal need to be calibrated at the beginning of a performance.
3.2 Optical Disks
For the first-generation Diskotron prototype described here, an 8-
step sequencer has been implemented at the microcontroller level.  
The sequencing instructions are inscribed as visual markings on the 
surface of a paper disk and take the form of digital codes that are 
rendered as characters of English alphabet.  For example, a three-
letter command ‘MV2’ signals the microcontroller to move the 
cartridge to the second track on the disk, command ‘RE3’ causes 
the sequencer to repeat a given track three times, and command like 
‘C4’ causes the turntable to produce a MIDI equivalent of this note.  
In short, the optical turntable paper disks are sequencing programs 
and the programs are composed of word-statements printed on the 
surface of the disk.  Playing a disk on the turntable is therefore 
equivalent to programming the internal controller electronics to 
produce a sequencing arrangement in real-time.
3.3 Software
In order to facilitate the creation of optical disks, an interactive 
software application has been written in C++/OpenGL.  The 
program draws a representation of a disk on the computer screen 
and enables the user to navigate between separate tracks and step 
sequence slots within each track using a keyboard or a mouse.  
Command-codes are then inserted in each slot by typing them.  
Once the disk arrangement is completed, a PostScript file can be 
generated, ready to be sent to a compatible printer.
4. ANALYSIS
This section is divided in two portions.  First, a discussion of this 
project looks at it in relation to historical precedents as well as 
contemporary attempts to utilize and/or augment the functionality 
of a turntable.  Second, an analysis of technical implementation 
issues pertaining to project hardware and software is given.
4.1 Precedents and competition
Due to the rise in popularity of turntable mix music, the recent 
years saw a number of new products and developments aiming to 
provide a link between a turntable and a computer.  Most popular 
are software solutions ( Traktor DJ Studio  by Native Instruments 
[12] is perhaps the most feature-rich application) that emulate the 
disk jockey setup and provide the means to manipulate digital 
tracks using a keyboard, mouse, or external MIDI controllers.  
A more comprehensive approach is taken by Stanton, Inc. with 
Final Scratch.   This product consists of a software component, 
specially encoded vinyl records, and a hardware box that enables 
the user to utilize an actual turntable as an interface to a computer. 
[13]  However, these state-of-the-art commercial offerings do not 
explore the potential of their product far beyond emulation - the 
turntable still remains primarily a playback device.
A paper submitted to this conference last year describes a prototype 
turntable-to-computer interface which suggests that there is a 
new generation of ideas in the air.  Based around the concept of 
a software framework visualized as a projection on top of the 
turntable platter, the project hints at the possibility of structuring 
a highly interactive experience for both the disk jockey and the 
audience. [14]  Another recent experimental project describes a 
set of approaches to utilize haptic technologies in the construction 
of a DJ interface.  The authors implemented a tactile feedback 
mechanism which allows the user to ‘feel’ various qualities of sonic 
material and enabled new possibilities for sound generation, such 
as parametrized ‘scratching’ controlled by software. [15] It must 
be noted, however, that such innovative projects are nevertheless 
limited in aim to augmenting the sound-manipulation capability of 
a turntable rather than taking it in a wholly new direction.
In comparison to the recent attempts at utilizing the turntable as 
a musical interface, analogues to electronic instruments given 
in the background section are more relevant to this project.  We 
might say that Diskotron in its current state is a sequencing 
instrument comparable in function to that of RCA synthesizer’s 
lacquer disk cutter, offering a possibility to play separate tracks 
24
5
6 6
8
6
1
7
3.1 RCM2300 20Mhz
clock counter
character recognition
3.2 PIC16F877 20Mhz
tuning knobsA/D
MIDI signal generator
3
3.3 EL driver
8. front panel buttons
start / stop / cue
7. calibration knobs
gain / offset / exposure
2. SX-18 50Mhz
optics array control
1. TSL-3301
data signal sensing
4. photointerrupters
clock signal sensing
5. motor driver
MIDI serial
6. EL panels
24
5
6 6
8
6
1
7
3.1 RCM2300 20Mhz
clock counter
character recognition
3.2 PIC16F877 20Mhz
tuning knobsA/D
MIDI signal generator
3
3.3 EL driver
8. front panel buttons
start / stop / cue
7. calibration knobs
gain / offset / exposure
2. SX-18 50Mhz
optics array control
1. TSL-3301
data signal sensing
4. photointerrupters
clock signal sensing
5. motor driver
MIDI serial
6. EL panels
Figure 3: Functional block diagram (left) and corresponding layout (right) of Diskotron hardware.
 of music, manipulate their tempo and to mix them together.  The 
obvious advantage is that the printed paper disks make this process 
insignificant in cost and near-instantly reproducible.
The main difference between this project and its historical 
predecessors is that the disks contain digital information spelling 
out program instructions, rather than sound waveforms.  At this 
stage, a minimum of instructions has been provided enabling 
the turntable to send MIDI note and continuous controller value 
messages, and to move the cartridge between different tracks of 
data.  However, this functionality represents only a fraction of 
possibilities for the current hardware configuration.   
Interfacing the optical turntable to a computer presents another 
range of possibilities.  For the purposes of composition, the feedback 
loop that occurs between the turntable and the software that 
receives its commands hints at a unique possibility. The software 
application for creating PostScript disks already acts as a channel 
for receiving data from the turntable.  Plotting the MIDI messages 
against the speed and direction variables sent over serially, a virtual 
equivalent of the playing disk is constructed.  Any manipulation of 
the actual disk translates into corresponding changes in the virtual 
representation.  This disk can then be captured and printed at any 
point, completing the composition feedback cycle.  
Finally, the digital codes are but the most sensible instructions 
designed to be interpreted by the turntable microcontroller.  A 
range of analog visual representation on the surface of the disk 
remains to be explored.  It is not an exaggeration to assert that any 
visual material can be fodder for experimentation on the optical 
turntable.   A study of  Jacques Dudon’s photosonic instrument 
suggests that 900 disks so far devised for it constitute only a 
small part of the musical material accessible to the optical disk 
technology. [8]  By offering the potential to mix between digital 
and analog representation (even on the same disk), the Diskotron 
project clearly has more than enough room to grow.
4.2 Technical features and limitations
The optical turntable prototype that is described here should be 
considered an initial attempt to bring the desired functionality 
together using a few patches of computational hardware loosely 
tied together.  In the tests carried out so far, the microcontroller 
engine proved to be very robust, arguably superior to any solution 
incorporating the overhead of a PC computer and an operating 
system.  The embedded hardware is speedy enough to run a full 
cycle of computation (read 100 pixels and parse them, extracting a 
single cross-section of data) at a rate of over 1000 per revolution.  
Depending on the position on the disk, this provides a sub-
millimeter resolution for each interpreted pixel.  The computational 
core could benefit from a performance boost with a faster processor, 
however, enabling more sequencing steps and higher density codes 
to be interpreted. 
One way to improve the performance of the system substantially 
with the existing hardware configuration is to forgo the use of 
English alphabet characters.  A test has been carried out using 
digital-coded values with Hamming error detection and correction.  
The effective bandwidth of the system was thus nearly quadrupled.  
However, this scheme detracts from the impressive feature of the 
preferred albeit less-efficient system of encoding.  By using actual 
characters as input to the optical turntable, an ever-present layer of 
abstraction is taken away and the program code becomes instantly 
readable by a human.
 
CONCLUSION
This document outlined a rich domain of inquiry.  There exists a 
lineage of electronic instruments that utilized the idea of an optical 
turntable for the purpose of sound and even image generation.  
In recent decades, a curious phenomenon of subverting the 
technological intention of the record-player turntable for the 
purpose of musical expression has evolved.  A few attempts to 
utilize this new type of interaction metaphor have been analyzed, 
which generally fall short of addressing the potential of a turntable 
as a full-featured instrument.  The Diskotron project seeks to find 
new ground between the historical legacy and possibilities afforded 
by digital technology.  A functional interface has been described, 
the initial application of which enables dynamic real-time 
sequencing of musical events during performance.  A synthesis 
engine is currently under development, which may elevate the 
status of Diskotron to that of a true heir to optical turntable synths 
that preceded it.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This project was developed over the last two years with the help 
and encouragement of the following individuals and organizations: 
John Maeda, Chris Csikszentmihályi and Joe Paradiso at MIT, 
Eyebeam Atelier in New York, and Ryuichi Iwamasa at GK Tech, 
Tokyo.  Original impetus for the project owes a due to Casey Reas 
and a record by Brian Chinetti aka Orgue Electronique.
REFERENCES
[1] Lee, Iara, Modulations: A History of Electronic Music: 
Throbbing Words on Sound (New York: Distributed Art 
Publishers, 2000), p45 
[2] http://www.obsolete.com/120_years/machines/cellulophone/
[3] http://www.obsolete.com/120_years/machines/light_tone_organ/
[4] Holmes, Thom, Electronic and Experimental Music 
(New York: Routledge, 2002), p75
[4] http://www.newmusicbox.org/third-person/oct99/samplers.html
[5] http://perso.club-internet.fr/dbr/piano.htm
[6] Chadabe, Joel, Electric Sound: The Past and Promise of 
Electronic Music  (Prentice Hall, 1996), pp45-46
[7] Vail, Mark, Vintage Synthesizers: Pioneering Designers, 
Groundbreaking Instruments, Collecting Tips, Mutants of 
Technology (San Francisco; Miller Freeman, 2000), pp294-296/
[8] Dudon, Jacques and Arfib, Daniel, “A digital emulator of the 
photosonic instrument,” Proceedings for the 2002 Conference on 
New Instruments for Musical Expression (NIME-02)
[9] Texas Optoelectronic Solutions, http://www.taosinc.com
[10] Ubicom, http://www.ubicom.com
[11] Rabbit Semiconductor, http://www.rabbitsemi.com
[12] Native Instruments, http://www.nativeinstruments.com
[13] Stanton, Final Scratch, http://www.finalscratch.com
[14] Andersen, Tue Haste “Mixxx: Towards Novel DJ Interfaces,” 
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for 
Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
[15] Beamish, Tim, MacLean, Karon and Fels, Sidney, 
“Designing the Haptic Turntable for Musical Control”, 
Proceedings of the11th Symposium on Haptic Interfaces for 
Virtual Environment and Teleoperator Systems (HAPTICS’03)