Design Principles and User Interfaces of Erkki
Kurenniemi's Electronic Musical Instruments of the 1960's
and 1970's
Mikko Ojanen
Department of
Musicology
P .O. Box 35
00014 University of
Helsinki
Finland
Mikko.Ojanen@helsinki.ﬁ
Jari Suominen
Department of
Computer Science
P .O. Box 68
00014 University of
Helsinki
Finland
Jari.Suominen@helsinki.ﬁ
Titti Kallio
T eliaSonera
P .O. Box 585
00051 Sonera
Finland
Titti.Kallio@teliasonera.com
Kai Lassfolk
Department of
Musicology
P .O. Box 35
00014 University of
Helsinki
Finland
Kai.Lassfolk@helsinki.ﬁ
ABSTRACT
This paper presents a line of historic electronic musical in-
struments designed by Erkki Kurenniemi in the 1960’s and
1970’s. Kurenniemi’s instruments were inﬂuenced by digital
logic and an experimental attitude towards user interface
design. The paper presents an overview of Kurenniemi’s
instruments and a detailed description of selected devices.
Emphasis is put on user interface issues such as unconven-
tional interactive real-time control and programming meth-
ods.
Keywords
Erkki Kurenniemi, Dimi, Synthesizer, Digital electronics,
User interface design
1. INTRODUCTION
Erkki Kurenniemi (b. 1941) is one of the leading pioneers
of Finnish electroacoustic music. A musical instrument de-
signer, composer, and multimedia artist, Mr. Kurenniemi
played a central role in the Finnish avant-garde music scene
in the 1960’s and early 1970’s. During that time, he built
a series of unique electronic musical instruments, each of
which can be regarded as unconventional also from today’s
perspective. He also founded the ﬁrst and still operational
Finnish electronic music studio at the Department of Mu-
sicology , University of Helsinki. Kurenniemi collaborated
with several composers and artists including Ralph Lund-
sten, Erkki Salmenhaara, Osmo Lindeman, Henrik Otto Don-
ner, Jukka Ruohom¨ aki, M.A. Numminen, and the Norwe-
gian theater company Scene 7.
Kurenniemi’s best-known achievement as an instrument
maker is a line of electronic music devices named Dimi (Digi-
tal Musical Instrument). As an instrument designer, Kuren-
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this w ork for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided th at copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and th at copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To cop y otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, re quires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME07, June 6-10, 2007, New Y ork, USA
Copyright 2007 remains with the author(s).
niemi’s particular interests were in digital logic and its ap-
plication to user interface design. In the mid 1970’s, Kuren-
niemi left the electroacoustic music scene to work for the
Finnish industry specializing in industrial automation and
robotics. Later he worked as a researcher in Heureka, The
Finnish Science Centre. Kurenniemi became a well-known
specialist and visionary of modern technology and appeared
in many television and newspaper interviews describing his
futuristic ideas and innovations. In the 1980’s Kurenniemi
returned to music-related research by developing a new the-
ory of tonal harmony [5].
The early 2000’s saw a renewed interest in Kurenniemi’s
early work. In 2002, Mika T aanila directed the documentary
ﬁlmFuture Is Not What It Used To Be [16] about Kuren-
niemi’s work and philosophy . T aanila also compiled a col-
lection of Kurenniemi’s compositions on a CD entitledErkki
Kurenniemi: Recordings 1963-1973 [6] released by a Finnish
record company Siboney in 2002. Kurenniemi’s instruments,
Dimi-A in particular, have been on display at art exhibitions
in both London and Helsinki. In recent years, Kurenniemi
has performed live in V enice, Berlin, and Helsinki playing his
instruments with artists such as the experimental electronic
music group Pan Sonic. In 2003, Kurenniemi received the
Finland Prize (Suomi-palkinto) from the Finnish Ministry
of Education for his work as an artist and researcher of the
future.
In this paper we will ﬁrst present Kurenniemi’s instru-
ments in general and then take a closer look at some of them.
Both technical and user interface issues of the instruments
are discussed. The methods we have used include interviews,
hands-on experimentation with the instruments and study
of the remaining technical documentation. The conducted
interviews consist of several discussions with Kurenniemi
himself, composer Jukka Ruohom¨ aki, artist Mauri Antero
Numminen and engineer Hannu Viitasalo. Mr. Ruohom¨ aki
and Mr. Numminen were among the ﬁrst users of Kuren-
niemi’s instruments and Mr. Viitasalo worked as an electri-
cal engineer in Kurenniemi’s company Digelius Electronics
Finland Inc.
In 2002, the remaining instruments in Finland, as well as
their contemporary technical documentation, were gathered
and stored in the University of Helsinki Electronic Music
Studio. Also some restoration work was done in collabora-
tion with the Finnish Museum of Contemporary Art, Ki-
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
88
Instrument Y ear Qty Description W orking condition
Integrated Synthesizer 1964- 1 Modular synthesizer with digital and analog modules. Out of order
Electric Quartet 1968 1 Collective instrument for four players. Good
Andromatic 1968 1 Polyphonic synthesizer with 10-step sequencer. F ull
Dico 1969 1 Synthesizer with 12-step sequencer and digital memory . F ull
Dimi-A 1970 2 Programmable 256-step sequencer with digital memory . Partial
Dimi-O 1971 1 Synthesizer with a video interface. Good
Dimix 1972 1 Electronic patchbay with video output. Poor
Dimi-S 1972 2 An instrument controlled by skin resistance of players. F ull
Dimi-T 1973 1 A brainwave controlled instrument. Out of order
Dimi-U - - Combination of Dimi-A and Dimi-O. Never constructed
Dimi-6000 1973 2 Computer controlled analog synthesizer. OS destroyed
T able 1: Erkki Kurenniemi’s Electronic Musical Instruments
asma. The authors Mikko Ojanen and Jari Suominen have
played Kurenniemi’s instruments in concerts together with
Kurenniemi. The documentation includes schematics and
Kurenniemi’s sketches. It lacks, however, explicit operating
instructions. Therefore, much of the playing techniques had
to be revived by experiment.
This is the ﬁrst study of Kurenniemi’s instrument pub-
lished in English. F ormer studies of Kurenniemi’s instru-
ments, published in Finnish, include Kalev Tiits’s M.A. the-
sis [17] and our recently published article in the Musiikki
musicological periodical [12]. Also, related to the subject is
Mikko Ojanen’s M.A. thesis [11] about Jukka Ruohom¨ aki’s
music. Kurenniemi’s earliest instruments are also mentioned
in Petri Kuljuntausta’s bookOn/Oﬀ [2] about early Finnish
electronic music.
2. A BRIEF HISTORY OF KURENNIEMI’S
INSTRUMENT DESIGN
The Electronic Music Studio of the Department of Mu-
sicology , University of Helsinki can be regarded as the ﬁrst
”instrument” designed and built by Kurenniemi. Instead of
a conventional tape music studio of the early 1960’s Kuren-
niemi designed his studio as an automated composition sys-
tem. As the heart of the studio Kurenniemi built a de-
vice called Integrated Synthesizer (1964-), which consisted
of three separate units: a tone generator, a mixer and a ﬁl-
ter. Integrated Syntheziser was intended to also control the
studio tape recorders. The vision of a fully automated studio
was never completed. However, Integrated Synthesizer re-
mained in use for a few years. In the late 1960’s, Kurenniemi
envisioned a mainframe computer based composition system
with terminals distributed around the university . Amidst his
ambitious studio design plans Kurenniemi built three cus-
tom made synthesizers: Electric Quartet, Andromatic, and
Dico. [12]
Kurenniemi built Electric Quartet - also the name of the
band that used the instrument - for the Finnish underground
artist Mauri Antero Numminen (b. 1940) in 1968. This
”collective” instrument consists of a main unit (with tone
generators and a sequencer) and a set of controllers (Melody
machine, Electrical trumpet, Violin machine, Drum machine
and a controller for distorting the vocalist’s voice). Nummi-
nen - the singer and leader of the band - aimed to provoke
the audience and his request was to have a somewhat chaotic
instrument to reach this goal. The repertoire of Electric
Quartet was limited to one piece entitledKaukana v¨ aijyy
yst¨ avi¨ a(F ar away lurk some friends). Their ﬁnest hour -
according to Numminen - was in Bulgaria 1968 where their
performance for an audience of 4000 people was intercepted
by the concert organizers [2, 10].
Andromatic (1968) was designed in collaboration with the
Swedish composer Ralph Lundsten (b. 1936). Andromatic
is a polyphonic synthesizer with a 10-step sequencer where
every step has its own oscillator. Initially , the instrument
was designed for the Emotion exhibition in the Samlaren art
gallery in Stockholm. In the exhibition it played music and
controlled the lights of a sculpture. The name of the instru-
ment originates from the name of the Lundsten’s studio,
Andromeda, where Andromatic is also currently located.
[12] The third custom made instrument, Dico (1969) was
designed for the Finnish composer Osmo Lindeman (1929-
1987). Dico is described below in more detail.
In 1970, Kurenniemi founded Digelius Electronics Finland
Inc. with Jouko Kottila and Peter F risk as his partners. Un-
der Digelius Kurenniemi designed a line of electronic music
devices including ﬁve synthesizers: Dimi-A (1970), Dimi-O
(1971), Dimi-S (1972), Dimi-T (1973) and Dimi-6000 (1973),
as well as the digitally controlled mixing console and patch-
bay Dimix (1972). [12]
After Dimi-O Kurenniemi started to design a new instru-
ment called Dimi-U. There, his aim was to combine the
strengths of both Dimi-A and Dimi-O. However, the project
was halted when Kurenniemi got interested in designing a
microprocessor controlled synthesizer which eventually be-
came Dimi-6000. [12]
Kurenniemi’s instruments are listed in T able 1.
3. DESCRIPTIONS OF SELECTED INSTRU-
MENTS
Below, some of Kurenniemi’s instruments are described in
more detail. The focus is on the best known instruments of
the Dimi series: Dimi-A, Dimi-O, Dimi-S and Dimi-T. Also
included is a description of one of the earlier instruments,
Dico. It can be seen as a starting point of Kurenniemi’s more
experimental user interface design. A noticeable aspect in
Kurenniemi’s design work is its evolutionary nature. Many
basic ideas of the early instruments emerged in advanced
forms later on. Dico, for example, shares the same design
core with Dimi-A and Dimi-O consisting of static oscillators
combined with a frequency division network and analog ﬁl-
ters. As synthesizers, Dimi-S and Dimi-T are more like mu-
sical toys than serious instruments. However, they represent
an interesting experimental approach to instrument control.
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
89
Figure 1: Dico. Note the grounded cable which has
replaced the metal brush.
3.1 Dico
Osmo Lindeman switched from composing instrumental
music to purely electroacoustic music in the late 1960’s and
built a private studio for this purpose. T o complement a
set of tape recorders and sound processors he needed an
electronic tone generator. Lindeman ordered an electronic
instrument from Kurenniemi and after a few consultations
with Lindeman Kurenniemi built Dico (Digitally controlled
oscillator) (Figure 1). [12]
Lindeman’s basic idea was that the instrument should
be a programmable sequencer. Kurenniemi’s answer was a
monophonic synthesizer equipped with a 12-step sequencer.
Dico’s interface consists of a 4x4 point patchbay , a matrix
of three rows by twelve columns of metal pins, a row of light
bulbs (one bulb placed above each pin column), a special
metal brush and a set of switches, buttons and potentiome-
ters to start and stop the sequencer and to control pitch
and tempo. The state of each sequencer step is represented
by 10 light bulbs (the remaining two were left as a ’future
expansion’). The sequencer is programmed in ”step time”
by using the metal brush to connect a pin in the middle
row to either the pin above it (setting a bit on) or the pin
below it (setting the bit oﬀ). On each step the user can ad-
just the diatonic pitch (four bits), octave range (three bits),
articulation (two bits) and the output channel (one bit). As-
signment of the signal to one of the instrument’s two ﬁlter
banks can be made at the patchbay .
The idea of the sequencer is based on Kurenniemi’s expe-
rience with early digital computers. The sequencer design is
basically identical to a primitive computer with twelve ten-
bit memory locations. The user can edit the bits of each
memory location by ﬁrst selecting the memory location and
then altering the bits individually with switches. The light
bulb on the top of each switch tells the state of each bit.
The use of the metal brush (later replaced with a grounded
wire) adds randomness to Dico’s operation. One way of
playing it is to start the sequencer with high tempo to pro-
duce an arpeggio. If the player touches the metal pins with
the brush lightly or quickly enough, some bits in the se-
quence are changed while some are not. This makes it pos-
sible to ’crossfade’ from one chord to another slowly and
somewhat randomly in a similar way to a painter layering
brushstrokes on a canvas one stroke over another.
3.2 Dimi-A
Dimi-A (Figure 2) is a two-voice programmable synthe-
sizer and it is probably the best-known of Kurenniemi’s in-
struments. Dimi-A was built as a research project where the
focus was to explore the potential applications of the digital
techniques in producing electroacoustic music. [4]
Figure 2: Dimi-A
Dimi-A is programmed by touching metal contacts on the
instrument’s touchpad, with two metal sticks (Figure 2).
The absence of an alphanumeric, let alone graphic, display
for the user interface makes the programming task fairly dif-
ﬁcult because the memory contents can only be checked by
listening. Also, the memory is volatile with no mass storage
backup, although Kurenniemi planned to make a cassette
tape interface as an upgrade. [4] Despite these weaknesses
the instrument was used even for live improvisations.
Figure 3: Layout of Dimi-A’s touchpad
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
90
Dimi-A has two operational modes, ”play” and ”com-
mand”, between which the user can toggle by touching the
arrow-shaped plates at the bottom of the touchpad (Figure
3). In the ”play” mode the user can start or stop a sequence
by using the four arrow plates on the top right. The user
can also jump to any step of the sequence by selecting a bar
with the numbered plates on the left and a step with the
numbered plates on the right. In the ”command” mode the
left-hand numbered plates will deﬁne a parameter number
and the right-hand plates the parameter value. These com-
mands can be stored at any step of the sequence by using
the ’R’-plate on the left. Each step can also have multiple
commands stored in it. Other plates on the top left are for
erasing the memory . Dimi-A has dedicated parameters for
(diatonic) pitch, volume, ﬁlters, vibrato, oscillator on/oﬀ,
ring modulation, sequence jumps, and tempo.
Dimi-A was Kurenniemi’s ﬁrst instrument built for the
commercial market. T o promote the instrument Digelius
Electronics released the single entitledDimi 1: Dimi is born
(Musica DSS-1) in 1970. The record included Kurenniemi’s
arrangement of Johann Sebastian Bach’s Inventio no. 13
in A minor (BWV 784) entitled Inventio-Outventio. Bach’s
two-voice composition provided optimal material for demon-
strating the capabilities of the instrument. The B side of
the single contained Jukka Ruohom¨ aki’s composition What
is time? . [15, 12]
Kurenniemi presented Dimi-A to Peter Zinovieﬀ, a British
composer and synthesizer designer, who stated that the in-
strument was quite an attractive device, but its sound qual-
ity was poor [3]. Despite the marketing eﬀorts, only two
Dimi-A units were manufactured. One of them is in the
University of Helsinki Electronic Music Studio. The other
one was sold to Ralph Lundsten, who later donated it to
the Musikmuseet, The Stockholm Music Museum. How-
ever, with the attention gained by Dimi-A Kurenniemi and
Digelius Electronics got funding from SITRA, The Finnish
National F und for Research and Development, which they
spent on new instrument projects. [12]
3.3 Dimi-O
With the funding from SITRA the prototype of a video-
controlled organ, Dimi-O (Figure 4) was completed in April
1971. Besides Kurenniemi, the electrical engineer Hannu
Viitasalo played an important role on designing and con-
structing the instrument. [4, 19]
Figure 4: Dimi-O
Dimi-O includes a four-octave conventional electric organ
keyboard and a memory unit with a 32-step sequencer. The
memory locations are presented on a television screen from
which the player can read the contents of the memory . A
cursor running over the screen tells which location is played
at the moment. On the screen the 32-step sequence is pre-
sented horizontally and the four-octave key range (i.e. 48
pitches) is presented vertically . In this respect Dimi-O was
easier to use than Dimi-A.
The unconventional part of the instrument is the opti-
cal input by a television or video camera (Figure 5). The
picture captured by the camera is converted to black and
white and can thereafter be transferred into the memory
unit and used as a control signal. Adjusting the contrast of
the picture aﬀects the instrument’s response to the picture.
When brightness is set to maximum the instrument plays a
complete four-octave diatonic cluster. When brightness is
reduced only some of the notes are played.
Figure 5: Dimi-O block diagram
After the prototype of Dimi-O was completed, Kuren-
niemi listed potential usages of the instrument[4]: First of
all, it can be used in a studio as a tone generator. There,
an obvious application is to read graphic music notation
through the video input. Secondly , Dimi-O can be used as a
solo instrument or in collaboration with orchestras. Kuren-
niemi also described a more avant-garde way of use of the
instrument: e.g. in ballet or at the theater with the cam-
era shooting dancers or actors as well as in experimental
ﬁlms where all the changes in the picture could be trans-
formed into music. Eventually , Dimi-O was used even in a
psychological test in the University of Oslo, Norway . There,
Dimi-O’s camera was shooting the testees’ faces while they
were interpreting Rorschach pictures.
A somewhat similar optical input method emerged again
later in the software intrument Dimi-H 1 (2004).
3.4 Dimi-S and Dimi-T
In the summer of 1968 Kurenniemi visited an electroa-
coustic music conference organized by T eatro Comunale in
Florence, Italy . During the conference Kurenniemi was in-
troduced to Manford L. Eaton’s ideas of biofeedback as a
source of musical or compositional material. Two of Kuren-
niemi’s instruments - Dimi-S and Dimi-T - are loosely based
on these ideas [12]. Dimi-S was also called Sexophone or
K¨ arlekmaskinen (Love Machine in Swedish). It is played by
1http://www.beige.org/projects/dimi/
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
91
Figure 6: Dimi-S
four people holding iron balls in their hands. Ralph Lund-
sten, who ordered the instrument, used it in some art exhi-
bitions and just ”for fun” [8]. Two copies of the instrument
were made and they are both located in Lundsten’s An-
dromeda studio together with the only manufactured Dimi-
O unit.
The control signal of Dimi-S is constructed from the changes
in the electroresistance of human skin when people are touch-
ing each other. The iron balls are connected to the Dimi-S
main unit (ﬁgure 6, right). Dimi-S also contains a light or-
gan unit (ﬁgure 6, left).
Dimi-T (T stands for thinking) is based on the idea of
alpha waves produced by the human brain while sleeping as
a control signal of the instrument. The user attaches elec-
trodes on his scalp and the EEG (electroencephalogram)
signal is measured. Then the EEG signal is used for con-
trolling the pitch of an oscillator.
4. TECHNICAL DESIGN PRINCIPLES
Kurenniemi has experimented with digital circuits with
almost all of his electronic musical instruments. However,
the design and functionality of these synthesizers do not
have much in common e.g. with digital synthesizers of the
1980’s. Some of the techniques Kurenniemi has exploited
on his instruments are common in analog synthesizers and
electric organs.
Like the earliest electronic musical instruments, Kuren-
niemi’s devices demand some engineering skills from the
musician operating them. Kurenniemi’s instruments being
mostly experimental prototypes, the user interface does not
hide the inner design of electrical circuits, and, indeed, the
circuits themselves have clearly had a strong inﬂuence on
the user interface design of these instruments.
With Integrated Synthesizer Kurenniemi started to exper-
iment with digital circuits. The synthesizer has digital logic
ports from which the user can build diﬀerent digital circuits,
such as diﬀerent sequencers, using a set of ﬁve patch matri-
ces (of the same type as the EMS VCS3 synthesizer patch
matrix). Many of the digital circuits that Kurenniemi used
in his later synthesizers are probably results of the experi-
ments made with Integrated Synthesizer.
Kurenniemi built a sequencer into most of his synthesizers.
The simpler ones are quite similar to Buchla’s classic design
based on a single shift register. However, Kurenniemi was
interested in automating the whole music reproduction pro-
cess. Therefore he expanded the basic logic of a sequencer
with some simple designs. The ﬁrst step was to exploit digi-
tal counter circuits (Electric Quartet and Andromatic) with
which the operator of the instrument could produce long
sequences with modulations on the melody . The sequencer
in Andromatic is a clever design where the state of a ﬂip-
ﬂop on each sequencer stage can be set to either break, shift
register or counter mode.
In the late 1960’s, Kurenniemi started to experiment with
digital memory circuits. Dico was the ﬁrst synthesizer to
have a digital memory . It allowed to store 10 parameters
into each of its 12 sequencer steps. This design was fur-
ther developed in Dimi-A, which uses an associative mem-
ory scheme by making it possible to save up to 100 musical
events, which could happen on any moment in an up to 256
step long sequence.
F requency division, a commonly used technique in elec-
tric organs, was used on Dico, Dimi-A, and Dimi-O. During
1960’s, the stability of oscillators was still a major problem
among synthesizer designers and frequency division oﬀered a
simple way to keep an instrument in tune as it requires only
one oscillator, which does not need to be voltage controlled
(the most common electric organ design uses 12 oscillators,
one for each note of an octave) [13]. The oscillator is tuned
above the audible frequency range and all the notes of the
synthesizer are made by dividing the frequency with whole
numbers [14, 1]. The technique is easiest to implement when
the waveform of the signal is a pulse wave and therefore it is
the waveform of choice in most of Kurenniemi’s instruments.
Besides the frequency division network, the ring modula-
tor and the attenuator circuits of Dimi-A are ”quasi-digital”
designs which are using digital logic ports and can therefore
process only digital waveforms.
5. USER INTERFACE ASPECTS
The design of Kurenniemi’s electronic musical instruments
is based mainly on the components that were available at the
time and on the ideas he got from the contemporary elec-
tronic component catalogues [3]. On the other hand, his in-
strument design is based on a very open-minded and exper-
imental attitude regarding the user interface. F urthermore,
Kurenniemi was prone to exploit unconventional methods
for controlling and programming the instruments (e.g. op-
tical input or biofeedback).
The user interfaces of Kurenniemi’s ﬁrst instruments were
very technically oriented, reﬂecting the technical function-
ality at the hardware level. Therefore, the input mechanism
was mainly ’plug in’ type. Partly this is reﬂecting the fact
that the ﬁrst instruments were tailor-made and he knew who
would be operating them. However, Kurenniemi interest-
ingly did not choose to use a conventional musical instru-
ment user interface (e.g. a keyboard) even in his later inno-
vations where he had clearly put some thought upon the user
interface design and usability . The Dimi-A user interface
clearly shows attempts to create an aesthetic and attractive
user interface the overall user experience in mind - there was
also a graphic designer involved in the ﬁrst steps of the de-
sign work. That reveals what a forerunner Kurenniemi was,
since aesthetics and attractiveness have only lately gained
attention in the usability area. [9, 18, 7]
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
92
The downside of choosing unconventional user interface
solutions is that the instruments did not look familiar and
therefore it was probably harder to get ﬁnancial support
and arouse interest in potential markets. If Kurenniemi had
chosen to pack the equipment e.g. into a cover of an electric
organ, the public’s and ﬁnanciers’ interest might have been
more signiﬁcant.
Although the Dimi-A user interface looks attractive, the
usability of the instrument is still quite unsatisfactory: the
user needs to remember what s/he has done, i.e. what pa-
rameters were chosen. The user interface won’t give nearly
any feedback from the user’s choices, which is regarded as
one of the main usability criteria in any user interface. How-
ever, Kurenniemi continued being very innovative with some
of his later instruments: for example, with Dimi-O he pre-
sented an idea of reading notes with a video camera, and
then playing the music in question (nowadays the concept
of e.g. reading EAN-like codes digitally is widely spread).
With Dimi-S the input technique was people touching each
other. With Dimi-T Kurenniemi presented the idea of using
EEG as an input method (we only start to see equipment
using EEG as an input signal now).
6. CONCLUSIONS
The evolution of Kurenniemi’s instrument designs may
be regarded as a logical and gradual transition from analog
to ”quasi-digital” to digital electronics. In his electronics
designs, Kurenniemi was more interested in programmabil-
ity than in sonic ﬂexibility or in developing novel synthesis
techniques. In particular, Kurenniemi did not implement a
purely digital sound synthesis system in any of his early or
Dimi instruments. However, his user interface designs were
greatly inﬂuenced by digital logic. This, combined by the
lack of conventional control hardware, such as a piano-style
keyboard (Dimi-O being the only exception), made adoption
of these instruments diﬃcult for ordinary musicians.
Despite their unconventional user interfaces, there is some-
thing appealing and fascinating in many of the instruments.
In particular, the compact size and the austere but visually
balanced user interface of Dimi-A, have made it a classic and
gained it status as a work of art. The inter-artistic optical
interface of Dimi-O and the somewhat provocative skin re-
sistance interface of Dimi-S alone earned Kurenniemi a rep-
utation of an eccentric artist and scientist. In some aspects,
Dimi-S and Dimi-O remind us of the electronic instruments
of Lev Sergeyevich T ermen, a.k.a. L´ eon Theremin. On the
other hand, the microprocessor based Dimi-6000, Kuren-
niemi’s most ﬂexible and technically advanced instrument,
appeared only as a conventional CR T terminal and a set of
stacked aluminum boxes.
Kurenniemi’s visions often went beyond what was possi-
ble to implement with contemporary technology or what was
ﬁnancially realistic at the time. He was, nevertheless, suc-
cessful as an instrument designer having completed a total
of 9 diﬀerent musical devices between 1968 and 1973. Since
the marketing attempts for the Dimi instruments failed, and
in spite of Kurenniemi’s many appearances in the Finnish
mass media, his instruments remained fairly unknown un-
til the late 1990’s when the Finnish electronic music scene
adopted him as their forerunner and ”godfather”. As a re-
sult, Kurenniemi was celebrated as the guest of honor and
featured artist of the 2002 Avanto international media art
festival in Helsinki. There, many of his instruments were
played live, perhaps for the largest audience ever.
Most of Kurenniemi’s instruments have survived to present
day and many of them are still in working order. The re-
maining instruments in Finland are stored, and occasionally
used, in the Electronic Music Studio at the Department of
Musicology , University of Helsinki.
7. REFERENCES
[1] A. Douglas. The Electronic Musical Instrument
Manual. 6. edition . Pitman publishing, London, 1976.
[2] P . Kuljuntausta. On/Oﬀ: eetteri¨ a¨ anist¨ a
s¨ ahk¨ omusiikkiin. Like, Helsinki, 2002.
[3] E. Kurenniemi. T aped interview by Mikko Ojanen and
Jari Suominen, Helsinki, 29 May 2004.
[4] E. Kurenniemi. Elektronisen musiikin instrumenteista.
Musiikki, 1:37–41, 1971.
[5] E. Kurenniemi. Musical harmonies are divisor sets. In
Proceedings of Nordic acoustical meeting 88 , pages
371–374, T ampere, 1988.
[6] E. Kurenniemi. Erkki Kurenniemi:
¨ a¨ anityksi¨ a/recordings: 1963-1973. Siboney , Helsinki,
2002. CD.
[7] M. Kurosu and K. Kashimura. Apparent usability vs.
inherent usability: experimental analysis on the
determinants of the apparent usability . In CHI ’95:
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human
factors in computing systems , pages 292–293, 1995.
[8] R. Lundsten. T aped interview by Jari Suominen,
Stockholm, 8 June 2004.
[9] D. Norman. Emotional Design . Basic Books, New
Y ork, 2003.
[10] M. A. Numminen. T aped interview by Jari Suominen,
Helsinki, 7 October 2006.
[11] M. Ojanen. Jukka Ruohom¨ aen s¨ avellystuotanto ja
tyylipiirteet 1970-luvulla: Esimerkkianalyysi teoksesta
P isces. Master’s thesis, University of Helsinki, 2007.
[12] M. Ojanen and J. Suominen. Erkki Kurenniemen
s¨ ahk¨ osoittimet.Musiikki, 3:15–44, 2005.
[13] T. Pinch and F. T rocco. Analog Days: The Invention
and Impact of the Moog Synthesizer . Harvard
University Press, November 2004.
[14] T. Rossing. Science of Sound, 2. edition .
Addison-W esley , New Y ork, 1990.
[15] J. Ruohom¨ aki. T aped interview by Mikko Ojanen, Jari
Suominen and Kai Lassfolk, Helsinki, 4 December
2004.
[16] M. T aanila. F uture is not what it used to be. Kinotar,
Helsinki, 2002. DVD.
[17] K. Tiits. V olunt¨ a¨ ariassistentti Kurenniemi ja
elektronimusiikin alku yliopistolla. Master’s thesis,
University of Helsinki, 1990.
[18] N. T ractinsky . Aesthetics and apparent usability:
empirically assessing cultural and methodological
issues. In CHI ’97: Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on Human factors in computing systems ,
pages 115–122. ACM Press, 1997.
[19] H. Viitasalo. T aped interview by Mikko Ojanen and
Jari Suominen, V antaa, 4 November 2004.
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
93