Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-164
Why Always Versatile?: Dynamically Customizable
Musical Instruments Facilitate Expressive
Performances
Kazushi Nishimoto
Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
/ PRESTO, JST
/ ATR Media Information Science Laboratories
1-1, Asahidai, Tatsunokuchi, Nomi,
Ishikawa, 923-1292, Japan
+817 61 51 1812
knishi@jai st.ac .jp
Chika Oshima and Yohei Miyagawa
Japan Advanced Institute of  Science and Technology
1-1, Asahidai, Tatsunokuchi, Nomi,
Ishikawa, 923-1292, Japan
+817 61 51 1812
{cooshi, y-miyaga} @jaist. ac.jp
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we discussa design principle fort he musical
instruments that are useful for both novices and professional
musicians and that facilitate musically rich expression. We
believe that the versatility of conventional musical
instruments causesd ifficulty in performance. By dynamically
specializing a musical instrument for performing a specific
(genre of)p iece,t he musical instrument could become more
useful for performing the piece and facilitates expressive
performance. Based on this idea, we developed two new types
of musical instruments, i.e., a “given-melody-based musical
in st ru me nt ”a nd a“ harmonic-functi on- basedm usical
instrument.” From the experimental results using two
prototypes, we demonstrate the efficiency of the design
principle.
Keywords
Musical instruments, expression, design principle, degree of
freedom, dynamic specialization
1. INTRODUCTION
Musical instruments are tools for expressing our inner
musical emotion. Them ore easily,d irectly, freelya nd perfectly
we can express our musical emotion through a musical
instrument, the more desirable the musical instrument is, not
only for novices who have never or seldom performed any
musical instruments but also for professionals. However, it is
actually very difficult for us, in particular for novices, to
express our musical emotionb yu sing conventional mus ical
instruments. Even after long and hard practice, we often ca nnot
achieve satisfactory performances.
We thinkt hatt hisp roblem arises fromt he versatility of the
conventional musical instruments. The c onventional
(acoustic) musical instruments are independent of the mus ical
pieces to be performed while using them. Therefore, people can
enjoy performing any musical piece of any genre with the
identical musical instrument. Although this feature greatly
benefits people, the wide applicability of conventional
musical instruments requires a large degree of freedom in
operation and generality. The large degree of freedom makes it
unnecessarily difficult for the performer to perform a piece of
music.
Therefore, it is necessary to reduce or eliminate the
excessive degree of freedom in operation and to specialize the
musical instruments for performing a specific piece. Now, we
have high-quality sound synthesizers and PCs. Th ese allow us
to create new electrical musical in struments that we can freely,
easily, quickly and dynamically customize as the o ccasion
demands. By appropriately reducing the degree of freedom in
operation and by specializing for a certain piece, such new
musical instruments facilitate expressive performance not
only for novices but also for professionals.
In section 2, we discuss the requirements of a musical
instrument that facilitates expressive performances as well as
howthee xcessive degree of freedom in operation should be
reduced or eliminated and how the musical instrument s hould
be specialized for a certain piece. Sections 3 and 4 describe two
newt ypeso fm usical instruments, i.e., a “given- melody-based
musical instrument” and a “harmonic-function-based mus ical
instrument,” and we illustrate two prototype mus ical
instruments, named the “Coloring-in Piano (CiP)” for typical
classical music and “RhyMe” for Be-Bop stylejazz
improvisation. We also show experiments and their results and
evaluate the advantages of the proposed new musical
instruments in these sections. Section 5 compares our
approach with the related works. Section 6 concludes this
paper.
2. A DESIGN PRINCIPLE
2.1 Requirements
Am us ic al in st ru men tt ha tf acilitates expressive
performances fore verybody should satisfy the following
requirements:
1. the initial barrier is low,
2. there is enough room for improvement by practice and
study, and the improvement can be recognized by the
player, and
3. the ultimately achievable quality of performance is not
inferior to that by conventional musical instruments.
     In order for novices to readily enjoy performing music, the
initial barrier must be sufficiently low. If it is too high, most
of the novices, in particular adult novices, would inevitably
give up the idea of enjoying musical performance from the
beginning. However, it is not practical to createa musical
instrument with which a performer can immediately perform
his/her ideal performance without any practice and/or study.
This is because direct extraction of the performer’s idea from
his/her brain is impossible, and an established ideal
performance does not initially exist in the performer’s mind
but is created through practice and/or study[1]. Accordingly,
ther oom for improvement by practice and study is necessary.
Additionally, from the novices’ viewpoint, they would
immediately lose interest in playing it if they cannot improve
or cannot feel improvement in performance even after
practicing hard. A feeling of steady and recognizable
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-165
improvement toward ultimate excellent performances
motivates players to continue practicing and performing.
However, even if am usical instrument satisfies the above two
requirements, professional performers would never use it if the
ultimately achievable quality of performance were inferior to
that by a conventional musical instrument.
2.2 How to sat isfy the requirements
We think that the key to achieving musical instruments that
facilitate expressive performances is dynamic custo mizability.
When a performer performs a Thelonious Monk jazz piece with
amusical instrument, the musical instrument should be
convenient for performing it but need not be convenient for
performing a classical Bach piece, and vice versa. Therefore,
the musical instrument must bea blet ob e dynamically, easily
and quickly customized depending on what is performed with
it.Therea re twoa spects forc ustomizing a musical instrument,
i.e., reduction of unnecessary degree of freedom in operation
and specialization of an interface depending on the piece to be
performed.
2.2.1 Redu ction of unnecessary degree of freedom
There are many musical elements, e.g., pitch, timbre, volume
and rhythm, that should be controlled in a musical
performance. Most of the conventional musical instruments
allow the performer to control all of the musical elements.
However, such a huge degree of freedom is not always
necessary.W e can find that some musical elements require no
(or less) degree of freedom when performing specific (genre of)
pieces. For example, when performing “Fantasie Impromptu
Op. 66” by F. Chopin, no degree of freedom in selection of
pitch is allowed for the performer. The pitches of all of the
notes are a-priori decided by Chopin. Therefore, when
performing this piece, the deg reeo f freedom in selection of
pitch is redundant for the performer. The performer ca nnot
express his/her own musical emotion in reproduction of the
sequence of pitches specified in the score. However, the
performer cannot skip this task. Furthermore, the task must be
accurately executed because even a miss-touch is notallowed.
Thus, such a redundant degree of freedom wastes the
performer’s cognitive and physical abilities.
What thep erformerso f Chopin’s p iece s hould essentially
do (and should devote themselves to) is expression of their
musical emotion that lies beyond ther eproduction task. If the
performersc oulds kipt he reproduction task and directly
tackle expression, they could concentrate their cognitive
ability on expression. Consequently, if we could eliminate or
reduce the unnecessary degree of freedom, the performer would
be able to perform more expressively, and hence professionals
as well as novices could receive some benefit.
2.2.2 Sp ecializing an interface for pieces
The layout of notes on the interface of a conventional
musical instrument is based on the pitch of a note. That is, a
certain pitch is always mapped on a certain position of the
interface. For example, a C4 note is always mapped on the 24th
white key from the leftmost key of a piano. We call this way of
layout “pitch-based note mapping,” and a musical instrument
that employs it a “pitch-based musical instrument.” Though
this is as imple andi ntuitive mapping criterion, it is not
always the best way of mapping. If the degree of freedom in
selection of pitch is reduced when performing a specific (genre
of) piece, the pitch-based note mapping actually becomes
nonsense. Even if the degree of freedom is not reduced for any
musical elements, some different mapping approaches often
facilitate performance. In such a case, the layout should be
changed based on another mapping criterion. However, it is
indispensable to provide a comprehensible, consistent and
definite criterion for mapping notes on the interface for the
performer to precisely project images in his/her mind to
externalized music.
3. GIVEN-MELODY-BASED MUSICAL
INSTRUMENT
This section illustrates a “given-melody-based musical
instrument” for performing musical pieces that require
accurate reproduction of given scores, e.g., typical classical
music, as the first example of a musical instrument based on
the above design principle.
3.1 Basic Co ncept
Them usicalp iecest hatr equire accurate reproduction of
given scores involve two types of elements from the
performer's perspective: non-expressive elements and
expressive elements. The pitches, pitch sequence and basic
rhythm (that is, the time value of each note) are the “non-
expressive elements.” The performers must accurately
reproduce them as the composer directed and hence they
cannot demonstrate their expression.Therefore, control of the
non-expressive elements is not an essential task for the
performers, although they cannot skip this task when using
conventional musical instruments. However, each note has
many other attributes, e.g.,Dynamik (varying and contrasting
degrees of intensity or loudness in musical tones) and Agogik
(a slight deviation fromt he main rhythm and/or thed irected
time values for accentuation purposes). We call these
attributes “expressive elements.” An individual performer’s
expression is reflected in how these expressive elements are
controlled. Therefore, the control of the expressive elements is
the essential task for the performers of this type of musical
piece.
Consequently, in order to f acilitate the pe rformance of this
type of music, we should reduce the degree of freedom in the
non-expressive elements as much as possible. In this type of
music, which notes must be performed at every point in ap iece
are definitely decided. Therefore, only the necessary p itches
should always be mapped on the interface, and the mapped
notes should dynamically change as the performance of the
piece progresses. As a result, the performer can output the
necessary notes without looking for them on the interface.
Owing to this way of mapping notes, the performer is freed
from most of the nonessentia lt asks, and his/her cogn itive and
physical loads are alleviated. Accord ingly, the i nitial barrier
becomes low. On the other hand, the performer is still in charge
of controlling all of the expressive elements for adding his/her
original expression. Namely, the degree of freedom for
expression is not reduced at all. Therefore, the given- melody-
based musical instrument is as expressive as c onventional
musical instruments and provides much room for
improvement of musical expression.
Figure 1: Setup of CiP
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-166
3.2 Coloring -in Piano
Here, we describe a prototype given-melody-based mus ical
instrument named “Coloring-in Piano (CiP).”
3.2.1 Setup of CiP
Figure 1 shows the setup of CiP. CiP consists of a MIDI
(Musical Instrument Digital In terface) keyboard, a music-
database, a function for replacing note numbers, and a tone-
generator. Before performing, it is necessary to prepare a
sequenceo fM IDI note-numbers (corresponding to pitches) of
the piece to be performed in the music-database. While
performing, the replacing function replaces the played note-
numbers with the note-numbers registered in the music-
database, based on the order in which they were input.
Accordingly, the correct note number is always output by
touching anyk ey.O nt he otherh and, thee xpressive elements,
i.e., note-on (key down) velocity, note-off (key up) velo city,
onset/offset timing, and pedal messages, are output as the
performer plays. Finally, the replaced pitch numbers are input
into the sound generator with the expressive elements
preserved as they were performed. We implemented the above
system on a laptop PC (OS: Windows 2000) using Delphi 6.
We used a YAMAHA silent grand piano C5 professional model
that outputs MIDI note-on/off, and pedal control messages.
The piano was connected to the laptop PC.
3.2.2 Experiment to Evaluate CiP’s Expressiveness
This section describes experiments conducted to evaluate
the potential expressiveness of CiP. In addition, we discuss
how the interface of CiP should be designed.
3.2.2.1 Method of evaluations
The second author of this paper, who is a professional piano
teacher, performed parts of two pieces on the c onventional
piano and on CiP. One of the p ieces was “Tendre F leur,” which
is one of the 25 Leichte etuden Op. 100 by F. Burgmuller. We
called it “Piece-A.” The other piece was “Grande Polonaise
Brillante Op. 22”by F. Chopin, which was called “Pi ece-B.”
Both are examples of the style known as romanticism and
include various articulations. Figures 2 and 3 show eight bars
selected from each piece. She played only the melody without
accompaniment. In the CiP case, the pieces were performed
three ways, e.g., using only one finger for one key performance
(CiP-1), using only two fingers for two-key performance (CiP-
2),a nd using five fingers for all-key performance (CiP-5). All
performances were recorded.
We asked twenty subjects who are experienced in piano
playing, e.g., those who had finished the Bayer Manual, to
evaluate ther ecorded performances.W e let thes ubjects listen
to four pairs of performances, i.e., pairs of a performance on a
conventional piano and CiP-1, CiP-2, CiP-5 or the performance
on the conventional piano. All of the evaluations were
conducted under blind conditions.Therefore, the sub jects did
not know how a performance was recorded or which
performances they were comparing even when they listened to
the pair of the same performances on the conventional piano.
We asked them to evaluate each performance from the
perspective of whether it is musical (1: not musical to 5: very
musical ), where we explained that “musical” means
“interesting” or/and “comfortable.”
3.2.2.2 Analysis of performance data
Based on the performance data in the MIDI format, we
calculated inter-onset interval (IOI) and gap time. The IOI is
obtained as
IOIi = tNon(i+1) –t Non(i) ,( 1 )
where IOIi is the i-th IOI, and tNon(i) is emitted time of the i-th
note-on message Non(i).T he gap time is obtained as
gap i = tNon(i+1) –t Noff(i)  , (2)
where gapi is the i-th gap time, and tNoff(i) is the emitted time of
the i-th note-off message Noff(i) .H e nce, if gapi is positive, the
performer shortened the i-th note. Additionally, we extracted
the velocity values included in the MIDI note-on message. The
velocity of a note-on message s hows the velocity of stepping
down a key and nearly corresponds to the sound level of the
note.
Table 1: Average values of evaluations of musicality. An
asterisk (*) indicates a significant difference of 1%.
Figure 4: Transition of average note-on velocity values of
the four ways of performance of Piece-A.
3.2.3 Results
3.2.3.1 Evaluation by the sub jects
Table 1 shows the average evaluation values of mus icality
by the twenty subjects. The reason why the values of
“conventional” for each piece are different is that all of the
Figure 2: Bars 1-8 of "Tendre Fleur,” which is one of the 25
Leichte Etuden Op. 100 by A. Burgmuller
Figure 3: Bars 220-227 of "Grande Polonaise Brillante Op.
22” by F. Chopin
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-167
evaluations were conducted under blind conditions. The
results of a t-test indicate that CiP-2 and 5 performances are as
musical as that of the conventional piano performance, though
the musicality of the CiP-1 performance is significantly worse
than that of the conventional piano performance.
3.2.3.2 Performance data
The IOI so ft he four performance methods (CiP-1, CiP-2,
CiP-5 and a conventional piano) are very similar for both
pieces. Therefore, the performer could reproduce the basic
structures of the pieces by any of the musical instruments.
However, we found evident differences in gap time and
velocity data. The gap time of CiP-1 was always positive.
When performing CiP-1, the performer must always release the
key. This means that the performer cannot perform a legato
expression with CiP-1. Figure4 showst he transition of the
average note-on velocity values of the four performance
methods for Piece-A. It is clear that the velocity of the CiP-2
performance decreases remarkably around the 14th note
comparing to the other performances.
3.2.4 Discussion
The results shown in Table 1 indicate that CiP, except for
CiP-1, have enough potential for rich m usical expression and
are not inferior to the conventional piano. The reason why CiP-
1i si n f e r i o rt othe others is that CiP-1 reduced the degree of
freedom in a necessary element, i.e., the overlap time between
two consecutive notes, which is preserved in CiP-2 and 5.
However, from the result shown in Figs. 4, we found that the
pieces were expressed differently between, in particular, CiP-2
performances and the conventional piano performances. This
might derive from the differences in fingering between two-
finger use and five-finger use. For example, there is quite a
large pitch gap between notes No. 12 and No. 13 in Piece-A
(see Fig. 3). While the performer’s hand had to move a long
wayt ot he right when performingt he part on thec onventional
piano, her hand did not need to move so far when performing
the part on CiP-2 (only one-key distance). This motion
difference should have affected the difference between the
expressions (velocity, in particular).
We cannot easily conclude wh ich expression is better.
Please notet hatC iP is not as ubspecies of thec onventional
piano but a new musical instrument. Therefore, CiP does not
need to have the same expressiveness as that of the
conventional piano. In fact, CiP-2 may permit novel
expression that cannot be achieved by the conventional piano:
CiP-2 always allowslegato expression, however large the
difference in pitch between consecutive notes is.
4. HARMONIC-FUNCTION-BASED
MUSICAL INSTRUMENT
This section describes a “harmonic-function-based musical
instrument” for performing musical pieces that require
harmonic analysis of chord progression while performing a
given piece, e.g., improvisational performance in the Be-Bop
style of jazz music.
4.1 Basic Co ncept
In this section, we describe the basic concept of the
harmonic-function-based musical instrument by using as an
example the improvisationalp erformance in Be-Bop style jazz
(hereafter, simply called “jazz improvisation”). In contrast
with the performance of classical music, the performer is
required to concurrently execute two different tasks in jazz
improvisation: composing melodies based on a given chord
progression and externalizing the composed melodies while
adding expression with a musical instrument.
Although it seems that the entire former task, i.e.,
composingm elodies,i se xpressive,w et hink that therea re still
non-expressive sub-tasks involved. When composing
melodies in jazz improvisation, a performer 1) reads the chord
progression from a score, 2) analyzes it based on a harmonic
theory, 3) obtains a function of each note, 4) c hooses notes
having functions that are suitable for the performer's desired
expressions, and 5) finally composes melodies by
concatenating the chosen notes with suitable rhythm. In other
words, the performer translates the attribute of each note from
“pitch” to “harmonic function” through theoretical analysis
(steps 1 to 3) and then composes melodies based on the
functions of the notes, not on the pitches of the notes (steps 4
and 5). In these five steps, we can say that the performer’s
expressiveness is reflected only in steps 4 and 5. Though steps
1t o3can be executed mechanically based on established
theory, these steps place a very high c ognitive load on the
performer. As a result, novices, in particular, cannot have the
extra cognitive ability to compose good melodies.
     In the externalization of composed melodies, the performer
must look for notes based on their harmonic functions, not
their pitch, on a musical instrument interface. Therefore, the
notes should be mapped on the interface based on their
harmonic functions. Each of the twelve notes in an octave has a
different function in a certain harmony. By providing the
twelve positions in an octave on the interface of a musical
instrument, by assigning a specific function to a specific
position, and by constantly mapping a note with a specific
function to the corresponding position, we can construct a new
musical instrument specialized for jazz improvisation. By
operating a certain position, the performer can always
immediately obtain a note with the required function, though
the pitch of the obtained note changes along with the chord
progression. Thus, even a novice can directly tackle the
expressive tasks by skipping these non-expressive tasks, and
ap rofessional can concentratem oreo fh is/her ability on
expressive tasks.
4.2 RhyMe
Here, we describe a prototype harmonic-function-based
musical instrument named “RhyMe.”
4.2.1 Setup of RhyMe
Figure 5 shows the setup of RhyMe. The system consists of
two modules: a chord-progression analysis module and a
dynamic mapping module. The chord-progression analysis
module analyzes the chord progression of a musical piece
based on the Berklee theory, which was developed at the
Berklee College of Music and is the most well known
harmonict heoryi nB e-Bop style jazz improvis ation, and then
obtains available note scales for each chord. Using the
obtained available note scale data, the dynamic mapping
module dynamically maps the notes to an interface in the
following manner. Usually, a scale consists of seven notes.
Each note is named by a number relative to the position from
the root note, i.e., I, II, III, IV, V, VI and VII, where I is the root
note. These positions correspond to the functions of the notes.
Fore xample, the III noteh as thef unction of expressing
tonality: minor or major of the chord/scale. Accordingly, we
name the function of each note by the number of the note's
position, e.g., the function of the III note is named “fun ction-
III.” For example, the F-mixolydian scale consists of F, G, A, B-
flat, C, D, and E-flat notes. Therefore, the function-III note of
this scale is A. The functions of the notes not included in the
currently available note scale are also named based on the
number of scale-notes, e.g., function-flat-II and function-
sharp-IV. Finally, a note of a certain function is constantly
mapped to a corresponding position on the interface. For
instance, the note of function-III is always mapped to the
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-168
position of function-III. As a result, all of the notes are mapped
on the interface based on their harmonic functions. The
mapping dynamically changes as the chord progresses (i.e., the
available note scale changes). Moreover, we can choice notes
based on their intervals by this way of mapping. For instance,
if we want a note that is two degree higher than the function-II
note, we can geti tb yt he position of fun ction-IV. Thus, the
mapping of notes is specialized for Be-bop improvis ation,
while RhyMe does not reduce the degree of freedom of any
musical element.
Figure 5: Setup of RhyMe
In thec urrent implementation, we applied a MIDI ke yboard
(KORG M1) as the interface. Functions I to VII were assigned
to the C to B keys, respectively. The out-of-scale functions
were mapped on the black keys. In this prototype, a note that is
asemi-tone lower than the white key to the right of the b lack
key is mapped as an expedient. Because of this mapping
method for the black keys, an in-scale note is assigned to a
black key in some cases.
4.2.2 Experiments
We conducted an experiment using RhyMe for jazz
improvisation to evaluate whether novice users could easily
perform jazz improvisation. We employed nine subjects and
let them play improvisations of “Autumn Leaves” using
RhyMe as well as using the same keyboard in normal p itch-
based note mapping mode, i.e., a conventional keyboard as it
is.B eforeb eginning thee xperiments, we brieflye xplained
how RhyMe works to the subjects. After the exper imental
performances, we posed the following questions to the
subjects:
1. Was it easy to operate this instrument? (1: Very difficult,
5: Very easy)
2. Was your performance good? (1: Very bad, 5: Very good)
3. Was your performance jazzy? (1: Not jazzy, 5: Very jazzy)
4. Did you enjoy performing this instrument? (1: No, 5:
Yes)
5. D o you think you could perform as you wanted to
perform? (1: No, 5: Yes)
6. Do you think you could improve your performance with
practice? (1: No, 5: Yes)
7. Do you want to continue to pe rform on this instrument?
(1: No, 5: Yes)
8. Do you think you can play a session performance with
other performers using this instrument? (1: No, 5: Yes)
Table 2 shows the average values of each inquiry for RhyMe
and for the normal keyboard. The asterisks in the “t” column
show the results of t-tests comparing the average values in
each inquiry: an asterisk indicates a significant difference of
2%. From these results, we confirmed that RhyMe was
evaluated more highly than the normal keyboard for all of the
questions. Furthermore, RhyMes cored significantly better
than the normal keyboard for all of the questions except Nos. 1
and 5.
4.2.3 Discussion
Theh armonicf unction of notes is not such a common
concept, particularly the novices. However, t hough the
subjects did not understand the harmonic function well, they
could satisfactorily perform on RhyMe. This fact proves that
RhyMe does not initially require a deep understanding of the
harmonic-function. Therefore, this novel way of mapping does
nothave ab ad influence on the alleviation of the in itial
barrier. On the contrary, it makes it easy for the subjects to
perform jazz improvisation, as the results in Table 3 show. We
could not find anys ignificant difference between RhyMe and
the normal keyboard in question No. 1. We think this result
relates to the fact that both musical instruments had the same
interface device. Namely, it is assumed that the instrument’s
ease of operation is strongly dominated by its interface device.
However, despite the interface problem, RhyMe was evalu ated
as being much better than the normal keyboard in all other
questions. In particular, the high scores of RhyMe in
questions 6, 7 and 8 suggest that the subjects had great
expectations of theirf uturea bility to enjoy performing music
with the harmonic-function-based musical instrument, t hough
they did not expect such enjoymentw ith thec onventional
instrument.
5. DISCUSSION AND RELATED WORKS
Recently, various instruments for novices’ entertainment
have been developed. The “Two Finger Piano”[2] is a system
that allows the user to coarsely handle tempo andDynamik for
each “beat” or for each half-beat (but not for each note) by
using two fingers. Therefore, it is impossible to control
Agogik, which requires note-level control. The CASIO LK-40
Lighted Keyboard [3] is equipped with a similar function to
CiP that always only outputs available pitches of a piece by
hitting any key. However, this system outputs constant
velocity values. Therefore,Dynamik cannot be expressed by
this system. “MusPlay”[4] and the “any key play” mode of the
Table 2: Results of eight-question inquiry for
improvisational performances using RhyMe and a
normal keyboard
No. RhyMe Normal t No. RhyMe Normal t
1 2.94 2.56 5 2.50 1.94
2 2.50 1.75 * 6 3.81 2.50 *
3 3.06 1.94 * 7 4.25 3.19 *
4 3.81 2.50 * 8 3.75 2.25 *
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-169
Yamaha EZ-20 and 30 keyboard s[5] are very similar to CiP. In
addition, MusPlay allows us to play a two-handed pol yphony
performance. As for the mechanism, CiP is not so advanced
from these systems. However, it is not assumed that
professional musicians use these musical instruments.
Therefore, no experiments have been conducted to evaluate
their potential for expression. On the contrary, we focused on a
mechanism that could benefit professionals as well asnovices,
andw ep rovedt hatC iP is as expressive as conventional
musical instruments in classical music performances.
The “adlib-musician” function of CASIO CT-647 ke yboard
is similar to RhyMe. However, in the CT-647, only notes
included in the presently available note scale are mapped on
the keys. In addition, the way of mapping notes is different
from RhyMe: a note whose pitch is the same or the nearest
neighbor of the original pitch of a key on the normal ke yboard
is mappedt ot he key. “INSPIRATION”[6] alsoc hangesi nput
notes to theoretically correct notes automatically. Therefore, in
these systems, neither pitch nor the harmonic-function of a
note mapped to a certain key is always stable.Consequently,
though the performer can perform improvisation as if he/she
hadb ecome an experiencedm usician, thep erformer cannot
intentionally compose melodies by using these systems: there
always remain unexpected factors. On the other hand,RhyMe
always provides an evident and stable criterion of mapping of
notes: the harmonic-function-based note mapping. Therefore,
the performer can intentionally compose melodies by
considering the harmonic functions of notes. In addition, all
twelve notes are (basically) always available on RhyMe for
allowing a fully expressive and profound improvisation by
using even incorrect notes (i.e., dissonant notes).
Thus,t he threer equirements, i.e.,l ow initial barrier, e nough
room for improvement, and potential for rich expression, have
not yet been satisfied in anyo rdinary ( electric) mus ical
instrument. However, we showed that they could be satisfied in
one musical instrument by considering the degree of freedom
of musical elements and specializing the interface of the
musical instrument for a specific (genre of) musical piece.
Hunt et al.[7,8] showed that a m ultiparametric interface is
more useful and expressive than a simple one-to-one mapping
between each control input and each musical parameter for
most people. We also empirically thought so. Therefore, we
employed multi-parametric interfaces for CiP andRhyMe.
However, we think that it is not always necessary to
integratedly control all the musical parameters and that only
“expressive elements” should be integratedly controlled. Our
experimental results would support this concept. Hunt et al.[9]
discussedt he importance of mapping between thew ay of input
and that of output in electric musical inst ruments. They
focused on the importance of a kind of affordance of musical
instruments, while we focus on the importance of an evident
criterion of mapping. Chadabe[10] pointed out that theelectric
musical instruments have been freed from tight and fixed
relationships between controller and sound generator and that
the instruments should employ more flexible mapping
between them. We strongly agree with this position and
believe the two musical instruments described in this paper,
i.e., the “given-melody-based musical instrument” and the
“harmonic-function-based musical instrument,” represent
incarnations of this concept.
6. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we discusseda design principle of musical
instruments that are useful for both novices and professional
musicians and that facilitate musically rich expression. We
pointed out that versatility causes difficulty in performance.
By eliminating the unnecessary degree of freedom in operation
and by appropriately specializing a musical instrument for
performing a specific (genre of) piece, the musical instrument
becomes more useful for performing the piece and facilitates
musical expression. Based on the proposed principle, we
developed two new types of musical instruments, i.e., a “given-
melody-based musical instrument” and a “harmonic-function-
based musical instrument.” Using two prototypes, we
demonstrated the efficiencies of the proposed principle based
on the experimental results. By exploiting this principle, we
can create new musical instruments that serve as an
introduction to musical performance as well as a tool for
exploring the entire world of expressive musical performance,
without changing the instruments.
This study was supported in part by the
Telecommunications Advancement Organization of Japan.
7. REFE RENCES
[1] Schon, D. A.: Th e Reflective Pra ctitioner: How
Professionals Think in Action ,H arpercollins, 1983.
[2] Ueda.K ., Hirai. S.,K atayose. H. and Inokuchi. S., The
improvement of Two Finger Piano, IPSJ Symposium
Series Vol.2000, No.4., 2000. (in Japanese)
[3] http://www.casio.com/musicalinstruments/product.cfm?s
ection=35&market=0&product=4057
[4] http://www.cs.utk.edu/~plank/plank/music/musplay/
[5] http://www.yamaha.com/cgi-
win/webcgi.exe/DsplyModel/?gPPK00005EZ30
[6] Yatsui, A. and Katayose, H.: An Accommodating Piano
which augments intention of inexperienced players,Proc.
Intl. workshop on Entertainment Computing , 2002.
[7] Hunt, A., Wanderley, M. M., and Kirk, R.: Towards a Model
forI nstrumentalM apping in Expert Musical In teraction,
Proc. International Computer Music Conference
(ICMC2000) , 2000.
[8] Hunt, A., and Kirk, R.: Mapping Strategies for Musical
Performance,Trends in Gestural Control of Music , Ircam,
2000.
[9] Hunt, A., Wanderley, M. M., and Paradis, M.: The
importance of parameter mapping in electronic instrument
design,Proc. The 2002 Conference on New Instruments
for Musical Expression (NIME-2002) , 2002.
[10] Chadabe, J.: The Limitations of Mapping as a Structural
Descriptive in Electric Instruments,Proc.T he 2002
Conference on New Instruments for Musical Expression
(NIME-2002), 2002.