Optical Measurement of Acoustic Drum Strike Locations
Janis Sokolovskis
Centre for Digital Music, School of EECS
Queen Mary University of London
Mile End Road, London, E1 4NS, UK
janis.sokolovskis@qmul.ac.uk
Andrew P . McPherson
Centre for Digital Music, School of EECS
Queen Mary University of London
Mile End Road, London, E1 4NS, UK
a.mcpherson@qmul.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
This paper presents a method for locating the position of
a strike on an acoustic drumhead. Near-ﬁeld optical sen-
sors were installed underneath the drumhead of a commer-
cially available snare drum. By implementing a time dif-
ference of arrival (TDOA) algorithm, accuracy within 2cm
was achieved in approximating the location of strikes. This
method could be used for drum performance analysis, tim-
bre analysis and can form a basis for an augmented drum
performance system.
Keywords
augmented drum, position sensing, optical sensors, TDOA,
gesture capture
1. INTRODUCTION
Position measurement of impacts on an acoustic drum has
applications both for performance analysis and for extended
percussion instrument performance, but few performance-
ready solutions exist. Several commercial electronic drum
pads oﬀer forms of position measurement, but these lack
the same tactile response and richness of sound provided
by a good acoustic drum. Measurements directly on an
acoustic instrument require careful design in order to avoid
disrupting the player’s performance. Practical issues such
as transport and setup time should also be considered.
This paper describes a method for capturing the loca-
tion of strikes on an acoustic snare drum. The system is
easy to transport and non-intrusive to the player since it
is hidden inside the drum frame, beneath the head. Six
near-ﬁeld optical sensors are installed inside the drum to
capture the displacement of the skin (Figure 1). The lo-
cation of the hit is approximated using time diﬀerence of
arrival (TDOA) [18], a technique commonly used in radar
and other ﬁelds which has also been applied to interactive
systems [13]. The current system maintains the acoustic
properties of the drum while recording position information
in real time.
2. RELATED WORK
2.1 Position Sensing Percussive Systems
Tindale et al. [16] give a very descriptive list of percussive
gesture capture tools and techniques. Some of the more
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’14,June 30 – July 03, 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Figure 1: Hardware design for the system. Top: drum
without the skin. Bottom: inside the drum, looking up
toward the head
prominent systems make use of piezo transducers and force
sensing resistors (FSR). The location of strikes was approx-
imated with the use of several vibration sensors that are
closely positioned underneath a rubber drum pad. Sim-
mons SDX [15], Roland Handsonic 1, and DrumKat 2 make
use of the FSRs since when placed closely together, they
are less susceptible to crosstalk than piezo sensors. Roland
V-Drums approximated radial distance from the centre of
the cymbal pad by measuring the period of the ﬁrst half-
wave of output signal received by the sensor [1]. In [17],
Tindale et al. used audio analysis to classify drum strikes
1http://www.roland.co.uk
2http://www.alternatemode.com
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
70
according to timbre. With the use of machine learning they
could classify the radial position of a drum strike based on
its spectral features.
There are only a handful of systems that attempt to solve
the issue of capturing position of a drum strike. An aug-
mented djembe drum [10] made use of computer vision. By
installing a webcam underneath the skin of the drum the
system was able to interpret shadow displacement into 3D
position of the hand. The shortfall of systems using shadows
is the requirement of adequate lighting to be present dur-
ing the performance. Similarly Gray et al. [5] augmented a
snare drum to allow the performer to trigger audio and video
samples. To reinforce information obtained by the camera,
the system also featured piezo transducer attached to the
drum skin and ﬂex sensors embedded into the brushes.
Paradiso et al. [13] proposed a glass surface that could ap-
proximate the location and distinguish diﬀerent gestures by
their acoustic features, knocks, metal taps and ﬁst bashes.
This was achieved by capturing their acoustical features
with the use of piezo transducers. Lopes et al. [9] created
a multi-touch surface which builds on the same principle
but with contact microphones instead and used Laser Light
Plane for multi-touch. The system’s goal was to explore the
possibilities of integrating touch and sound to expand input
language of surface interaction. Using the same method
with addition of FSRs, McCloskey et al. [11] created a per-
cussive performance surface. Ishii et al. [6] used an array of
microphones underneath a ping pong table to approximate
the location of ball impacts.
2.2 Optical Sensors in Musical Instruments
Roland D-Beam is one of the commercial products that cap-
tures performance gestures using infrared (IR) technology.
The system can detect the distance between the hand and
the sensor. The distance can be mapped to parameters on
the performance device. Buchla Lightning makes use of IR
technology to capture 2D position of two drumsticks that
are waved in the air. Buchla Thunder also used IR sensors
to measure distance between the ﬁnger and the performance
pads.
Although there are a small number of percussive instru-
ments that use optical sensing for capturing musical ges-
tures there are no systems that use optical sensing for cap-
turing the position of a drum strike.
Authors in [14] demonstrated the usefulness of near-ﬁeld
optical sensors in musical performance gesture capture. The
sensors were installed on a bow of a violin to capture bow
position. The paper addressed the issue of capturing some
of the performance gestures of a violin player without lim-
iting the performance with the size of the system and its
aﬀect on the performance. Leroy et al. [7] devised a violin
pickup using near-ﬁeld IR sensors to capture the vibrations
of each string. The system yielded good results and could
track the pitch of vibrating strings. McPherson [12] used IR
sensor for capturing continuous key motion on piano. The
system featured MIDI out capability and could extend the
performance of an acoustic piano.
3. METHOD
Six QRE1113 optical reﬂectance sensors (also used in [14])
are placed radially around the head of an acoustic snare
drum. The IR LED of each sensor illuminates the under-
side of the head, and the intensity of the reﬂected light is
converted to a voltage by a phototransistor circuit (Fig-
ure 2). The signal from each phototransistor is sampled at
96kHz by an audio interface.
3.1 Hardware
LED Photo-
trans.
Strike
Vibrating drumhead
Direction of travel
Signal captured by the the sensor
Voltage
Time
Figure 2: Wave propagation is captured with the use of
near-ﬁeld optical sensor.
A laser-cut wooden frame was assembled and installed in-
side the drum. The frame was designed to hold six printed
circuit boards (PCBs) with the QRE1113 sensors (Figure 1).
The height adjusting design of the frame allows further ex-
perimentation with tension of the drumhead. The schematic
in Figure 3 is taken from [14] with an additional capaci-
tor. IC1 acts as a transimpedance ampliﬁer, converting the
collector current from Q1 into a voltage according to the
relationship Vo = -Io * Rl. C1 blocks the DC level of IC1
before it is sampled by the audio ADC.
Recorded signals were analysed in Matlab and approxi-
mation was carried out with the use of TDOA method.
Vi
Vb
Io
Vo
−
+
R l
Figure 3: Schematic of near-ﬁeld optical sensors.
3.2 TDOA
TDOA is a common technique used in GPS tracking, radar
systems and sound-source localisation problems [18], [8] and
[13]. The method is based on measuring the diﬀerence of
wave arrival time to two receivers at known locations. By
observing Figure 4a we can denote that pairwise diﬀerence
can be obtained using
S1P − S2P = s∆T, (1)
where s is the speed of signal propagating through a medium
and ∆T is the time diﬀerence. From these measurements a
hyperboloid can be constructed using:
x2
a2 − y2
c2 − a2 = 1, (2)
where a = s∆T/2 and c = S1S2/2. Since hyperbola pro-
duces two loci, one locus is chosen using the sign of the
TDOA. There are inﬁnite number of points P that satisfy
the measurement. The unique location is obtained by read-
ing the intersection of several hyperbolas derived from mul-
tiple pairs of sensors. Since sensors on our system are not
placed linearly we need to translate and rotate the hyper-
bola.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
71
a
c
P (x,y)
(a) Hyperbola is deﬁned as the locus of all points P.
O(x,y)
θ
Δx
Δy (b) Intersection of pair of hyperbolas. The signal source is at O.
Figure 4: TDOA algorithm geometry.
Current implementation uses a low pass ﬁlter at 10kHz to
decrease some of the noise. Due to the interference caused
by ﬂuorescent lighting a notch ﬁlter at 100Hz was imple-
mented to eliminate this source of noise. TDOA was ap-
proximated using simple thresholding set above the noise
level (Figure 5). The limitation of using such an approach
is its susceptibility to false triggering which is caused by pre-
viously decaying strike. With this in mind the time between
strikes is set to 1 second. Such method does not consider
low intensity strikes. The drum hits have to be hard enough
to breach the threshold level. The speed of the wavefront
produced by the strikes in the drum used in (1) is calculated
using:
s= 2πrf
2.045, (3)
as described by Fletcher and Rossing [4], where f is the
frequency (in Hz) of the fundamental mode of the drum
and r is the radius.
For the approximation of a unique location of a drum
strike six hyperbolas were constructed. Each hyperbola was
produced by two neighbouring sensors. In an ideal mem-
brane all of the hyperbolas should intersect at a unique
location. Due to the imperfections of the drumhead and
imprecise tensions around the edges of the skin some hy-
perbolas did not intersect. In Figure 6 we can see that
hyperbolas derived from S1S2 did not intersect S5S6 and
S3S4 did not intersect S6S1. For the hyperbolas that did
intersect the average was calculated. Non-intersecting pairs
of hyperbolas were not included in the calculation.
Samples at 96kHz
Analysis Window
Amplitude
Figure 5: Analysis window for approximating the diﬀer-
ences. The time is read and compared with the other sensors
to get the TDOA.
4. RESULTS
Strike Approximation
Distance in mm
Distance in mm
Figure 6: Intersections of all pairwise hyperbolas and ap-
proximation of the drum strike.
To test the system’s accuracy, the tip of a drumstick was
painted to leave marks on the drumhead at the time of
impact. A photo was then superimposed on the design of
the drum and measurement of each strike was annotated.
The error was measured using Euclidian distance between
strikes and approximations. The middle point of the mark-
ing left on the drumhead is considered as the ground truth.
Two drumheads of the same brand were used with diﬀer-
ent tensions, however there were no signiﬁcant diﬀerences
in error approximation for the two drumheads. The average
error for 100 drum strikes was 18mm with maximum error
of 54mm.
The correlation analysis for the two drumheads showed
that the distance from the centre of the drum is positively
correlated with the error of the approximation of the strikes
(p< 0.01,r = 0.52). This can be seen in ﬁgure Figure 7, as
the distance from the centre increases so does the range of
errors. The black dashed line shows the ideal measurement.
Equation 3 assumes that the velocity of wave-front propa-
gating through the drumhead is uniform. This assumption
is violated the most when the strikes occur near the rim
since the speed of the wavefront dissipates with time. One
possible solution to this problem is discussed in the next
section.
5. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
72
0 20 40 60 80 100 1200
20
40
60
80
100
120
Measured distance in mm
Approximated distance in mm
Measured vs Approximated
Figure 7: Approximated and measured distance from the
centre of the drum.
The current implementation assumes that the speed of the
wave propagated through the drumhead is constant, how-
ever as shown by Fletcher and Rossing [4] the fundamental
pitch at the time of impact can shift as much as 10% depend-
ing on the intensity and position of the strike. The intensity
of strikes is not considered in current implementation due
to inherent manufacturing diﬀerences for the phototransis-
tor. Transistors of the same brand produce diﬀerent current
output. One of the suggestions would be to ﬁne-tune the
pull-up resistor R2 in Figure 3 as suggested in [14]. The
change of speed could also be approximated by taking into
consideration bending stiﬀness and non-uniform density of
the material of the drumhead.
In literature the TDOA for wave-source localisation prob-
lems are approximated using cross-correlation. In current
implementation such method was not used because of the
peak-ambiguities present in the raw signal which produced
more erroneous results. Current method uses simple thresh-
olding which as discussed before is not reliable for drum-
strikes in a quick succession. One of the suggestions would
be to use a more robust onset detection algorithm. There
are many onset detection methods described in [2], however
most of them are dealing in frequency domain which might
not be acceptable in live performance where the latency of
the system is crucial. One possible solution would be to
use combination of very small FFT window and backtrack-
ing algorithm [3]. The backtracking algorithm could look
at the acceleration changes of the ﬁltered signal within the
FFT onset window.
6. APPLICATIONS
In current state the system can be used for sample trigger-
ing through the use of MIDI. As well as triggering samples
the system can be used for controlling performance param-
eters or toggling an eﬀect on or oﬀ. In the context of live
performance the size and cost of the system could be re-
duced by installing an embedded hardware device such as
BeagleBone3 or a DSP chip. At the moment the main cost
of the system is the ADC (audio interface), optical sensors
and the electronics are inexpensive. The main advantage of
using embedded hardware device in the future is its set-up
time and portability.
As discussed in the review section, Tindale et al. [17]
classiﬁed drum strikes according to timbre. With the use of
augmented drum proposed in current report we can investi-
gate how do small changes in the locations of strikes aﬀect
the frequency spectrum. By installing the system under-
neath other percussive instruments such as timpani, further
study into timbre analysis of other percussive instruments
3http://beagleboard.org/
can be conducted.
In the context of performance analysis playing techniques
could be studied and compared between players.
7. CONCLUSION
This paper has described a method of approximating the
location of drum strikes using optical sensing and time dif-
ference of arrival (TDOA) calculations. The present imple-
mentation achieves mean accuracy within 2cm on a snare
drum. The TDOA technique is suitable for real-time use,
though improved onset detection is needed prior to use in
most performance situations. Possible applications of posi-
tion detection include performance analysis, timbre analysis
and augmented percussion performance.
8. REFERENCES
[1] R. Aimi. Hybrid Percussion: Extending Physical
Instruments Using Sampled Acoustics. PhD thesis,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2006.
[2] S. Dixon. Onset detection revisited. In DAFX, 2006.
[3] D. P. Ellis. Beat tracking by dynamic programming.
Journal of New Music Research, 36(1):51–60, 2007.
[4] N. H. Fletcher and T. D. Rossing. The Physics of
Musical Instruments. Springer-Verlag: New York,
1991.
[5] R. Gray, S. Lindsell, R. Minster, I. Symonds, and
K. Ng. An augmented snare drum. In ICMC, 2009.
[6] H. Ishii, C. Wisneski, J. Orbanes, B. Chun, and
J. Paradiso. Pingpongplus: design of an
athletic-tangible interface for computer-supported
cooperative play. InCHI, 1999.
[7] N. Leroy, E. Fl´ ety, and F. Bevilacqua. Reﬂective
optical pickup for violin. In NIME, 2006.
[8] N. Liu, Z. Xu, and B. Sadler. Low-complexity
hyperbolic source localization with a linear sensor
array.Signal Processing Letters, IEEE, 15:865–868,
2008.
[9] P. Lopes, R. Jota, and J. A. Jorge. Augmenting touch
interaction through acoustic sensing. In ACM, 2011.
[10] T. M ¨aki-Patola, P. H¨am¨al¨ainen, and A. Kanerva. The
augmented djembe drum - sculpting rhythms. In
NIME, 2006.
[11] J. McCloskey, D. Anderson, R. Jennings, and
D. Medine. Multi-input sensing table: A sensor fusion
for drumming. 2012.
[12] A. P. McPherson. Portable measurement and
mapping of continuous piano gesture. In NIME, 2013.
[13] J. Paradiso, C. Leo, N. Checka, and K. Hsiao. Passive
acoustic sensing for tracking knocks atop large
interactive displays. In2002 IEEE International
Conference on Sensors, 2002.
[14] L. S. Pardue and A. P. McPherson. Near-ﬁeld optical
reﬂective sensing for bow tracking. In NIME, 2013.
[15] Simmons Electronics. SDX Manual, 1987.
[16] A. R. Tindale, A. Kapur, G. Tzanetakis, P. F.
Driessen, and W. A. Schloss. A comparison of sensor
strategies for capturing percussive gestures. In NIME,
2005.
[17] A. R. Tindale, A. Kapur, G. Tzanetakis, and
I. Fujinaga. Retrieval of percussion gestures using
timbre classiﬁcation techniques. In ISMIR, 2004.
[18] J. Valin, F. Michaud, J. Rouat, and D. Letourneau.
Robust sound source localization using a microphone
array on a mobile robot. In IROS, 2003.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
73