The Haptic Hand
Edgar Berdahl
School of Music and CCT
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, LA, 70803, USA
edgarberdahl@lsu.edu
Denis Huber
Audio Communication Group
Technical University of Berlin, Germany
Sekr. EN-8, Einsteinufer 17c
denis.adrian.huber@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
The haptic handis a greatly simpliﬁed robotic hand that
is designed to mirror the human hand and provide haptic
force feedback for applications in music. The “ﬁngers” of
the haptic handdevice are laid out to align with four of
the ﬁngers of the human hand. A key is placed on each of
the “ﬁngers” so that a human hand can perform music by
interacting with the keys. Thehaptic handis distinguished
from other haptic keyboards in the sense that each ﬁnger is
meant to stay with a particular key. Thehaptic handpro-
motes unencumbered interaction with the keys. The user
can easily position a ﬁnger over a key and press downward
to activate it—the user does not need to insert his or her
ﬁngers into an unwieldy exoskeleton or set of thimbles.
An example video demonstrates some musical ideas af-
forded by this open-source software and hardware project.1
Author Keywords
NIME, haptic, haptic hand, open-source hardware, sound
and music computing, motorized fader
ACM Classiﬁcation
H.5.5 [Information Interfaces and Presentation] Sound and
Music Computing, H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Pre-
sentation] User Interfaces—Haptic I/O, I.2.9 [Artiﬁcial In-
telligence] Robotics—Propelling mechanisms.
1. INTRODUCTION
Since as early 1978, music technology researchers have been
investigating how to provide musical instruments with hap-
tic force feedback [5]. For example, J.-L. Florens, A. Lu-
ciani, C. Cadoz, and N. Castagn´ e have created a 16-key
system [6]. Subsequent work has involved extending the
system to more keys and laying them out according to the
shape of a piano keyboard [3]. However, this technology
is expensive enough that building and using 88-key force-
feedback pianos would be challenging.
Therefore, it is worthwhile to think about incorporating
this technology into useful musical systems with fewer keys.
1https://github.com/eberdahl/Open-Source-Haptics-For-Artists/
tree/master/Hardware/HapticHand
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’15,May 31-June 3, 2015, Louisiana State Univ., Baton Rouge, LA.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
For example, in the present paper, the authors suggest con-
sidering alternative musical mappings so that only one key
per active ﬁnger is required—in other words, the ﬁngers re-
main with the certain keys instead of switching keys like on
a piano.
2. RELATED WORK IN ROBOTICS
Further related work can be found in the ﬁeld of robotics.
A series of wearable and/or exoskeleton haptic devices have
been created for delivering various magnitudes of force feed-
back to the ﬁngers. One notable example is CyberGrasp,2
which is a glove that delivers haptic force feedback to the
ﬁngers using a system of cables. Many other related robotic
haptic devices are described in a review article [5].
The form and dynamics of the hand itself are inspiring.
If one considers what the ultimate human-computer touch-
based interface could be for interacting with the hands, it
seems reasonable that it should be impedance matched to
the human hands or at least be able to present a similar
mechanical impedance. Consequently, a haptic device that
models the human hands is of particular interest. HIRO
III, which is a highly optimized ﬁve-ﬁngered haptic interface
robot, can move and present force feedback with dexterity
[4]. The user touches each of his or her ﬁngertips to the
ﬁnger tips of the HIRO robot, which present the haptic
force-feedback in 21 degrees-of-freedom (not shown).
3. THE HAPTIC HAND
It is informative to compare the shapes of human hands.
Figure 1 shows the outlines of nine PhD students’ hands
overlaid on top of each other. The outlines of the index and
middle ﬁngers are aligned with each other, based on the as-
sumption that the haptic hand would have keys for at least
the index and middle ﬁngers. By consulting Figure 1, one
can observe that the ring ﬁngers are also fairly well aligned,
but the thumb and pinky ﬁngers are not particularly well
aligned.
Because furthermore the tip of the thumb tends to move
in a di↵erent plane than the tips of the ﬁngers, no key for the
thumb is provided. This simpliﬁes the mechanical design
signﬁcantly, enabling the cost to be decreased. Thehaptic
hand device therefore provides keys for the index, middle,
ring, and pinky ﬁngers (see the dotted red key outlines in
Figure 1. Although the “pinky key” may be more or less
accessible to some musicians, a key is nonetheless provided
for the pinky ﬁnger because it moves in the same plane as
the other included ﬁngers, and it is convenient to have an
even number of motor channels total.
To keep costs low and to promote compatibility with
other open-source software and hardware for music, the
2http://www.cyberglovesystems.com
32
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
Figure 1: Outlines of nine hands overlaid, with the
keys depicted in dashed red.
Figure 2: The haptic hand force-feedback device.
haptic handhardware is derived from the open-source Fire-
Fader haptic device [2]. It has essentially been created by
using two instances of the FireFader circuit, rotating the
motorized faders so that they are oriented vertically, de-
signing a surrounding enclosure to house the electronics,
and attaching keys. It was decided to use ALPS faders with
60mm of travel instead of 100mm of travel to more closely
match comfortable smaller motions of the human ﬁngers.
The keys are touch sensitive so that the device can detect
whether or not a key is being touched by the user. This is
achieved by carefully attaching the keys to the motorized
faders, painting the keys with a black conductive paint, and
then putting a varnish on top of the conductive paint.
4. PROGRAMMING
Although the electronics and mechanical parts for thehap-
tic handare very similar to those of the FireFader, there are
signiﬁcant di↵erences in the requirements for programming
these two devices. While FireFader users typically grip the
motorized fader knobs tightly, users’ ﬁngers tend to be less
strongly coupled to the keys of thehaptic hand. Conse-
quently, many successful programs for thehaptic handwill
incorporate a virtual contact spring (also known as “BUT”
[7]) or a similar restoring force to push the key upward into
the human ﬁnger, allowing for continuous control.
−5cm 5cm
force contact spring
Figure 3: Switching between a force proﬁle (in thick
black) and a contact spring force (in blue).
4.1 Haptic Drum
One way to keep the keys in contact with the user’s ﬁngers
is to implement a kind of haptic drum algorithm, which
incorporates a contact spring [1]. In this case, each of the
ﬁngers can even be used to independently play one-ﬁngered
drum rolls:https://www.cct.lsu.edu/~eberdahl/m/HD.mov
4.2 Force Proﬁle
An intriguing idea is to use a force proﬁle to program the
force feedback [8]. A user can draw into the force proﬁle to
customize the feel, which allows various haptic designs to be
rapidly tested. However, not all force proﬁles will incorpo-
rate a returning force. Therefore, it was decided to switch
between a force proﬁle and a contact link. In this manner,
the user explores the force proﬁle while pressing downward,
then when the user reaches the bottom of the stroke, the
force feedback is calculated using a contact spring instead
of the force proﬁle. This continues until the user’s ﬁnger
rises above the threshold where the contact spring’s force
decreases to zero (see Figure 3). Then the mode of the force
feedback switches back to the force proﬁle so that the cycle
can start again. In the following example, a sound is trig-
gered, each time the user reaches the edge of a“hump”in the
force proﬁle:https://www.cct.lsu.edu/~eberdahl/m/FP.mov
In summary, despite the low-cost design of thehaptic
hand, it can be used successfully for implementing some
intriguing multi-ﬁnger musical interactions.
5. REFERENCES
[1] E. Berdahl. An example of creative physical modeling:
A simulation of the haptic drum. InProceedings of the
7th International Conference on Tangible, Embedded
and Embodied Interaction, Barcelona, Spain, February
2013.
[2] E. Berdahl and A. Kontogeorgakopoulos. The
FireFader: Simple, open-source, and reconﬁgurable
haptic force feedback for musicians.Computer Music
Journal, 37(1):23–34, Spring 2013.
[3] C. Cadoz, S. de Riviere, L. Lisowski, and J.-L. Florens.
Modular retroactive keyboard and a ﬂat modular
actuator. US Patent No. 5107262, April 1992.
[4] T. Endo, H. Kawasaki, T. Mouri, Y. Ishigure,
H. Shimomura, M. Matsumura, and K. Koketsu.
Five-ﬁngered haptic interface robot: HIRO III.IEEE
Transactions on Haptics,4 ( 1 ) : 1 4 – 2 7 ,2 0 1 1 .
[5] T. Evreinova, G. Evreinov, and R. Raisam. From
kinesthetic sense to new interaction concepts:
Feasibility and constraints.International Journal of
Advanced Computer Technology,3 ( 4 ) : 1 – 3 3 ,2 0 1 4 .
[6] J.-L. Florens, A. Luciani, C. Cadoz, and N. Castagn´ e.
Ergos: Multi-degrees of freedom and versatile
force-feedback panoply. InProceedings of EuroHaptics,
pages 356–360, Munich, Germany, June 5-7 2004.
[7] A. Kontogeorgakopoulos and C. Cadoz. Cordis Anima
physical modeling and simulation system analysis. In
Proc. 4th Sound and Music Computing Conference,
pages 275–282, Lefkada, Greece, July 2007.
[8] B. Verplank. Haptic music exercises. InProc. of the
Int. Conf. on New Interfaces for Musical Expression,
pages 256–257, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2005.
33
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 