Multiple-Touch-Sensitive Keyboard 
John Eaton 
Composer 
28 72 Street 
North Bergen, NJ 07047 
001-201-766-8717 
johneaton1@earthlink.net 
Robert Moog 
Moog Music Inc. 
554C Riverside Drive 
Asheville, NC 28801 
001-828-251-0090 
bobm@moogmusic.com 
ABSTRACT 
In this presentation, we discuss and demonstrate a multiple 
touch sensitive (MTS) keyboard developed by Robert Moog for 
John Eaton. Each key of the keyboard is equipped with sensors 
that detect the three-dimensional position of the performer’s 
finger. The presentation includes some of Eaton’s performances 
for certain earlier prototypes as well as this keyboard. 
Keywords 
Multiple touch sensitive, MTS, keyboard, key sensor design, 
upgrading to present-day computers 
1. INTRODUCTION 
At the beginning of the presentation, we present an audition of 
an early (1960’s) synthesizer piece, Blind Man’s Cry, by Eaton 
demonstrating the sensitivities of keyboard synthesizers of that 
time. 
2. MOTIVATIONS 
Unquestionably, an element missing in much electronic music is 
human nuance. 
The multiple-touch-sensitive (MTS) keyboard restores that by 
taking full advantage of the human body’s capacities for 
expression that have produced human nuance in traditional 
music making by developed performance artists. 
It is a firm belief of both presenters that the most sensitive and 
meaningful music will be produced by overcoming resistance by 
diligent practice on the instruments – i.e., the best instruments 
will be difficult to play well.  Furthermore, they must be played 
by the parts of the human body that can develop the most 
sensitive control, such as the tips of the fingers. 
3. KEYBOARD DESIGN 
The sensitivities of the MTS keyboard address some highly 
developed techniques for keyboard and string instruments, as 
well as new abilities that must be developed. 
The keyboard consists of 49 keys, plus one larger multiple-
touch- sensitive control surface to the left of the keys, which is 
intended for global parameter control. In addition, a multiplicity 
of input jacks can accommodate auxiliary global controllers 
such as expression pedals and footswitches.  
Each key, independently of all the others, sends out five 
independent eight-bit data streams that tell the current values of 
a) the left-to-right position of the player’s finger, b) the front-to-
back position of the player’s finger, c) the area of the surface of 
the player’s finger that is touching the key surface, d) the depth 
to which the key is depressed, and e) the force with which the 
key is depressed after it reaches the lower limit of its travel.  
The keyboard’s circuitry scans the signals from the keys and 
global controllers, and delivers them to an external dedicated 
computer through a single eight-bit parallel interface. The 
dedicated computer maps the key data and then formats it into a 
MIDI data stream, each key being assigned to a different MIDI 
channel within a predetermined range. Each of the key outputs 
may, of course, be assigned to any MIDI control change or other 
continuously variable destination.  Thus, any key parameter can 
be applied to whatever facet of the music is susceptible to 
control in the synthesizer or computer program used. Any 
number of these may be used in a preset mapping, and the 
mappings may be changed in the course of a piece.  (In Eaton’s 
"Genesis", e.g., seven different mappings are used, three of 
which employ all five sensitivities in some of the slower 
sections, whereas only two are used in one brilliant, faster 
section.) 
Moog will present a brief technical description of the sensors 
themselves. Eaton will then present a DVD of a piece written 
and performed by him.  
 
4. RAISON  D’ETRE FOR THIS 
PRESENTATION 
At the moment, the keyboard is controlled by a large, 
cumbersome, circa late 80's computer.  After "Genesis", which 
used “black box” MIDI-controlled digital synthesizers, Eaton 
felt constrained by the lack of variety and relative banality of 
inputs provided by the then current synthesizers for the 
incredible controls that the keyboards were sending out - it was 
like threshing wheat with a surgeon's scalpel!  It is also very 
difficult to cart that much equipment around as an electronic 
troubadour.  Fortunately, one powerbook today has the memory 
and computational power to do the job of several of those late 
1980’s computers and synthesizers.   
We are doing this presentation today with the hope that we will 
initiate a dialogue with any or all of you on how we could 
connect one or more the keyboards to an up-to-date, portable 
computer, and what would be the best software to use on it. In 
particular, the current software for the old computer, which is 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
Nime’05, May 26-28, , 2005, Vancouver, BC, Canada. 
Copyright remains with the authors. 
 
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
258
written in C and assembly language, presently needs to be 
ported over to, say, a Powerbook G4.    
We would like to get your ideas for synthesis programs, and to 
increase the general awareness of this powerful keyboard,  
 
 
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
259