Solar Sound Arts: Creating Instruments and Devices 
Powered by Photovoltaic Technologies 
  
Scott Smallwood 
University of Alberta 
Fine Arts Building 3-82 
Edmonton, AB  T6J4H1 
Canada 
scott.smallwood@ualberta.ca 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper describes recent deve lopments in the creation of 
sound-making instruments and devices powered by 
photovoltaic (PV) technologies.  With the rise of more efficient 
PV products in diverse packages, the possibilities for creating 
solar-powered musical instruments, sound installations, and 
loudspeakers are becoming increasingly realizable.  This paper 
surveys past and recent developments in this area, including 
several projects by the author, and demonstrates how the use of 
PV technologies can influence the creative process in unique 
ways.  In addition, this paper discusses how solar sound arts 
can enhance the aesthetic direction taken by recent work in 
soundscape studies and acoustic ecology.  Finally, this paper 
will point towards future directions and possibilities as PV 
technologies continue to evolve and improve in terms of 
performance, and become more affordable. 
 
Keywords 
Solar Sound Arts, Circuit Bending, Hardware Hacking, 
Human-Computer Interface Design, Acoustic Ecology, Sound 
Art, Electroacoustics, Laptop Orchestra, PV Tech nology 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The phenomenon of photovoltaics (PV), the conversion of light 
energy into direct current, was initially discovered in 1839 by 
the French physicist Alexandre -Edmond Becquerel. Over the 
next hundred years, experiments in photovoltaics progressed 
slowly, and it wasn’t until the 1950s that the technology began 
to be used in earnest for practical harvesting of energy in the 
space industry through sustained research at Bell Laboratories, 
AT&T, and Western Electric.  The 1970s saw the mass 
production of solar panels, but the technology failed to progress 
rapidly and take hold as a viable alternative to fossil fuels due 
to powerful oil company lobbyists and a lack of government 
subsidy support.  Within the last ten years, however, PV 
technologies h a v e  e m e r g e d  a s  a  r e a l  v i a b l e  a l t e r n a t i v e ,  
particularly in remote installations, as the many solar panels 
along roadsides and gas lines powering pumps and hazard 
lights attest. 
  The last ten years has also seen a rapid increase of the use 
of PV technologies in art,  particularly art installations installed 
in remote locations , such as the Black Rock Desert in Nevada 
during the annual Burning Man Festival.  As well, it seems that 
the various ecological threads of sustainability, including 
music’s own acoustic ecology phenome non, has created an 
environment in which outdoor, site -specific arts practice has 
grown into a real force of interest among many artists and 
curators.  With an ever-emerging culture of DIY electronics 
and media art forms, it is not surprising that PV would  o f f e r  
attractive solutions to remote po wer needs, but it also offers a  
interesting new variable into  the possibilities of environmental 
interaction.  T h i s  p a p e r  will introduce  s o m e  i d e a s  t o w a r d s  
putting PV to work in e x p e r i m e ntal sound works and 
instruments, with emphasis on environmental interaction 
through PV variability. 
2. BACKGROUND 
In 1979, Alvin Lucier, in collaboration with electronic designer 
John Fullemann, completed his solar-powered sound 
installation entitled Solar Sounder I.  The piece was insta lled as 
a semi -permanent installation in the lobby of City Savings 
Bank in Middletown, CT.  The solar panels were placed at 
ground l e v e l  s u c h  t h a t  a  p e r s o n  c o u l d  c a s t  a  s h a d o w  o v e r  a  
panel and cause the sound to change.  Speaking about this 
piece, Lucier tells us that the idea behind the piece is not that 
the audience can manipulate the sound, but that “the sound is 
changed by the rotation of the earth and the revolution of the 
sun, and so changes with the seasons” [5]. As the sun fell on the 
cluster of PV panels in different proportions based on the angle 
of the sun, which if course is dependent upon rotation and 
revolution, it caused the piece to sound in a distinctive way 
during that particular time of day and part of the year. 
 Craig Colorusso’s Sun Boxe s ( 2 0 0 9-10) c o n s i s t s  o f  t w e n t y  
speakers with circuitry that play guitar loops of different 
lengths, each with independent solar PV systems, cr eating an 
evolving soundscape [1 ].  L i k e  L u c i e r ’ s  w o r k ,  t h i s  p i e c e  
generates sound only when the sun falls on the solar panels , 
thereby linking the piece to real -time environmental factors .  
Jeff Federsen’s Earth Speaker  (2007) , a series of PV -powered 
speakers and circuits, absorb sunlight during the day, and pla y 
low frequency sounds at night  [ 6]. Nigel Helyer, a Syd ney-
based sculptor and sound artist , has created several interesting 
environmental works that are completely self -contained using 
PV technologies, including Haiku (2003), Lotus ( 2 0 0 6 ), and 
Meta-Diva (2001), consisting of a group of loudspeakers on the 
ends o f  l o n g  a l u m i n u m  p i p e s, sticking o u t  o f  t h e  w a t e r  i n  a  
cluster.  Each circuit is a solar -powered “voice,” emitting short 
samples of the sounds of birds, frogs, insect sounds, etc, which 
are sounded at unique rhythms, creating a texture of natural 
voices [3]. 
 These works  all have different approaches to generating 
sound, but common among them is the way in which they relate 
to their environment, both in terms of their reliance on that 
environment’s natural energy level, and in terms of the 
resulting soundscape.  The approach to distributing power is 
partially responsible for this, having many self -contained, 
slightly individualistic objects th at are part of a larger whole, 
but the sounding objects themselves utilize the variability of the 
power source in the sounds produced.  In this way, t he sounds 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.  
NIME’11, 30 May–1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway. 
Copyright remains with the author(s).  
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
28
are linked explicitly to environmental energy factors .  T h i s  
approach to dealing with power issues has interesting 
implications not only for sound installation work, but also for 
sound performance, improvisation, and composition. 
3. SOLAR OBJECTS AND 
INSTRUMENTS 
The author’s own inquiry into this research comes from a long -
standing p r a c t i c e  o f  s o u n d s c a p e  c o m p o s i t i o n  a n d  s i t e-specific 
performance, as well as through technological research interests 
and experiences in i nteractive instrument design and laptop 
performance [2][8].  Some general principles of the following 
designs include: 
• Self-contained s y s t e m s. The objects and instruments 
are conceived as all -in-one devices, featuring their 
own sound generation circuitry, loudspeakers and 
energy collectors (PV arrays).  
• Portability.  The objects are highly portable, and in 
the case of the instruments, they are small hand -held 
devices. 
• Context sensitive.  The objects respond directly and 
immediately to light both in terms of power and 
sound control. 
• Recycled materials.  The objects are constructed from 
inexpensive parts and recycled materials.  
What follows are descriptions of several devices and 
instruments that have resulted from this preliminary research.  
3.1   Solar Noise Discs 
These small, handheld instruments grew out of some earlier 
experiments [2], and all have the same basic features.  T hey are 
packaged in recycled film canisters, particularly small ones 
intended to house 3.5-inch reels of 16mm film.  They have 
speaker holes on one side, from which the sound emits.  On the 
other side, they feature three photocells, and five body -contact 
points via Canadian dimes , which when touched, use  b o d y  
capacitance to affect changes in the circuit  (see Figure 1) .  The 
sound-producing circuits i n  t h e s e  i n s t r u m e n t s  a r e  b a sed on 
Schmitt trigger logic chips such as the 74C14 and t h e  4 0 9 3 .  
These bistable multivibrators can be used to produce a square -
wave oscillator by connecting an RC circuit between input and 
output pins on the chip.  Seve ral oscillators can be produced 
with a single chip, and circuit -bending techniques are used to 
create modulations and instabilities in the circuit.  The resulting 
sounds are amplified through an LM386 amplifier and a small 
speaker built in to the instrument.  The instrument includes a 
2.1 mm coaxial power jack for DC power, which connects to a 
PV array, or to any DC power source for that matter. 
 
 
Figure 1: "Fly" Handheld Solar Electric Instruments  
 The instrument can be  played by holding it between the hands 
like a tiny accordion . One hand becomes  a kind of mute, which 
is essentially volume:  to stop the sound, you just cover the 
holes, opening your hands up as you need more sound, which 
also changes the timbre.  The other hand, of course, covers the 
three photocells and connects the body contacts in various 
ways, depending on how fingers are arranged.  How one does 
this, and how it affects the sound is something that has to be 
experienced and practiced.  It seems chaotic at first, but one 
soon learns that things can be controlled, and repeated, if 
conditions are just right.  There are currently three of these 
instruments in existence, and a few oddball versions as well.  
Although they each sound different, due to variations in the 
circuitry, there is a quality about all of them that is similar  due 
to the basic circuit design and the physical resonance properties 
of the case. 
 To power the instruments , there are two  different “ levels” of 
power, to allow for a couple of different types  of lighting level 
requirements and volume levels.  On sunny days, these 
instruments can be played with “solar flaps”, which are 
essentially small solar arrays mounted on either side of a 
cardboard flap, which plugs into the instrument and kind of 
dangles, f l a p p i n g  i n  t h e  w i n d  i f  i t  happens to be windy (see 
Figure 2 ).  This will supply a maximum of about  600 mW of 
power, more than enough to power the instrument quite 
sufficiently if its sunny, and it allows for the possibility of rapid 
changes of character since one can quickly move it in and out 
of shadows.  The next power level i s  achieved by connecting 
the instrument to a larger solar p a n e l  t h a t  c a n  b e  w o r n  o n  a  
pack-back, or simply placed on the ground. The Go Power! 
DURAlite series of PV panels, manufac tured by the Carmanah 
Technologies,1 have proven to be the most effective solution in 
the field. These lightweight panels are designed for RV and 
marine usage, and they are quite robust due to the fact that the 
solar film is encased in a fiberglass laminate, making them 
virtually unbreakable, as well as waterproof and resistant to 
clouding by overexposure to intense sunlight.  These products 
come in three varieties:  5, 10, and 20 watt panels, each with an 
operating voltage of 16 volts. Even in cloudy condi tions, the 5 
watt panel has proven to work very well . 
 
 
Figure 2: "Solar Flap" 
3.2 Bird 
This installation project was an attempt to create something that 
was completely self-contained, with the PV technologies being 
“built-in” to the object.  Using small 500 mV cells generating 
about 17 mA of current , a  r i n g  o f  s e v e r a l  o f  t h e s e  were 
connected in series  t o  f o r m  a n  a  P V  a r r a y ,  w h i c h  w e r e  g l u e d  
onto a small disc .  This array, of course, failed to generate 
enough wattage to power the amp -speaker circuits used in the 
instruments above , but would work just fine powering piezo -
elements.  Sound generation was  created using similar Schmitt 
trigger circuits to the instruments above, connected to piezo -
speakers. The results are  a  s e r i e s  o f  b e e p i n g, twittering, and 
buzzing devices that are completely self -contained, each using 
about 40 mW of power.  
 In preparing for this work, the work of Ralf Schrieber  and his 
“solarsoundmodule” designs were quite inspirational [7].  The 
key interest in this work was not so much in the individual 
design itself, but in the idea of several of these operating as a 
                                                                    
1 http://www.carmanah.com  
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
29
series of voices in a single system. It became interesting to  
imagine walls covered with these devices, in clusters or spread 
throughout a space, or perhaps hanging from the ceiling in 
mobiles. 
 
 
Figure 3: Bird (2009) 
 The resulting piece is indeed a mobile, named Bird, which 
consists of four round objects based on the 4093 chip, a piezo -
speaker, a bottle -cap resonator, and a ring of seven small 500 
mV solar cells in series, all housed in plastic  juice bottle caps 
(see Figure 3).  The four devices hang in a column, connected 
one to another by ball bearing fishing swivels, allowing each to 
turn freely.  These hang inside a column of streamers made 
from ¼” red plastic leader tape.  This allows for the wind to 
affect the sounds from the devices due to rippling shadows cast 
by the streamers, as well as helping to generate the force 
necessary to cause the devices to turn in response to the w ind, 
creating an ever-changing sound based on the sun and the wind.  
Bird has been exhibited on its own, and as part of larger 
installations. 
3.3 Domeintonators 
These devices are hybrid installation objects and instruments, 
and were designed using circuitry si milar to that of “Bird” 
above:  a 4093 NAND gate chip with tw o distinct patterns of 
modulating square wave oscillators, each of which is sounded 
by one of two piezo speakers.  The circuitry is installed in 
recycled security camera domes, and includes an audio jack for 
amplifying the signal (in stereo) of the domes if desired (see 
Figure 4).  The devices also include two photocells, which are 
installed in the dark battery compartment in the bottom of the 
housing.  When the door to the battery compartment is 
removed, the performer can manipulate the sound of the 
instrument by “playing” the photocells underneath the 
instrument, thus causing changes in the speed of the two 
modulated square waves. 
 These are powered by a  1 5 0  m W  f l e x i b l e  s o l a r  s t r i p  b y  
PowerFilm, Inc., which manufactures a variety of small to 
medium-sized flexible strips. 2  The solar strip is mounted in an 
arch over the circuitry inside of the clear dome top of the 
instruments.  This makes the instrument completely self-
contained, but it is expandable in the sense that it can be 
amplified using external equipment if desired.  
 
 
Figure 4: "Domeintonators" 
                                                                    
2 http://www.powerfilmsolar.com  
 These instruments have been used in performances as well as 
in installation settings, but ultimately these might be best suited 
to an interactive installation in which the existing six devices 
could be “played” by listeners, while being further amplified by 
an additional solar-powered amplifier and loudspeaker, making 
the six instruments function as one larger, organ -like 
instrument. 
3.4 Arcade Bells 
The Arcade Bells resulted from a desire to move beyond these 
analog-ish methods for making sound by emplo ying a small 
microprocessor.  In addition, this piece uses piezo discs to 
explore ways to “ring out” or resonate larger objects, s u c h  a s  
metal sheets, bowls, and other devices that might make nice 
resonators.  This particular piece uses  four small copper -plated 
footless goblets as transducers by glu ing large piezo discs t o the 
bottom of each and sending the  l e a d s  t h r o u g h  a  h o l e  d r illed 
through t h e  center.  A housing container is attached to the 
bottom, made from recycled evidence containers, in which the 
circuitry resides. 
 
 
Figure 5: Arcade Bells (2010) 
 The circuitry consists of an ATMEL ATmega328 chip an d its 
life support (voltage regulator and power capacitors, crystal 
clock, etc), a LM386 amplifier, a small transformer, and a 
photocell, which sticks out of the cup like a small flower.  The 
chip is programmed to generate square waves at audio rates in 
patterns; specifically, ascending spectral arpeggios, similar to 
1980s arcade game sound effects .  The chip also monitors the 
state of the photocell, which when bright, means the spectral 
arpeggios get faster, and open up to more of a range.  The 
sound created by the chip is amplified through the LM386, and 
impedance-matched to the piezo -disc, which then resonates 
through the brass cup. 
 Using the ATMEL chip requires more power than the simple 
logic chips used in previous experiments, but nevertheless they 
are quite capable of operating in low power states.  This entire 
circuit consumes less than 500 mW and can operate with much 
less.  The amplifier is powered outside of the 5 volt regulator’s 
loop, allowing it to be more directly effected in volume by the 
full voltage coming in from the solar panel.  
3.5 Solbutter Instruments 
The final series of devices discussed here are a new series of 
microprocessor-based devices, based in part on the work done 
on the Arcade Bells  a b o v e .   T h e s e  i n s t r u m e n t s  a l s o  u s e  t h e  
ATMEL ATmega328 chip to generate sound, as well as to read 
sensor data from various control sources.  As of this date, two 
prototypes have  b e e n  c o m p l e t e d ,  b o t h  o f  w h i c h  u s e  t h e  
ATMEL’s timer interrupts to generate waveforms other than 
square wave forms, including s ine waves and FOF -based 
granular synthesis algorithms.  
 Like the noise disc instruments above, these are round, 
handheld instruments with a built -in speaker amplified by a 
LM386 chip, mounted on the bottom of the container.  The 
instrument shown (figure 6) f e a t u r e s  t w o  p u s h b u t t o n s  ( t a k e n  
from a recycled toy), a 50K ohm potentiometer, and four 
photocells. 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
30
 
Figure 6: "Solbutter I" 
 Code-wise, the sound producing methodology, written in the 
Arduino environment, uses the chip’s PWM (pu lse-width 
modulation) digital output capabilities to simulate analog 
waveforms, and also uses a timer -interrupt routine to ensure 
that the sound -producing part of the code gets priority.  This 
device uses code based in part on the open- source “Auduino” 
project by Peter Knight , which implements a simplified FOF 
synthesis model to create a low -fidelity gra nular synthesis 
architecture [4]. 
 Powering this instrument is accompli shed the same way that 
the noise disc instruments are powered:  either by plugging in  a 
“solar flap”, or a larger solar panel (or a battery or any other 
DC power source).  This instrument requires at least 250 mW, 
and includes a voltage regulator and filter for the chip.  The 
amplifier uses the raw voltage of the solar panel, meaning that 
the relative volume level is proportional to the power received 
from the PV source. 
 
 
Figure 7: Performing with Tealfly in the Ravine  
4. FUTURE WORK 
While these humble beginnings have been instructive, it seems 
clear that this research has tremendous potential.  It has already 
led to a number of interesting performances and installations, 
and it is my hope that through a combination of these 
obsessions and  e x p e r i m e n t s ,  a n d  t h e  o b s e s s i o n s  a n d  
experiments of others, a kind of “solar son ics practice” might 
emerge, which might open up a whole new world of site -
specific and spatial performance concepts.  In the words of 
Alvin Lucier: “Composers are thinking now of a timeless kind 
of depth; that is, of creating and going into a  s o u n d-space, 
rather than moving horizontally along i t ” [ 5].  This, to me, is 
what much of this work is about, and where much of its 
potential lies.  
 In addition, this work has tremendous potential for artists 
involved in the field and philosophy of acoustic ecology.  I n 
addition to the obvious utility of creating electronic music 
performances outdoors using sustainable technologies, the 
metaphor of real-time energy production as a sonic parameter is 
a powerful one, and will undoubtedly result in a variety of 
interesting s o u n d  w o r k  w i t h  e x p l i c i t  c o n n e c t i o n s  t o  
environmental factors. 
 The future will bring a new series of installations, some of 
which will be prototyped and evaluated at the Burning Man 
Festival in 2011 .  Also planned is a PV -powered portable 
hemispherical speaker  f o r  s u p p o r t i n g  m o b i l e  o u t d o o r  
performances with laptops and other electronics that require 
additional amplification.  Finally, I intend to infect more people 
with this bug through instrument building workshops and skill 
sharing, both here in my comm unity and beyond.  
5. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I would like to thank Princeton University and the University of 
Alberta for their support of this research, as well as the 
MacArthur Foundation , GRAND 3, a nd t he  Ca na da  Counc i l  of  
the Arts.  In addition, the following pe ople have been 
instrumental in their assistance and support:  Perry Cook, Dan 
Trueman, Geoffrey Rockwell, Nicolas Collins, Mark Young, 
Gary Joynes, and Todd Janes. 
 Finally, I would like to acknowledge some of the 
manufacturers of the PV products that have been used in these  
experiments, particularly Carmana Technology Corp. and 
PowerFilm, Inc.  In some ways, PV is still just getting off the 
ground, and the number of manufacturers of these products are 
small, mostly centered on products for large-scale powe r 
installations or home conversion systems.  PowerFilm in 
particular is developing a wide variety of PV solutions that are 
especially of interest to sound artists and designers, since they 
are scalable, extremely robust, and easy to mount on any 
surface with foam tape or adhesives. 
 For more information on this project, including more details , 
photos, schematics, sound samples, and video clips of  these and 
other instruments and devices, please visit the project website 
at: 
http://www.ualberta.ca/~ssmallwo/s ee/. 
6. REFERENCES 
[1] Colorusso, C.  Sun Boxes. 
http://www.designboom.com/weblog/cat/8/view/10493/cra
ig-colorusso-sun-boxes.html, 2010 (accessed Jan. 02, 
2011). 
[2] Cook, P, and Smallwood, S.  SOLA: Solar orches tras of 
laptops and analog.  Leonardo Music Journal  20 (2010). 
[3] Helver, N. Sonicobjects. http://www.sonicobjects.com/  
(accessed Jan 02, 2011).  
[4] Knight, Peter.  Auduino. 
http://code.google.com/p/tinkerit/wiki/Auduino , 2008 
(accessed Jan 02, 2011).  
[5] Lucier, A., and Margolin, J. Conversation with Alvin 
Lucier.  Perspectives of New Music  20, 1/2 (Autumn 
1981), 50-58. 
[6] Mahajan, N.  Art meets Solar Energy.  
http://www.ecofriend.org/entry/art-meets-solar-energy/, 
2007 (accessed Jan. 02, 2011).  
[7] Schreiber, R. Solarsoundmodule. 
http://www.ralfschreiber.com/solarsound/solarsound.html , 
1996 (accessed Jan 02, 2011).  
[8] Smallwood, S., Cook, P.,  Trueman, D., and McIntyre, L. 
Don’t forget the laptop: a history of hemispherical 
speakers at Princeton, plus a DIY guide. In Proceedings of 
the 2009 New Instruments for Musical Expression 
Conference, Pittsburgh (2009).
                                                                    
3 http://grand-nce.ca/aboutgrand/profile.html  
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
31