The Fingerphone: a Case Study of Sustainable 
Instrument Redesign
 
 
 
Adrian Freed 
CNMAT – UC Berkeley 
1750 Arch Street 
Berkeley, CA 94709 
adrian@cnmat.berkeley.edu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
The Fingerphone, a reworking of the Stylophone  in conductive 
paper, is presented as an example of new design approaches for 
sustainability and playability of electronic musical instruments . 
Keywords 
Stylophone, Conductive Paper, Pressure Sensing, Touch 
Sensing, Capacitive Sensing, Plurifunctionality, Fingerphone, 
Sustainable Design 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
  
Figure 1: The Disassembled Stylophone 
1.1 Stylophone 
The Stylophone is a portable electronic musical instrument that 
was commercialized in the 1970's and enjoyed  a brief success  
primarily in the UK . This is largely attributable to its 
introduction on TV by Rolf Harris, its use in the song that 
launched David Bowie's career, "Space Oddity," and its 
appearance in a popular TV series "The Avengers". Three 
million instru ments were sold by 1975. A generation later the 
product was relaunched. The artist  "Little Boots" has  prompted 
renewed interest in the product by showcasing it in her hit 
recording "Meddle". 
1.2 Mottainai! (What a waste!) 
The Stylophone in its current incarnat ion is wasteful  in both its 
production and interaction design. The  new edition has a 
surprisingly high parts count, material use and  carbon footprint. 
The limited affordances of the instrument  waste the efforts of 
most who try to learn to use it. 
 Musical toy designers evaluate the ir products according to 
MTTC ( Mean Time to Closet),  and by how many battery 
changes consumers perform before putting the instrument  aside 
[1]. Some of these closeted instrument s reemerge a generation 
later when "old" becomes the new "new" –but most are thrown 
away.  
 This paper addresses both aspect s of this waste by exploring a 
rethinking and redesign of the Stylophone, embodied in a new 
instrument called the Fingerphone.  
1.3 History 
The Stylophone was not the first stylus -based musical 
instrument. Professor Robert Watson of the University of Texas 
built an “electric pencil” in 1948  [2]. The key elements for a 
wireless stylus instrument are also present in the David Grimes 
patent of 1931 [3] including conductive paper and signal 
synthesis from position -sensing potentiometers in the pivots of 
the arms of a pantograph. Wireless surface sensing like this 
wasn’t employed commercially until the GTCO Calcomp 
Interwrite’s Schoolpad of 1981. 
 Electronic mus ical instruments like the Fingerphone with 
unencumbered surface interaction were built as long ago as 
1748 with the Denis d’Or of Václav Prokop Divi š. Interest in 
and development of such instruments continued with  those of 
Elisha Gray in the late 1800’s, Theremin in the early 1900’s, 
Eremeeff, Trautwein, Lertes, Heller in the 1930’s, Le Caine in 
the 1950’s, Michel Waisvisz  and Don Buchla in the 1960’ s, 
Salvatori Martirano and the c ircuit benders in the 1970’s [4]. 
1.4  Contributions 
The basic sensing principle, sound synthesis method and 
playing style of the Stylophone and Fingerphone are well 
known so the novel aspects of the work presented here are in 
the domain of the tools, material, form and design method  with 
which these instruments are realized.  
 Contributions of the paper include: a complete musical 
instrument design that exploits the potential of paper sensors, a 
novel strip origami pressure sensor,  surface e -field sensing 
without external passive components, a new manual layout to 
explore sliding finger gestures, and suggestions of  how to 
integrate questions of sustainability and longevity in to musical 
instrument design and construction. 
2. The Fingerphone 
2.1 Reduce 
The Fingerphone  (Figure 2)  achieves low total material use, 
low e nergy cost and a small carbon footprint by usi ng 
comparatively thin materials, recycled cellulose and carbon to 
implement the functions of  the S tylophone without its high-
energy cost and toxic materials:  plastics, metals, glass fiber and 
resins. 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial adva ntage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.  
NIME’12, May 21-23, 2012, University of Michig an, Ann Arbor. 
Copyright remains with the author(s).  
 
 
Figure 2:  The Fingerphone 
 The Stylophone contains two major, separate circuit boards 
with a different integrated circuit on e ach: one for th e oscillator 
and stylus board, the other for an LM386 power amplifier for 
the small speaker. The Fingerphone has only one integrated 
circuit, an Atmel 8 -bit micro-controller, that is used to sense e -
field touch and pressure on paper transduce rs, synthesize 
several digital oscillators and drive the sound transducer using 
an integrated pulse width modulation controller  (PWM) as  an 
energy-efficient, inductor-less class D amplifier. 
 The Fingerphone’s playing surface, switches and volume 
control f unctions are achieved using conductive paper  [5, 6]. 
Various other materials were explored including embroidered 
silver plaited nylon thread ( Figure 3), and a water -based silk-
screened carbon-loaded ink (Figure 4). 
 
Figure 3: Embroidered Manual  
 
 
Figure 4: Printed Manual  
 Paper is an interesting choice  because cellulose,  its core 
component, is the most common polymer, one that can be  
harvested sustainably and is also readily available as a recycled 
product.  
 Complete carbon footprint, and lifecycle cost analyses are 
notoriously hard to do well but we can use some simple 
measures as pr oxies: The Stylophone has 65 components, a 
production Fingerphone would have only six. Manufacturing 
process temperature is another useful proxy: the Stylophone’s 
metals, plastic and solder  suggest a much higher cost than those 
associated with paper. At first glance it would appear that the 
waste stream from the paper of the Fingerphone mi ght be more 
expensive than the S tylophone. In fact they are similar because 
of the packaging of the reel s the surface mount parts  are 
contained in during manufacturing  of the Stylophone. The 
Fingerphone waste paper stream can be recycled back into 
future Fingerphones.  
 In some products , such as  grocery bags , plastic compares 
favorably to  paper in terms of e nvironmental impact  and 
production energy budgets .  Paper has the advantage in musical 
instrument s such as the Fingerphone of providing a medium to 
inscribe multiple functions — a plurifunctionality difficult to 
achieve with plastics or metals. These functi ons include: visual 
and tactile fiducials for the performer, highly conductive and 
insulating regions for the playing surface, a membrane for the 
bending wave sound transducer and an absorbent and thermally 
insulating substrate for connections and support of the micro -
controller and output transducer.  This plurifunctionality is 
found in traditional fretted chordophones: frets serve as 
fiducials, to define the length of the sounding string, as a 
fulcrum for tension modulation of the string and as an anvil to  
transfer energy to the string in the "hammer on" gesture.   
 Capacitive sensing of the performer's digits obviates the need 
for the Stylophone's metal wand and connecting wire entirely. 
Employing a distributed -mode driver eliminates the need for a 
loudspeaker cone and metal frame . In this way the entire 
instrument surface can be used as  an efficient radiator.  
 The prototype of Figure 2 uses a small, readily available 
printed circuit board for the Atmel micro- controller; the 
production version wou ld instead use the common "chip on 
board" technique observable as a black patch of epoxy on t he 
Stylophone oscillator board, on cheap calculators and other 
high volume consumer products. This technique has been 
successfully used already for paper and fiber substrates as in 
Figure 5 [7]. 
 
Figure 5: Chip on Fabric 
 In conventional electronic design the cost of simple parts 
such as resistors and capacitors  is considered to be negligible; 
laptop computers , for example , employ hundreds of these 
discrete surface mounted parts. This traditional  engineering 
focus on acquisition cost from  high volume manufacturers 
doesn’t include the lifecycle costs and , in particular, ignores the 
impact of using such parts on the ability for users to eventually 
recycle or dispose of the  devices. Rather than use a  
conventional cost rationale the Fingerphone design was driven 
by the question: how can each of these discrete components be 
eliminated entirely? For example, Atmel provides a software 
library and guide for capacitance sensing. Their design uses a 
discrete resistor and capacitor for each sensor channel. The 
Fingerphone uses no external resistors or capacitors. The built -
in pull -up resistors of each I/O pin are used instead  in 
conjunction with the ambient capacitance measured between 
each key and its surrounding keys.  
 The Stylophone has a switch to engage a fixed frequen cy and 
fixed depth vibrato , and rotary potentiometers  to adjust pitch  
and volume. These functions are controlled on the Fingerphone 
using an origami piezoresistive sensor a nd linear paper 
potentiometers. The former is a folded strip of paper using a 
flattened thumb knot that forms a pentagon  (Figure 6) . Notice 
that 3 connections are made to this structure eliminating the 
need for a pull up resistor and establishing a ratiometric 
measure of applied pressure. 
 
Figure 6: Origami Force Sensor  
The remaining discrete components on the micro -controller 
board can be eliminated in a production version : The LED and 
its series resisto r are used for debugging — a function easily 
replaced using sound [8]. The micro -controller can be 
configured to not require either a pull resistor or reset button 
and to use an internal RC clock instead of an external crystal or 
ceramic resonator. This RC clock is not as accurate as the usual 
alternatives but certainly is as stable as the Stylophone 
oscillator. This leaves just the micro -controller’s decoupling 
capacitor.  
 The magnet of the sound transducer shown in Figure 2  is one 
of the highest  energy-cost devices in the design. A production 
version would use  a piezo /ceramic transduce r instead . These 
have the advantage of being relatively thin (1 -4mm) and are 
now commonly used in cellphones and similar portable devices 
because they don't create magnetic fields that might interfere 
with the compasses now used in portable electronics. By 
controlling the shape of the conductive paper  connections to a  
piezo/ceramic transducer a low -pass filter can be tuned to 
attenuate high frequency aliasing noise from the class D 
amplifier. 
2.2 Reuse 
Instead of the dedicated battery compartment of the 
Stylophone, the Fingerphone has  a USB mini connector so that 
an external, reusable  source of power can be connected —  one 
that is likely to be shared among several devices, e. g, cameras, 
cellphones, or  laptop computers. Rechargable, emergency 
chargers for cellphones that use  rechargeable lithium batteries 
and a charging circuit are a good alternative to a disposable 
battery (Figure 7). 
 
Figure 7: Reusable Power Sources  
 This approach of providing modular  power sources shared 
between multiple devices  may be found in  modern power tool 
rechargeable battery packs , and in the Home Motor of 1916. 
This was available from the Sears mail order catalog with 
attachments for sewing, buffing, grinding, and sexual 
stimulation [9]. 
 The Fingerphone components are installed on a  light, stiff 
substrate to provide a resonating surface for the bending mode 
transducers. Th is has been found to be a good opportunity for 
reuse so prototype Fingerphones have been buil t on the lid of a 
pizza box, a cigar box , and a sonic greeting card from Hallmark 
- all of which would normally be discarded  after their first use . 
Such reuse has  precedent in musical -instrument b uilding, e.g., 
the cajon (cod -fish shipping crates), the steel -pan (oil drums), 
and ukulele (cigar boxes).  
2.3 Recycle 
The bulk of the Fingerphone is recyclable, compostable paper. 
A ring of perforations in the paper around the micro -controller 
would facilitat e separation of the small non -recyclable 
component from the recyclable paper.  
3. Use Maximization 
3.1 Introduction 
The Stylophone has a single , strident, sawtooth-wave timbre. 
There is no control over the amplitude envelope of the sawtooth 
wave other than to turn  it off. This guarantees (as with  the 
kazoo, harmonica,  and vuvuzela) that the instrument will be 
noticed – an important aspect of the gift exchange ritual usually 
associated with the instrument. This  combination of a  
constrained timbre and dynamic envelop e presents interesting 
orchestration challenges .  These have been addressed by David 
Bowie and Little Boots in different ways: In early recordings of 
"Space Oddity" the S tylophone is mostly masked by rich 
orchestrations––in much the way the string section of an 
orchestra balances  the more strident woodwinds such as the 
oboe. Little Boots ’ "Meddle" begins by announcing  the song's 
core ostinato figure , the hocketing of four staccato "call" notes 
on the Stylophone with  "responding" licks  played on the piano. 
The lengths of call and response are carefully balanced so that 
the relatively mellow instrument, the piano, is given more time 
than the Stylophone. 
3.2 Timbre 
The oscillators of the  Fingerphone compute a digital phasor 
using 24 -bit arithmetic and index tables that include sine and 
triangle waves. The phasor can also be output directly or 
appropriately clipped to yield approximations to sawtooth and 
square/pulse waves respectively. Sufficient memory is available 
for custom waveshapes or granular synthesis. The r esult is 
greater pitch precision and more timbral options than the 
Stylophone.  
3.3 Dynamics  
An envelope function, shaped according to the touch 
expressivity afforded by electric field sensing , modulates the 
oscillator outputs of  the Fingerphone. The level of  dynamic 
control achieved is comparable to the nine "waterfall" key 
contacts of the Hammond  B3 organ.  
 Legato playing is an  important musical function and it 
requires control of note  dynamics. The audible on/off clicks of 
the Stylophone disrupt legato to such an extent that the primary 
technique for melodic playing of the instrument is to rapidly 
slide the stylus over the keys to create a perceived blurring 
between melody notes. The dedicated performer with a steady 
hand can exploit a narrow horizontal pat h half way down the 
Stylophone stylus-board to achieve a  chromatic run rather than 
the easier diatonic run 
 Legato in the Fingerphone is facilitated by duophony so that 
notes can actually overlap––as in traditional keyboard 
performance. Full, multi-voice polyphony is also possible with  
a faster micro -controller or by taking advantage of remote 
synthesis resources driven by the OSC and MIDI streams 
flowing from the Fingerphone’s USB port. 
3.4 Manual Layouts 
 
Figure 4: Trills 
Surface int eraction interfaces provide fundamentally different 
affordances to those of sprung or weighted action keyboards. In 
particular it is slower and harder to control release gestures on 
surfaces because they don’t provide the stored energy of a key 
to accelerate and preload the release gesture. This factor and the 
ease of experimentation with paper sugges t a fruitful design 
space to explore: new  surface layout designs. The layout 
illustrated in  Figure 4 resulted from  experiments with elliptical 
surface sliding gestures that were inspired  by the way  Dobro 
and lapstyle guitar players perform vibrato and trills.  Various 
diatonic and chromatic ascending, descending and cyclical runs 
and trills can be performed by orienting, positioning and 
scaling these elliptical a nd back and forth sliding gestures on 
the surface.  
3.5  Size Matters 
By scaling the layout to comfortable finger s ize it is possible to 
play the white “keys" between the black ones –something that is 
impossible with the Stylophone layout .  
 The interesting thi ng about modulations of size in interactive 
systems is that continuous changes are experienced as 
qualitatively discrete, i.e.,  For each performer, certain layout s 
become too small to reliably play or too large to efficiently 
play. The economics of mass ma nufacturing interacts with this 
in a way that historically has narrowed the number of sizes of 
instruments that are made available. For example, the Jaranas 
of the Jarochos of Mexico are a chordophone that players build 
for themselves and their children. T hey are made “to measure” 
with extended families typically using seven or eight different 
sizes. The vast majority of m anufactured guitars on the other 
hand are almost entirely “full size” with a few  smaller sizes 
available for certain styles. T his contras ting situation was also 
present with the hand -built fretless banjos of the 19 th century 
now displaced by a few sizes of manufactured , fretted banjos. 
 In the case of the S tylophone the NRE’s (Non -recurring 
Engineering) costs for two molds and the circuit b oards 
discourage the development of a range of sizes. There are also 
costs associated with the distribution and shelving in stores of 
different sizes.  The lower cost structures of the Fingerp hone on 
the other hand allow for a wider range of sizes. Prototy pes have 
been developed by hand and with a cheap desktop 
plotter/cutter. Different scales can be experimented with in 
minutes instead of the hours required to develop circuit boards. 
Also, die cutting of paper is cheaper than injection molding or 
etching in production. 
 The use of a finger -size scale would appear to put the 
Fingerphone at a portability disadvantage with respect to the 
Stylophone.  It turns out that fabric and paper allow for folded 
Fingerphones that are no larger than the Stylophone for 
transport. Roll-up computer keyboards and digitizing tablets are 
precedents for this approach.  
4. Discussion 
4.1 Impact 
By itself the Fingerphone will not have a significant direct 
impact on the sustainability issues the world faces. However, 
now that musical instr ument building is being integrated as  
standard exercises in design school classes, the Fingerphone 
can serve as a strong signal that more environmentally 
responsible materials and design techniques are available. 
4.2 Design Theory 
Simondon’s thesis on the tech nical object [11] describes the 
value  of plurifunctionality to avoid  the pitfalls of “ hypertelic 
and maladapted designs”. Judging by the number of huge 
catalogs of millions of highly functionally -specific electronic 
parts now available , the implications of Simondon’s 
philosophical study were largely ignored . The Fingerphone 
illustrates how plurifunctionality provides designers with  an 
alternative route to economies of scale than the usual high -
volume-manufacturing one where  the cost of development is 
amortized over a large number of inscribed functions instead of 
a large number of high volume parts.  
4.3 Transitional Instruments 
The Fingerphone adds to  a debate in the NIME community 
about accessibility, ease of use and virtuosity.  Wessel and 
Wright declare that it is possible to build instruments with a 
low entry point and no ceilin g on virtuosity  [12]. Blaine and 
Fels argue that this consideration is irrelevant to casual users of  
collaborative instruments [13]. Isn’t there a neglected space  in 
between of transitional instruments that serve  people on a 
journey as they acquire musical skills  and experience ?  
Acoustic instrument examp les include the melodica, ukulele 
and recorder. The Stylophone, in common with Guitar hero and 
Paper Jamz,  is designed with a primary focus on social 
signaling of musical performance. The Fingerphone  shows that 
affordable instruments may be designed that both call attention 
to the performer and also afford the exercise  and development  
of musical skills, and a facilitated transition to other 
instruments.  
5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Thanks for support from Pixar/D isney, Meyer Sound Labs, 
Nathalie Dumont from the Concordia University  School of Fine 
Arts and the Canada Grand project . 
 
REFERENCES
[1] S. Capps, "Toy Musical Instrument Design,", Personal Communication,  Menlo Park, 2011. 
[2] Anonymous, "Electronic  Pencil Enables Composers To Hear Score," Science News Letter, p. 3, November 13, 1948.  
[3] D. Grimes, "Method and Apparatus for Making Graphical Repr esentations at a Distance," US Patent #182,28,68, 1923. 
[4] C. Roads, "Early electronic mu sic instruments: Time line 1899 -1950," Computer Music Journal, vol. 20, pp. 20-23, 1996. 
[5] R. Koehly, "Fabrication of Sustainable Resistive -Based Paper Touch Sensors: Application to Music Technology," 
Doctorate, IDMIL, McGill University, 2011.  
[6] R. Koe hly, D. Curtil, and M. Wanderley, "Paper FSRs and latex/fabric traction sensors: methods for the development of 
home-made touch sensors," 2006, pp. 230 -233. 
[7] J. Yoo, L. Yan, S. Lee, H. Kim, and H. J. Yoo, "A wearable ECG acquisition system with compact planar-Fashionable 
circuit board-based shirt," Information Technology in Biomedicine, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 13, pp. 897-902, 2009. 
[8] A. Turing, Manual for the Ferranti Mk. I : University of Manchester, 1951.  
[9] R. Maines, "Socially camouflaged techn ologies: the case of the electromechanical vibrator," Technology and Society 
Magazine, IEEE, vol. 8, pp. 3-11, 23, 1989. 
[10] L. Kottke, "6 and 12 String Guitar," ed: Takoma, 1969.  
[11] G. Simondon, Du mode d'existence des objets techniques . Paris: Aubier-Montaigne, 1958. 
[12] D. Wessel and M. Wright, "Problems and Prospects for Intimate Musical Control of Computers," Computer Music Journal, 
vol. 26, pp. 11-22, 2002. 
[13] T. Blaine and S. Fels, "Collaborative Musical Experiences for Novices," Journal of New Music Research, vol. 32, pp. 411 -
428, 2003. 