Natural Interfaces for Musical Expression:
Physiphones and a physics-based organology
Steve Mann
Fluidly Limitless User Interfaces Devices (FLUI D) Laboratory
University of Toronto, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
10 King’s College Road, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M5S 3G4
B.aaaaaaaaaIaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa
Paaaaaaaaaa 123
Daaaaaaaaaa 43017-6221
aaaaaaaaaa@aaaaaaaaa-aaaaaaa.com
C.aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa
aaaaaaaa
aaaaaaaaaaaaaa
aaaaaaaaaaa@aaaaaaaaaa.org
ABSTRACT
This paper presents two main ideas:
(1) Various newly invented liquid-based or underwater
musical instruments are proposed that function like wood wind
instruments but use water instead of air. These “wood water”
instruments expand the space of known instruments to in-
clude all three states of matter: solid (strings, percussion);
liquid (the proposed instruments); and gas (brass and wood-
winds). Instruments that use the fourth state of matter
(plasma) are also proposed.
(2) Although the current trend in musical interfaces has
been to expand versatililty and generality by separating the
interface from the sound-producing medium, this paper iden-
tiﬁes an opposite trend in musical interface design inspired
by instruments such as the harp, the acoustic or electric
guitar, the tin whistle, and the Neanderthal ﬂute, that have
a directness of user-interface, where the ﬁngers of the musi-
cian are in direct physical contact with the sound-producing
medium. The newly invented instruments are thus designed
to have this sensually tempting intimacy not be lost be-
hind layers of abstraction, while also allowing for the high
degree of virtuosity. Examples presented include the posei-
dophone, an instrument made from an array of ripple tanks,
each tuned for a particular note, and the hydraulophone,
an instrument in which sound is produced by pressurized
hydraulic ﬂuid that is in direct physical contact with the
ﬁngers of the player. Instruments based on these primordial
media tend to fall outside existing classiﬁcations and tax-
onomies of known musical instruments which only consider
instruments that make sound with solid or gaseous states
of matter. To better understand and contextualize some
of the new primordial user interfaces, a broader concept of
musical instrument classiﬁcation is proposed that considers
the states of matter of both the user-interface and the sound
production medium.
Keywords
Hydraulophone, tangible user interface, ethnomusicology
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME07, New York, New York, United States of America
Copyright 2007 Copyright remains with the author(s).
1. SEPARATING TOUCH FROM SOUND
Modern technology has made it possible to separate the
user-interface from the sound production mechanism of an
instrument. For example, the harpsichord (and later the pi-
ano) is often regarded as an improvement over the harp, be-
cause it re-arranges the user interface (keyboard) in a more
optimal manner than direct interaction with a harp. A series
of mechanical levers, linkages, and other mechanisms allow
the user-interface and sound production medium to each be
separately optimized at opposite ends of an intricate chain
of cause and eﬀect.
Similarly, in the evolution of certain woodwind instru-
ments, the addition of levers, linkages, and other mechani-
cal aids allows the ﬁngers of the musician to reach a larger
number of ﬁnger holes than was possible with a simple ﬂute
like a penny whistle, shakuhachi, or recorder in which the
ﬁngers cover the ﬁnger holes directly. In fact there is a hier-
archy of complexity ranging from a simple Japanese bamboo
ﬂute (shakuhachi) with only four ﬁnger holes, to a Western
concert ﬂute with mechanical levers and linkages to a larger
number of holes, all the way up to a large pipe organ with
mechanical, pneumatic, or electrical linkages to large num-
bers of wind-blown pipes.
The pipe organ is a very large woodwind instrument which
often has a user interface that is quite separate from the
sound producing medium. As a result of this separation, the
user interface can be optimized for usability, and the sound
production of the instrument can be separately optimized
without the need for constraints such as keeping the pipes
close enough together for a musican to be able to reach each
pipe or each ﬁnger hole with his or her ﬁngers. The pipe
organ provides the musician with a wide variety of diﬀerent
woodwinds that are all mapped to the same user-interface,
namely an array of keyboards and a pedalboard. By sim-
ply pulling out stops, drawknobs, or the like, a wide range
of diﬀerent ranks of organ pipes can be “connected” to the
same standard keyboard user-interface. Many pipe organs
also include “presets” that allow the musician to quickly re-
conﬁgure the instrument in various ways from one song to
the next, or even within the same song. A wide variety of
organ pipes have evolved to include woodwinds that sound
like (i.e. “synthesize” the sounds of) ﬂutes as well as brass
instruments, stringed instruments, and other instruments.
For example, some organ pipes are made long and slender
and have a wooden “beard” near their mouths to empha-
size higher harmonics, and some even have means to almost
entirely suppress the fundamental. Intricate sets of holes,
“beards”, and intricate shaping of organ pipes allows the
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
118
frequency spectrum to be altered in many ways to “syn-
thesize” a tremendous range of diﬀerent orchestral sounds.
Some pipes are slightly detuned from one another so that
they sound like stringed instruments or string ensembles
when the appropriate ranks of pipes are played together.
This evolution toward separating the user-interface and
sound-production medium reaches even greater heights with
electronic keyboards where there is an essentially unlimited
number of sounds that can all be mapped to the same user-
interface, namely a piano-style keyboard.
The piano-style keyboard is not the only interface we need
consider. For example, there exist a wide variety of wood-
wind synths, guitar synths, and other devices that allow
a musician operating one kind of user-interface to control
other kinds of instruments.
Various kinds of hyper-instruments[1] and meta- instru-
ments have also been proposed.
Modern improvements to user-interfaces allow one musi-
cian to play a larger more complex and intricate repetoire.
The harpsichord or piano can be used to play very richly in-
tricate compositions that a single musician would not be able
to play on a harp. Similarly, an organist is often said to be
“conducting” a whole “orchestra” of organ pipes. Some in-
struments, such as orchestrons, player-pianos, barrel organs,
and elecronic keyboards can even play themselves, in whole
or in part (i.e. partially automated music for a musician to
play along with). For example, on many modern keyboard
instruments a musician can select a “SONG”, “STYLE”,
and “VOICE”, set up a drum beat, start up an arpeggiator,
and press only a small number of keys to get a relatively
full sound that would have required a whole orchestra back
in the old days before we had modern layers of abstraction
between our user-interfaces and our sound-producing media.
1.1 Back to basics
Despite the many advantages of the separation of user-
interface from sound-producing medium, a price we pay for
this separation is a loss of pysicality. The harpsichord, for
example, encloses and at least partially hides the harp both
from touch and from view. Some indirect user-interfaces like
the pipe-organ attempt to mitigate this problem by making
some of the pipes visible as sculpture, but the audience still
cannot see which pipe is sounding at any given time, and
the musician does not get the same intimacy as with a tin
whistle where her or she can touch and feel the air that is
making the sound. Likewise the MIDI keyboard hides the
orchestra inside layers of abstraction or computer chips that
neither the musician nor the audience can touch, see, or
directly experience in simple ways.
In this paper we wish to explore existing instruments and
invent new ones that embody a simplistic physicality char-
acterized by three guiding principles:
1. the user-interface is based, at least in part, on natural
physical phenomena, preferably of a sensually primor-
dial nature;
2. the sound-production medium is also based, at least
in part, on natural physical phenomena; and
3. the interface phenomena (1) and sound production
phenomena (2) are identical, or at least closely related.
Consider, for example, the oldest musical instrument in
the world, the Neanderthal ﬂute, made approximately 50,000
years ago, from the bone of a cave bear.
It has no levers, linkages, or keys. Instead, it was similar
to a tin ﬂute or penny whistle, in the sense of being played
by placing the ﬁngers in direct physical contact with the air
in the pipe, making it easy, for example, to “bend” the pitch
of notes by partial hole-covering.
Instruments like the Neanderthal ﬂute, the tin ﬂute, the
harp (pre-harpsichord, i.e. just a raw harp), as well as the
more modern guitar, embody this similar kind of simplic-
ity in which the ﬁngers of the musician are in direct physi-
cal contact with the sound producing media, i.e. the user-
interface phenomena (1) and sound production phenomena
(2) are the same.
2. ORGANOLOGY (ETHNOMUSICOLOGY)
In the context of understanding or inventing new musical
instruments, it is useful to look at taxonomies of existing
instruments from around the world.
Musical instruments are ordinarily classiﬁed into cate-
gories such as percussion instruments, stringed instruments,
and wind instruments.
Victor-Charles Mahillon, curator of the collection of mu-
sical instruments at the Brussels Conservatory of Music, de-
veloped a system to precisely classify musical instruments
based on the initial vibrating element in an instrument that
made the initial sound. Mahillon’s system was primarily for
classifying western instruments used for classical music.
Ethnomusicologists Erich Moritz von Hornbostel and Curt
Sachs expanded the Mahillon classiﬁcation system to include
all known instruments from around the world.
The Hornbostel-Sachs classiﬁcation system, based on the
Dewey Decimal Classiﬁcation of library classiﬁcation, iden-
tiﬁes four top-level classiﬁcations by their Greek names:
1. idiophone: sound is produced by vibrations in the
solid three dimensional body of an instrument. ex-
amples include xylophones, gongs, sticks, stones, and
other three-dimensional vibrating objects;
2. membranophone: sound is produced by vibrations
in a thin membrane. The membrane is principally two-
dimensional in the sense that the thickness is small
compared with the two dimensions of its surface;
3. chordophone: sound is produced by vibrations in a
chord (string, wire, dawai, or similar long thin mate-
rial) principally one-dimensional in the sense that the
length is large compared to the two cross sectional di-
mensions.
4. aerophone: sound is produced by vibrating air;
with a ﬁfth category, electronophones, later added. These
categories are based on identifying the vibrating element
that initially makes the sound in the instrument. This tax-
onomy of (1) solid volume; (2) solid plane; (3) solid line;
or (4) gas, limits our thinking to only two states of matter:
solid and gas.
This paper instead proposes a physics-based organology
that considers both the input medium (interface) and the
output medium (i.e. the sound production medium), with
regards to their state of matter (solid, liquid, gas, or plasma).
2.1 Input-output mapping
Consider, as a top-level classiﬁcation, the state-of-matter
of the vibrating element that ﬁrst makes sound. Aerophones,
from the Greek words “phonos” = sounding, and “aero” =
wind, remain as with the Hornbostel-Sachs mapping, but
the other three-level categories now become subcategories
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
119
SOLID LIQUID GAS
SOLIDLIQUIDGAS
PIANO
1−D 2−D 3−D
1−D 2−D 3−D
PIPE ORGAN
TIN FLUTE
RECORDER
XYLO−
PHONE
AEROPHONES
CHORDO−
PHONES
MEMBRANO−
PHONES
IDIO−
PHONES
GUITAR
DRUM
(DIRECT
HITTING)
PLASMA
PLASMA
(EARTH) (WATER) (WIND) (FIRE)
SOUND PRODUCING ELEMENT
USER INTERFACE ELEMENT
INFO.
SPARK−GAP
LOUDSPEAKER
LOUDSPEAKER DATA COMMUNICATION,
COMPUTER−GENERATED
MUSIC
TESLA ORGAN
ACETOPHONE
HYDRAULOPHONE
TESLA KEYS
MICROPHONE
HYDROPHONE
LIQUID NITROGEN
INSTRUMENT
(MANN, 1984)
CALLIOFLUTE
(MANN, ACM MM 2006)POOL PIANO
(HYDRAULIC
HYPERINSTRUMENT)
FLORGAN/
PNEUMATOPHONE
CONTROLLING
PIANO
FLORGAN/
PNEUMATOPHONE
CONTROL OF
HYDRAULOPHONE
HYDRO−TESLA
INSTRUMENT
POSEIDO−
PLASMAPHONE ELECTRO−
HYDRAULOPHONES
FOR USE IN
CHILDREN’S
PLAYGROUNDS
PLASMA PIANO PLASMA−
HYDRAULOPHONE
PLASMA PIPES
WOODWIND SYNTH
PLASMIDI
WATER SPEAKER AIR SPEAKER
INFORMATION
(AETHER / IDEA
QUINTESSENCE)GAIAPHONES
DIRECT
USER−INTERFACES
Figure 1: A new organology based on physics:Categorization
of musical instruments by both their input (user-interface) and out-
put (sound-producing mechanism) shows 16 newly deﬁned categories
(shaded) in each of which the author has invented at least one new
instrument, along with 9 categories (unshaded) where instruments al-
ready existed. Those that fall on the diagonal are most desirable for
direct user-interfaces.
under solid instruments. Solid instruments might be called
“stereophones” from Greek “stereo” meaning “solid”, but
since “stereophone” already has another meaning, “Gaia-
phone” is more appropriate (Greek godess of the earth —
the Greeks used Earth, Water, Air, and Fire to refer to the
four states of matter).
Gaiaphones, in which vibrations in solid matter propa-
gate as vibrations in the surrounding air, are then further
subdivided into the idiophones, membranophones, and chor-
dophones (Fig. 1).
These classiﬁcations relate to how the instrument outputs
(makes) sound, but if we go to a music store to purchase a
musical instrument, we will ﬁnd that the instruments are
usually categorized by input (user-interface).
Classifying instruments based on their interface makes
sense to a person who wants to buy an instrument, because,
for example, someone who knows how to play piano, will
also know how to play organ, to some degree. Thus he or
she can try all the instruments in that section of the store.
Because of this recent shift in emphasis on user interfaces,
we might want to expand the newly proposed physics-based
classiﬁcation of musical instruments along the input (user-
interface) dimension as well as the output (sound-producing)
dimension.
In view of the directness of user-interface that we are
exploring in this paper, a logical choice of top-level user-
interface categories would be the same categories newly set
forth for the sound-producing classiﬁcation, namely the state-
of-matter of the user-interface.
We deﬁne a direct user-interface as requiring a position
along the diagonal of this new classiﬁcation system of Fig. 1.
A pipe organ, for example, is not a direct-user-interface be-
cause the ﬁngers are placed on solid matter (the keys of the
organ) which (indirectly) controls the wind in the pipes.
A guitar can be a direct-user-interface because the ﬁngers
.
Figure 2: This poseidophone is also a glass harp. Thus it can be
played by rubbing wet ﬁngers around the edges of the glasses, or by
dipping the ﬁngers right into the water. The glasses, with water, form
very good aspheric lenses to concentrate the sun’s rays (or rays from
a stage light during a performance) onto high-temperature ceramic
pickups that optically respond to sound waves (ripples) in the water.
Alternatively, or additionally, a video camera and computer vision
system picks up the sound.
are in direct physical contact with the very medium that
creates the sound, namely the strings. Likewise a tin ﬂute
will fall along the diagonal in this classiﬁcation system.
Moreover, the map of Fig. 1 suggests a possible new space
of liquid-based instruments in which liquid is used instead
of solid or gas, either for the sounding mechanisms, or the
user interfaces, or both.
2.2 The poseidophone
The poseidophone, named after the Greek god of the sea,
Poseidon1, is made from an array of ripple tanks, each tuned
for a particular note. The sound produced by the poseido-
phone is too weak for use in performances, and thus, out
of necessity, it must be ampliﬁed somehow. This is usually
done electrically, and thus there is generally one or more
forms of electrical pickup associated with each ripple tank.
A note is sounded on the instrument by disturbing one
of the ripple tanks, and chords are played by disturbing
multiple ripple tanks simultaneously. Although a keyboard
could be used to create these disturbances, it is preferable,
in keeping with the spirit of remaining on the diagonal in
Fig. 1, that the player disturb the ripple tanks by inserting
ﬁngers directly into the water.
A portable poseidophone is shown in Fig. 2. This partic-
ular poseidophone, permanently installed in a portable road
case, is also a glass harp, so it can be played in a variety
of diﬀerent ways, i.e. by hitting or rubbing the glasses, i.e.
playing it as an idiophone or friction idiophone. However,
the preferable way of playing it is to dip the ﬁngers into
the water to make audible as well as subsonic sound waves.
In this case it is no longer being played as an idiophone,
but, rather, as something outside of any of the ﬁve top-level
categories in the Hornbostel-Sachs taxonomy. The sound in
the water waves extends beyond the range of human hear-
ing, particularly at the bottom end, thus what we hear are
mostly harmonics, sometimes assisted with additional pro-
cessing. The audio from each pickup is often fed into a
separate bandpass ﬁlter. Sometimes more than one ﬁlter is
used for each pickup, in order to provide a fuller, more rich
sound. Each pickup can be plugged into a separate guitar
eﬀects pedal, and with ten guitar pedals, the sound can be
further shaped. For example, the sound can be modulated
upwards, from the deep bass sound of the original poseido-
1The Greeks considered the sea-divinities to be primordial
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
120
Figure 3: The main architectural centerpiece in front of Ontario Sci-
ence Centre is a fountain that is a hydraulophone, approximately 10
metres in diameter and 20 feet high. This one is reedless, but other hy-
draulophones include the Clarinessie (single reed), theH2Oboe (dou-
ble reed), and a wide variety of underwater orchestral instruments.
(Leftmost ’glog by James Fung)
phone, to make it a lead or melody instrument 2.
One or more of the bandpass ﬁlters, modulators, up- con-
verters, pitch up-shifters, etc., may be implemented by an
oscillator in a way much like (but not exactly like) the way
a superheterodyne radio receiver uses a local oscillator as
part of a ﬁlter. Since some oscillators can be controlled by
MIDI, the poseidophone is often used with MIDI, and thus,
in addition to being an acoustic instrument, is also a MIDI
controller. However, there remains an important physical-
ity in the process of actually sculpting sound waves with the
ﬁngers, much as there remains a physicality in playing an
electric guitar, whether the guitar pickup is magnetic or op-
tical. Whether sculpting the sound waves on a guitar string,
or the sound waves in a ripple tank, the important fact is
that the ﬁngers remain in direct physical contact with the
sound-producing medium, namely the water.
2.3 The hydraulophone
Water is a very primoridal element. It is often said that of
all the modern inventions (television, radio, Internet, etc.),
the invention that most captures the attention of indige-
nous persons when ﬁrst brought into the modern world is
the water faucet. Water is tangible, immediate, and easy
to comprehend. The hydraulophone is an instrument that
many children begin to play before they are one year old.
Large hydraulophone installations (Fig. 3) are ideally suited
to use in public parks because the array of water jets forms
a self-cleaning keyboard instrument that can be shared with
strangers without the usual risks of cross contamination that
might occur if another instrument like a piano were left out
in the middle of a park. There’s no need to wash your hands
when you’re playing in a fountain!
2.4 Pneumatophone (ﬂorgan polyﬂute)
Pneumatophones are instruments that make sound pneu-
matically (i.e. with compressed air) in a way that is similar
to the manner in which hydraulophones make sound hy-
draulically (i.e. with pressurized hydraulic ﬂuid, typically
water).
Two versions of the pneumatophone have been presented
in previously published literature. See Fig. 1 and 2 of [2].
A previously unpublished version of the pneumatophone
with acoustic pickups. has a number of 3/4” copper pipe
tee ﬁttings that each are supplied with wind (compressed
air) at one end of the tee. The other end of the tee is the
user-interface (ﬁnger hole). At the side-discharge port there
is a thin membrane that pickups up air vibrations such as
2Poseidophones that naturally play in the higher registers
tend to have small cups for the higher notes, and these cups
often get too small to insert more than one ﬁnger into. In-
deed, at some point, only the tip of the smallest ﬁnger will ﬁt
in the cup, and beyond that we loose the intimacy when we
need to use a small actuator. Poseidophones can be built us-
ing nano-technology, but then they loose their human scale
and their primal sense of immediacy.
Figure 4: One of the 12 pneumatophonic elements in a pneu-
matophone: Placing a ﬁnger over the mouth causes air to blow
against a thin membrane, causing the membrane to vibrate in various
ways depending on the shape, position, orientation, and movement of
one or more ﬁngers at, in, or near the mouth of the instrument. In
this instrument the membrane is simply that of a microphone with
the mesh-ball windscreen unscrewed and removed (one microphone
for each of the 12 notes in the instrument). A blower or air compres-
sor supplies a steady stream of air at the bottom of each tee ﬁtting
(one tee ﬁtting for each note).
had a lamb lamb lambMA−−ry LIT−−tle LIT−−tle LIT−−tle
C G
b
c
d
e
g
C C2 3 4 6 7 8 10 11 12 14 15 16
Figure 5: Pneumatophone tablature: Blacked areas denote
blocked areas of the instrument’s mouths. Capitals denote harmony,
lowercase letters denote melody. For beat 1, a “C” chord is formed
with emphasis on “e”. During beat 2, where the melody is not a mem-
ber of the chord, we ease oﬀ on the chord a little bit, by pulling the
ﬁngers back slightly, indicated as a lesser blacked-out (lesser blocked)
region of the “g”, “e”, and “c” mouths. During beat 8, we ease oﬀ
a little on the melody note “e” and the harmony notes “c” and “g”,
since there are no lyrics being sung during this beat.
eddy currents, turbulence, and other sounds made by the
air. These sound vibrations may be picked up optically,
magnetically, electrically, etc....
One of these instruments uses ﬁve tee ﬁttings and ﬁve
standard dynamic microphones in which the ball-shaped
windscreen has been unscrewed and removed. Each micro-
phone is attached to the side-discharge of each tee ﬁtting as
shown in Fig. 4. Each of the ﬁve microphones is plugged into
a modiﬁed Cry Baby Wah Wah pedal. Each pedal is set dif-
ferently by the musician. Usually the settings are updated
only occasionally during a song, while most of the playing
is done at the mouths of the instruments. Simple songs like
Mary Had a Little Lamb can be played without touching the
Wah Wah pedals at all, once they are set for a particular
song. In this case the ﬁrst pedal is set to shape the sound of
microphone number 1 to approximate a “B” note. Pedal 2
(on microphone 2) is set to approximate a “C” note. Pedal
3 is D, pedal 4 is E, and pedal 5 is G.
Placing ﬁngers near, into, onto, or around some of the
instrument’s mouths causes compressed air to hit, stir, ﬂow,
or eddy around the respective membranes in various ways.
Referring to the ﬁve mouths as “b”, “c”, “d”, “e”, and
“g” (the notes that they principally play) we can write out
a simple form of tablature for pneumatophone, as shown in
Fig. 5. This tablature is similar to guitar tablature. Also, as
with an electric guitar, an intricately intertwined harmony
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
121
and melody can be played on nothing more than ﬁve tee
ﬁttings, ﬁve microphones, some compressed air, and some
guitar eﬀects pedals and ampliﬁer. Unlike guitar, however,
the pneumatophone can sustain notes for as long as desired.
In fact there will always be a small amount of turbulence
and eddy currents ﬂowing past each pickup, so, technically
speaking, every note on the pneumatophone is sounding to
some degree all the time, and the player merely accentuates
the degree to which notes sound, while also changing the
way in which they sound. A noise gate is sometimes added
to each pickup (by way of ﬁve other noise-gate guitar eﬀects
pedals) when this background drone is not wanted. How-
ever, usually some form of background drone is desired, so
only some of the noise gates are shut oﬀ during only portions
of a given song. Thus there are usually ten eﬀects pedals
for a 5-note instrument, and these are typically adjusted
dynamically during the song, but only occasionally.
Staﬀ-notation cannot express the intermix of overlapping
(on the same compass) harmony and melody that is possible
on a pneumatophone. We refer to this intertwined and over-
lapping harmony and melody as “harmelody”. Pneumato-
phone tablature can be extended to produce what we call
“ﬂuid music notation” (“harmelodic notation”) which re-
sembles a multicolored Time-Frequency Distribution (TFD),
wavelet transform, or spectrogram.
2.5 The acetophone
The acetophone is a horizontally mounted pipe with 12 air
holes running along its length. It is powered by acetylene,
supplied by a hookup to an acetylene tank. Initially, there
are 12 ﬂames burning, but if the player covers up one of
the air holes, the corresponding ﬂame will be deprived of
oxygen supply, and the ﬂame will make a loud bang as it
is extinguished. Anybody who has used an acetylene torch
will no doubt be familiar with this loud bang whenever the
air supply is shut oﬀ.
The acetophone is an aerophone, since the sound is pro-
duced by gas (acetylene, oxygen, and combustion gases).
Although an acetophone can be played using a keyboard
to control air valves, it is preferable, in keeping with the
spirit of remaining on the diagonal in Fig. 1, that the player
interact with the acetyphone by having his or her ﬁngers in
direct contact with the air.
All 12 ﬂames and ﬁnger hole systems are identical and
sound identical. What makes the acetyphone melodic is a
set of resonators through which the sound vibrations from
the ﬂames pass. In small chamber performances acoustic
resonator pipes are used. In larger performances, 12 micro-
phones are used, one for each ﬂame. The output of each of
these 12 microphones is run through a bandpass ﬁlter, to
select out the frequency of the desired note from the broad-
band snapping sound of the ﬂame extinguishing.
Regardless of whether the bandpass ﬁlter is acoustic, ana-
log, digital, or implemented by oscillators (sometimes MIDI
controlled oscillators), the instrument is still an aerophone,
and not an electrophone, because the initial sound vibra-
tions come from air, not electricity. The electricity (whether
MIDI, digital, analog, or the like) serves merely a post-
processing role, after the initial production of the sound has
been made by the demise of one or more ﬂames.
Chords can be played by blocking multiple air holes at the
same time.
An electric starter re-ignite any of the ﬂames when the
corresponding air hole is no longer blocked.
Figure 6: Plasmaphone: Sound is produced by plasma. A num-
ber of diﬀerent kinds of plasmaphones have been built by the author,
with various kinds of pickups. The one shown here uses optical pick-
ups (wrapped in foil for shielding from high voltage interference) on
each of several plasma balls. As more ﬁngers come closer to one of
the plasma balls, plasma is drawn away from a pickup, resulting in
dramatic changes in the sound produced.
The acetophone has a MIDI output, making it easy to use
it as a controller for a
pyrophone [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pyrophone] Mod-
ern pyrophones (consider Satan’s Calliope, for example) gen-
erally have MIDI inputs.
See also, http://www.vu.union.edu/ stodolan/pyrophone/
(thermoacoustic organ).
2.6 “Rectiﬁre”
It is well known that one can quickly run one’s ﬁngers
through the ﬂame of a Bunsen burner, candle, or torch ﬂame
without pain or damage.
The rectiﬁre makes use of this fact by way of a linear array
of ﬂames through which the player runs his or her ﬁngers to
play the instrument. The instrument can be played with or
without asbestos gloves, but playing without gloves provides
some interesting physical constraints and physicality to the
music that stays more within the “pysiphone” spirit.
Acoustic, optical, or electric pickups are ﬁtted to each
ﬂame to pickup changes in the sound of the ﬂame due to
insertion of the ﬁnger.
A diﬀerent variation on this ﬁre and water theme has been
previously reported[2],p190.
2.7 TESLA-KEYS
The Transcutaneous 3 Electrical Sounding Linear Array
for Keyboard-like Electrically Yielded Sound (T.E.S.L.A.
K.E.Y.S.) is a musical instrument invented by author S.
Mann in the 1970s, consisting of an array of spark gaps into
which the player inserts his or her ﬁngers to produce sound.
Sound is produced by sparks occurring in direct physical
contact with the ﬁngers of the player.
One embodiment was made using eight 6-volt automobile
ignition coils originally used in Model-T fords. Current lim-
iting resistors were used to keep the stimulation levels below
the pain+damage threshold. Each spark gap is adjusted so
that it does not quite arc, until a ﬁnger is inserted. Each
Model-T ford coil has an integral electrotome that can be ad-
justed for tuning over the desired range of notes, the sound
being made directly by sparks at the desired pitch. The
result is an acoustic instrument that can be used in small
chamber settings, or can be used as a source of excitation
for an array of Tesla coils, thus becoming a user-interface to
an ionophone or Tesla organ. In either case, the ﬁngers of
the musician are in direct physical contact with at least the
ﬁrst stage of sound-producing sparks.
2.8 The plasmaphone
The plasmaphone is similar to TESLA-KEYS but the
plasma is contained in an array of glass balls that the player
touches (Fig. 6). Since the plasma eﬀects occur at high fre-
quency, the plasma may still, in some sense, be regarded as
3Transcutaneous means applied through the unbroken skin,
i.e. unlike some versions of the instrument that use im-
planted electrodes.
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
122
Figure 7: Another variation of the plasmaphone at the 2006
PineHill Christmas Concert, December 25th: Commercially
made high voltage plasma mugs bought from a novelty store are de-
signed to be ﬁlled with water and touched. The author bought nine
of these “plasmugs” and made them into a highly expressive “plas-
macoustic” instrument.
being in contact with the player’s ﬁngers despite the glass
barrier.
2.9 Poseidoplasmaphone
The poseidoplasmaphone (Fig. 7) combines water and plasma.
2.10 The xenophone
The xenophone consists of 12 xenon ﬂash tubes (from
camera ﬂashes) each ﬂashing into a separate resonant pipe.
The ﬂash tubes are excited to just slightly less than what is
required to ﬁre them. The instrument is played by stroking
the ﬂash tubes with the ﬁngers, to get them to ﬁre. For
reasons of user comfort and safety, a small ﬂash tube mak-
ing a small sound is used either to activate a much larger
(and louder) ﬂash tube such as GE Mazda FT623 (40,000
watt-seconds) or the weak sound of the smaller ﬂash tubes
is ampliﬁed by way of acoustic, electric, or optical pickups.
2.11 The Gaiaphone
The Gaiaphone, named after the Greek goddess of the
earth, is an instrument that is played by stomping on it.
A phased array of geophones, sometimes mounted in giant
resonant pipes, beneath the earth, pickup up the sounds
and feed them to a computer. The computer analyzes the
sound using Morlet wavelet theory, and modulates it up into
the audible range of human hearing, but includes also the
subsonic parts of it.
The Gaiaphone can be played like a foot piano (regions
of the earth are organized by frequency) or like an andan-
tephone (regions of the earth are organized by time). In the
ﬁrst case, sounds from the geophones are used to compute
direction and location information for a seismic disturbance
in each of 12 diﬀerent regions, at the same time. Distur-
bances in a ﬁrst region, say, region-A result in the sounding
of an “A” note by passing the actual seismic activity through
bandpass ﬁlters and other eﬀects processors. Disturbances
in a second region are ﬁltered to sound a whole tone higher
(“B”), and so-on, to make a musical scale that one or more
players can play with their feet. An alternate version of the
instrument is played in a pool, in which hydrophones are
used instead of seismophones.
2.12 Idioscope and Glockenspark
Any of the new instruments in this paper can be assisted
by computer vision. One example comes from an electric
xylophone made of 88 blocks of wood, each with its own
microphone connected to a separate bandpass ﬁlter. Each
bandpass ﬁlter is tuned to a separate note, like the notes on
a piano. The blocks can be identical, or they can be sized to
each resonate at the desired frequency so that some of the
bandpass eﬀect comes from the wooden blocks themselves.
An improvement to the author’s electric xylophone was
made by using only two microphones, one in each of the two
sticks and simply using an overhead camera to see which
block was being hit. A computer then selected and imple-
mented an appropriate bandpass ﬁlter for each block hit.
Moreover, any desktop surface with data projecter can be-
come the instrument, using the real sound of a real stick
hitting real wood to make the sound, then ﬁlter it with the
computer, choosing a center ﬁlter frequency based on where
on the desk a stick hits. (A stereo sound card in the com-
puter does 2 separate bandpass ﬁlter channels, with one stick
held in each hand). Microphones can also be ﬁtted to the
hands or the desk itself for direct (stickless) hitting.
This idioscope (camera-assisted idiophone) evolved into
the glockenspark, in which 88 metal bars, connected to high
voltage (at a safe and very low current) are touched by the
user. Sparks ﬂy to the ﬁngertips (or to insulated metal sticks
for people afraid of direct touch), and computer vision deter-
mines which bars are touched. The audio output from the
computer then goes back to one or two high voltage supplies,
so that the sound is actually produced by sparks. The result
is an entirely acoustic instrument in which plasma is both
the user-interface as well as the sound-producing medium.
2.13 Quintephones
It is proposed that instruments in the ﬁfth state of mat-
ter be generalized beyond electrophones to include opti-
phones for sound production by non-electric informatics,
optical computing, or any other newly invented means.
3. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
A large range of newly invented musical instruments have
been presented. Each of these inventions has a simplicity
of user-interface like a keyboard instrument, but none of
them is merely a user-interface. When physiphones are used
as MIDI control surfaces they are acting as hyperacoustic
hyper-instruments, not merely as user-interfaces, since each
of these newly invented instruments has a linear array of
real physical processes, each with a resonator (much like the
Hsain Wain, a large circle of graduated drums that looks
like a pipe organ but is a membranophone). This physical-
ity serves as both a user-interface and a sound-production
medium. Many of these newly invented instruments do not
fall within any of the ﬁve Hornbostel Sachs categories. None
of them are merely electrophones or merely interfaces to
electrophones. In all cases, the initial sound production
(the ﬁrst vibrating element that makes sound) is due to a
real physical process. These new instruments may be called
“physiphones” from the Greek words “physika”, “physikos”
(nature) and “phone” (sound).
Inventing these new instruments has shown the limita-
tions of previously known musical instrument classiﬁcation
systems. A new classiﬁcation scheme was proposed, the top-
level of which is the initial sounding mechanism’s state of
matter: Earth, Water, Air, Fire, or Quintessence!
4. REFERENCES
[1] T. Machover. Hyperinstruments: A composer’s
approach to the evolution of intelligent musical
instruments. In W. Freeman, editor, Cyberarts. Spartan
Books, San Francisco, 1991.
[2] S. Mann. FL
UI D... In Proceedings of the 13th annual
ACM international conference on Multimedia, pages
181 – 190, Hilton, Singapore, 2005.
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
123