Lessons Learned in Exploring the Leap MotionTM  
Sensor for Gesture-based Instrument Design 
 
 
Jihyun Han 
Department of Computer Science 
University College London 
UK  
jihyun.han.10@ucl.ac.uk 
 
Nicolas Gold 
Department of Computer Science 
University College London 
UK 
n.gold@ucl.ac.uk 
 
ABSTRACT 
The Leap MotionTM sensor offers fine-grained gesture-recognition 
and hand tracking.  Since its release, there have been several uses of 
the device for instrument design, musical interaction and expression 
control, documented through online video.  However, there has been 
little formal documented investigation of the potential and challenges 
of the platform in this context.  This paper presents lessons learned 
from work-in-progress on the development of musical instruments 
and control applications using the Leap Motion TM sensor.  Two 
instruments are presented: Air-Keys and Air-Pads and the potential 
for augmentation of a traditional keyboard is explored.  The results 
show that the platform is promising in this context but requires 
various challenges, both physical and logical, to be overcome. 
 
Keywords 
Gestural control, Virtual instruments, Augmented instruments 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Gestural control for new musical instruments has been under active 
research for many years (e.g. see [11]).  As platforms for gesture 
recognition advance, new opportunities arise to explore their 
potential and improve on the size, portability, and other aspects of 
new and augmented instruments.  The Microsoft Kinect TM [10] 
sensor spawned many new applications in musical control (e.g. Yang 
and Essl [23]) and the recent Leap MotionTM controller [8] offers 
possibilities for finer-grained manipulation of musical parameters. 
 Instruments and control systems based on the Leap MotionTM are 
emerging in video (examples are described in section 2) but little 
formal documentation of the challenges and potential of the device in 
various scenarios exists. 
 This paper presents practical lessons learned during work to 
explore the potential of the Leap Motion TM for developing two 
instruments (Air-Keys and Air-Pad), and in gestural augmentation of 
a traditional keyboard.  These lessons are documented to aid those 
considering using the platform in this context.  The rest of the paper 
is structured as follows: s ection 2 reviews background, section 3 
presents the two instruments developed in this project and evaluates 
them, section 4 discusses sensor orientation issues, and section 5 
concludes. 
2. BACKGROUND 
2.1 The Leap MotionTM Sensor 
The Leap Motion controller is a small (3” long [8]) USB device that 
tracks hand and finger motions as input. It is consumer targeted and 
intended to be used with minimal setup on a physical desktop, 
potentially offering an accessible means of controlling a virtual 
musical interface.  
 It works by projecting infrared light upward from the device and 
detecting reflections using monochromatic infrared cameras. Its FOV 
extends 25mm to 600mm with a 150o spread from the device and it 
has high framerate (>200fps) and precision (1/100mm per finger) [8].   
2.2 Gestural Control of Instruments 
Gestural instruments have been developed over many years (see 
Miranda and Wanderley [11] for a comprehensive treatment of the 
subject), and new developments (e.g. using cameras [13,14], motion-
capture [15], or gloves [12]) are regularly reported.  More recently 
the advent of consumer -level gesture-capture devices like the 
KinectTM has led to further developments in the area, e.g. [4, 22, 23]. 
 The recent release of Leap MotionTM has likewise produced many 
examples of new instruments, largely documented in video alone 
(e.g. see [7]).  One notable exception is the work of Silva et al. who 
undertook an evaluation of the sensor in the context of digital music 
instruments (in similar vein to this paper) [17].  In their case, they 
used visual and tactile feedback to aid the performer in locating their 
hand position and were able to measure latency using the difference 
between the timing of sounds recorded on the tactile surface and note 
triggering by the sensor.   Our work evaluates the platform from the 
perspective of instruments using touchless action [18]. 
 These Leap-based instruments can be can be classified using 
Miranda and Wanderley’s framework [11] thus: 
2.2.1 Augmented Musical Instruments  
These are acoustic/electric instruments augmented by sensors [11].  
Soylentcola augmented a guitar with the Leap MotionTM sensor 
attached to the body to control effects [20].  Expression parameters 
appear to be controlled by the position of the detected hands in 
a very practical way.   Earnshaw attached the sensor to a drumkit to 
create a drumstick-controlled theremin-like instrument [1].  R az 
enhanced a traditional piano, controlling electronics through hand 
gesture to combine acoustic and electronic sounds [7].  Bertelli 
enhanced a snare drum, using the sensor (in combination with other 
controllers) to manipulate tempo, timbre, and envelope [7].  
Thompson’s Motion-Controlled Instrument receives chords from a 
midi controller, and plays them based on timing quantisation, pitch 
and velocity controlled in the x, y, and z dimensions respectively 
[21].  T hese augmented instruments work reasonably well and for 
timbral control with distinct gestures, the sensor works effectively. 
2.2.2 Instrument-like Gestural Controllers  
These are gestural controllers modelled after acoustic instruments 
[11].  Gratoo created an air drum played with sticks [5].  There is 
noticeable latency between a  ‘hit’ and the sound trigger ing, 
suggesting that the LEAP API’s built-in key-tap gesture recognition 
is being used to trigger MIDI messages.  If this is the method used, it 
successfully detects taps, but does not offer velocity sensing. 
 Heaver constructed an Air Piano [6] using 3 dimensional 
positioning of the fingers to determine pitch, velocity, and the after-
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on 
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME’14, June 30 – July 03, 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
371
touch of the notes.  It appears to suffer from the sensor’s difficulty 
(see later) in tracking fingers that are close together thus sometimes 
missing notes or falsely activating.  Sensomusic ( who created a 
PianoLeap instrument as well as a theremin -like instrument) [16] 
appears to have adopted a heuristic solution to recreate ‘valid’ chords, 
based on the number of detected fingers. The pitch and volume are 
controlled by the position of the hand.  Pianoleap also seems to have 
a fail-safe design which restricts the available notes to a certain scale, 
and quantised timing of note activation.  The sensor has also been 
used to create an Air Harp [19], which provides direct interaction 
with the virtual reconstruction, appearing very responsive and with 
simple note layout. It also provides selectable scales and expression 
controls. 
2.2.3 Alternate Controllers 
These are controllers that do not bear strong resemblance to existing 
instruments [11] (or in these cases, are often separate gestural 
interfaces used with other instruments or hands).  Earnshaw created 
an expression controller used with a guitar where the movement of 
the headstock controls effect parameters  [2]. Yehezkel uses the 
controller to perform dubstep [24] using the hand position to control 
effects, and Fujimoto uses it for beatboxing [3] using gestures to 
shape and trigger sounds.  Voy and Sqeepo both control various 
aspects of their synthesised sound through gesture [7], in the latter 
case creating a particularly intuitive interface in the context of the 
musical genre.  Silva et al. [17] present the Crystal Piano which 
combines Leap-based gesture recognition with a clear physical 
surface and visual feedback to guide the user.  They observe similar 
issues to those found in our evaluation here in terms of occasional 
mis-tracking and lost fingers.   
3. INSTRUMENTS 
3.1 Air-Keys 
This section presents the Air-Keys and the Air-Pads we developed to 
explore the challenges involved in re-creating a traditional instrument 
using gestural technology.  We examine key issues in turn. 
3.1.1 Recognition of key -presses and key-releases 
Recognising key presses is fundamental to the operation of the Air-
Keys.  The Leap MotionTM SDK’s way of providing the user with 
tracking data is done through the ‘onFrame’ method. This is called on 
every frame and the manipulation of tracking data is performed 
inside the method. 
 Our first approach to detect key-presses used the SDK’s built-in 
support for gesture recognition. The 'key-tap' gesture, where user 
instantly taps downward and recoils upward was used. While it was 
simple to make the program trigger the MIDI message on the key-
tap, the latency between the user's intention and the trigger was too 
high for instrumental use as the sensor needs to see the fingers recoil 
upwards to recognise it as a key-tap.  From a MIDI perspective, a 
single gesture makes appropriately timed creation of note-on and 
note-off messages more difficult. 
 The next approach utilised the SDK’s ability to track the physical 
characteristics of fingers.  We  hypothesised that when the user 
intends to press a key, the downward velocity of the fingers will be 
higher than when they move their hand for other reasons .  We 
measure the downward velocity of the fingers in comparison to a 
threshold, and when it is exceeded, this triggers a note-on message.  
Likewise, upward velocity and note-off are calculated from upward 
finger velocities. The problem with this approach is that the methods 
are called on every frame so MIDI messages were being triggered for 
every consecutive frame where the fingers moved faster than a 
certain speed (thus a de-bounce was required). 
 Using the SDK’s ability to refer to the previous frame, the 
positions of those fingers present in the current frame are compared 
on the y -axis with those in the previous frame.  If a finger was 
positioned higher than a set threshold in the previous frame, but is 
currently lower than the threshold, the program triggers the note-on 
message and vi ce versa for note -off messages.  T his creates an 
imaginary horizontal 'trigger-plane’ which makes a sound when 
fingers pass it. 
3.1.2 Recreating the Keyboard Layout  
We model the layout of the keyboard through a single class holding 
information for the positions of the different keys (measured in 
millimetres).   Keys are  instantiated from note 41 (F2) to 79 (G5) 
with note 60 (C5) as the middle. Keys are initially 2 cm wide but key 
spacing can be dynamically changed. 
 When the condition for a message trigger is successful, i.e. a finger 
moves past the vertical threshold, the x-axis value of the position of 
the finger is used to determine which key has been pressed.  
3.1.3 Calculation of Note V elocity  
Note velocity is somewhat unintuitive in an air keyboard since there 
is no physical feedback in relation to the striking force on the ‘key’.  
 To create velocity sensitivity a direct mapping is made between the 
speed of the finger and  the velocity of the note.  When the note 
trigger condition succeeds, as the x position of the finger is identified, 
the speed of the finger at the moment of trigger is calculated between 
0cm/s to 300cm/s and converted to a MIDI velocity value. 
 This solution lets the player control the loudness of the sound by 
hitting the notes at higher speed, akin to hitting the keys hard. 
3.1.4 Hardware-Related Characteristics 
The characteristics of the Leap Motion TM device also affect the 
performance of the instrument. 
 Consider a case where a finger has ‘pressed’ the key at C4. A note-
on message for C4 is sent.  If, while depressed below the threshold, 
the finger is moved horizontally and then lifted at a different note, for 
example, D4, the note initially triggered will still be playing and a 
meaningless note-off message will be sent to D4.  This problem 
requires the instantiation of a hand model to track finger IDs and map 
their correspondence to notes.  Fingers are added to the map as soon 
as notes are triggered and are removed as the finger leaves the touch 
zone. When they are removed, a note-off message is sent for the 
appropriate note number. 
 Consider another case where a finger is depressed at C4, but gets 
'lost', i.e. disappears in the sensor’s field of view after the note-on 
message was sent.  Once the tracking is lost for a finger, the sensor 
has no way of regaining the ID of the lost finger and gives a new ID 
to the finger when it reappears in the field. This causes two problems: 
the note that was pressed by the lost finger is stuck on and has no 
way of turning off, and the map entry for the lost finger has no way 
of being removed. Overcoming this requires a frame -by-frame 
verification of the map to the currently detected fingers, and where 
fingers in the map are no longer detected, a note-off message is sent 
to the appropriate note and the map entry removed.   
 Finally, the sensor’s high sensitivity (beneficial in many situations) 
can allow false detection of near-stationary fingers when they are 
close to the note-triggering plane.  Addressing this simply requires a 
minimum-speed threshold to be exceeded (currently 1cm/s).  
3.2 Air-Pads 
We applied the same base mechanism and algorithm to recreate a 
4x2 button array drum-pad. We decided to loosen the concept of 
fine-grain control and make each pad (key) comparably larger than 
the Air Keys trigger zones.  Each pad triggers different note values 
responsible for kick drum, snare, closed hi-hat, and so on. 
 The implementation of the Pad Layout is a further modification of 
the aforementioned Keyboard Layout. Instead of only considering 
the x axis as the division of keys, we took the z axis into account to 
separate each pad. The controller class passes both x and z values to 
the pad layout class on each successful trigger. Each pad is 10cm x 
10cm and they are laid out in 2 rows, each containing 4 pads.  
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
372
3.3 Evaluation and Discussion 
The prototype of the Air-Keys and the Air-Pads were then evaluated 
by the first author in a semi-structured way. For the Air-Keys, The 
Celebrated Chop Waltz (informally known as the chopstick song) 
was played to evaluate the practicality of the keys for melodic use. 
Basic triad chords of Pachelbel’s Canon in C were played for the 
chordal evaluation. Furthermore, a simple drum pattern was played 
to evaluate the practicality of the drum pads.  E ach trial was 
undertaken twice: before practice and after ten minutes of practice.  
Table 1 shows the observations made. 
Table 1: Observations of instrument playability  
Criterion Observations 
Sense of key 
positioning  
(prior to 
melodic and 
chordal 
evaluation) 
 
Once a sense of the position of  middle C was 
established, running from C to G was not very 
difficult (5/10 trials error-free).  When attempting to 
play stepwise from middle C to the C  an octave 
above, passing the thumb under the hand to play 
above G ( i.e. shifting the thumb to land on F to play 
F to C fluently with 5 fingers) was not recognized at 
all (0/10 trials error-free).  As the keys are not 
physical, it was difficult to get the sense of height 
(threshold). One has to strike down the keys in a 
wide vertical angle to ensure the threshold is passed.  
Melodic 
performance 
 
In the i nitial trial, there was a lot of confusion in  
where the keys were, and how high they were.  Key 
spacing is not easily predictable (e.g. E to C) thus 
non-stepwise jumps can be hard to play (an average 
of two to four consecutive mistakes after most non-
stepwise jumps).  After ten minutes of practice one’s 
sense of the keyboard layout was improved  (an 
average of two mis-locations per phrase containing 
approximately eight non-stepwise jumps) and after 
getting used to the threshold height, the velocity of 
the notes was more easily controllable  (increased 
control after practice corresponds to the reported 
experience of Bertelli [7]).  Flatter hand shapes 
performed better. 
Chordal 
performance 
As with the melodic performance, the initial sense of 
key layout was poor  (finding note locations took 
three to eight attempts and triad shapes took five to 
ten attempts).  T he piece used (Pachelbel’s Canon) 
involved a lot of non-stepwise movement, and was 
thus far more difficult than the melodic performance.  
It was harder to get the device to recognize the 
fingers as they were close together .  After ten 
minutes of practice , in contrast to the melodic 
performance, hand-finger shape remained stationary 
while the arm and the wrist moved to press a typical 
triad chord. Once familiar with the recognized hand 
shape and the width of keys, it was easier than the 
initial attempt (two to five attempts for location, with 
triads taking three to five attempts).  However, in a 
realistic situation, the hands and fingers do not stay 
stationary nor are they flat, thus it was less practical 
with triad chords.  Expression control of chords 
using forward/backward movement was quite 
playable.  Once the chord was found, only three 
fingers were lost from tracking in twenty trials of ten 
seconds. 
Drum pad 
performance 
Adjusting to the buttons was significantly easier than 
the Air Keys, even at the initial attempt (average of 
two errors per bar).  Trigger threshold confusion was 
less of a concern, as a typical pad performance 
involved wider vertical swings at the pad.  After ten 
minutes of practice, a simple drum pattern and 
variations were easily and fluently performable  
(maximum two errors per bar).  The larger pad area 
improved the calibration and practicality of the 
instrument, however, when a finger was struck 
down to activate a pad, we occasionally observed the 
nearby fingers mistakenly activating the same pad. 
 
4. ORIENTATION 
Our final investigation involved placing the sensor at various angles 
to the table to investigate its potential in non desk-bound situations.   
 The Leap MotionTM sensor is designed to be used on a desk facing 
upward with the hands held over it .  O bject 3D realisation is 
undertaken through projection from the device upwards, so 
vertically-oriented objects are sometimes not correctly recognised.  
Due to its reliance on reflected infrared, objects such as transparent 
pens are also not very well seen by the device. 
 Despite the sensor’s intended desk-based usage, there are examples 
of its use mounted on the body of guitars (e.g. [20]) and the potential 
for alternative orientations was explored here, with a view to 
augmenting traditional keyboard instruments (motivated by the work 
of McPherson et al. [9] but without requiring custom electronics and 
thus in similar vein to Yang and Essl [23]).  Table 2 reports the 
observations made during informal evaluation. 
Table 2: Observations of orientation on sensor 
performance. 
Orientation Observations 
Upright (see 
Fig. 1(a)) 
This orientation works the most fluently but when a 
hand and fingers are positioned as for piano 
performance, the fingers are sometimes not 
recognised properly as the fingers point downwards 
and are too close together (an average separation of 
about 5mm is needed).  Fingers remain tracked 
when stationary or with slow bending. 
Rotated 90 
degrees 
about y axis 
(see F ig.  
1(b)) 
Fingers are not fluently recognised, with detection 
briefly failing on average three times a second with a 
stationary hand.  Palms are recognised but appear to 
change direction frequently and disappear about 
40cm above the device.  ‘Pointables’, such as a 
pencil, are recognised until they are completely 
parallel to the x axis (mirroring the situation with the 
y-axis when the device is in its normal orientation. 
Sensor held 
upside-down 
above the 
hands 
Hands and fingers are not recognised unless a plane 
of solid material is placed above the sensor to block 
overhead lighting (or room lighting is switched off) 
in which case the sensor works close to normally but 
with inverted axes  (about two finger mis -tracks 
every five seconds with a stationary hand). 
Sensor 
placed on its 
side (see Fig. 
1(c) and (d)) 
Vertical (i.e. in the direction of projection) modelling 
is weak. As the device is projecting the infrared 
horizontally towards the user, the fingers are not 
correctly recognised if they are placed flat on the 
table.  Fingers are barely recognised even if upright 
(perhaps because of early reflection of the infrared 
light from the table surface since the sensor performs 
better when placed on the edge of a table) 
Sensor at an 
angle (see 
Fig. 1(e)). 
Works as normal but pianistic hand shapes can still 
be hard to detect.   Around five mis -tracks of the 
fingers and two of palms every ten seconds. 
 
We also experimented by placing the sensor at the back of a MIDI 
keyboard to control various timbral parameters based on sliding the 
hand back and forth on the keys while holding down a chord.  Whilst 
there was some success in this, the other keys and potentiometers 
occluded the sensor’s view of the hands and thus further work will be 
needed to determine the best placement and heuristics required. 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
373
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Views of sensor orientation (a) normal, (b) rotated 
about y axis, (c) on its side, (d) side, edge of table, (e) at an angle.  
5. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper has presented lessons learned from work in progress to 
use recent consumer-level gesture detection technology as means for 
creating and controlling instruments.  Two variants of a virtual 
instrument were presented: Air-Keys and Air-Pads, both using the 
Leap MotionTM sensor for control.  Observations derived from 
informal evaluation of these instruments, and using the sensor for 
augmenting a traditional instrument, were presented.   
 Future work will include the development of finger -specific 
adaptive thresholds (rather than a flat plane) based on individual 
finger velocity to account for more natural pianistic hand shapes, and 
heuristics for note prediction and triggering in common technical 
scenarios e.g. thumb passing under the hand in an upward run. 
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work is partially supported by the EPRSC CREST Platform 
Grant [grant number EP/G060525/2]. RCUK-funded data may be 
obtained from Nicolas Gold.  Leap MotionTM is a trademark of Leap 
Motion Inc.   KinectTM is a trademark of Microsoft Inc. 
7. REFERENCES 
[1] N. Earnshaw. Drums + Leap Motion Theremin experiment. 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4ZG9V0MNeh4 (accessed 
7th Feb 2014).  2014. 
[2] N. Earnshaw. Building Bridges: Exploring the Musical 
Interface Gap. https://labs.leapmotion.com/building-bridges-
exploring-the-musical-interface-gap/ (accessed 7th Feb 2014).  
2014. 
[3] R. Fujimoto. Humanelectro × Leap Motion. 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p9EyDes62sc (accessed 7th 
Feb 2014).  2013. 
[4] N. Gillian, and J. Paradiso. Digito: A Fine-Grain Gesturally 
Controlled Virtual Musical Instrument. In Proceedings of the 
International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical 
Expression (NIME) (Ann Arbor, Michigan, May 21-23, 2012). 
[5] gratoo. The Geek Tune (Rocking the Leap Motion). 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xp6v96DhzwU (accessed 7th 
Feb 2014). 2013. 
[6] M. Heavers.  Leap Motion Air Piano. 
http://vimeo.com/67143314 (accessed 7th Feb 2014). 2014. 
[7] Leap Motion Inc. 6 Songs in the Key of Leap. 
http://blog.leapmotion.com/post/60865789820/6-songs-in-the-
key-of-leap-motion (accessed 7th Feb 2014).  2013. 
[8] Leap Motion Inc. The Leap Motion. 
https://www.leapmotion.com/product. (accessed 7th Feb 2014). 
2014. 
[9] A. McPherson, and Y. Kim.  Design and applications of a 
multi-touch musical keyboard. In Proceedings of the Sound and 
Music Computing Conference (Padova, Italy. July 6-9, 2011). 
[10] Microsoft Inc. Kinect for Windows. 
http://www.microsoft.com/en-us/kinectforwindows/  (accessed 
7th Feb 2014). 2013. 
[11] E.R. Miranda, and M.M. Wanderley. New Digital Musical 
Instruments: Control and Interaction Beyond the Keyboard. A-
R Editions, Inc., Middleton, Wisconsin, 2006. 
[12] T. Mitchell, S. Madgwick, and I. Heap. Musical Interaction 
with Hand Posture and Orientation  : A Toolbox of Gestural 
Control Mechanisms. In Proceedings of the International 
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME) 
(Ann Arbor, Michigan, May 21-23, 2012). 
[13] P. Modler, and T. Myatt. Video Based Recognition of Hand 
Gestures by Neural Networks for the Control of Sound and 
Music. In Proceedings of the International Conference on New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME) (Genova, Italy, June 
5-7, 2008). 
[14] O. Nieto, and D. Shasha, Hand Gesture Recognition in Mobile 
Devices: Enhancing The Musical Experience. In Proceedings 
of the 10th International Symposium on Computer Music 
Multidisciplinary Research (CMMR) (Marseille, France, 
October 15-18, 2013). 
[15] K. Nymoen, S. Skogstad, and A. Jensenius. Soundsaber-a 
motion capture instrument. In Proceedings of the International 
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME), 
(Oslo, Norway, May 30 – June 1, 2011). 
[16] sensomusic. sensomusic usine & leap motion air piano and 
theremin. http://vimeo.com/77346807 (accessed 7th Feb 2014). 
2013. 
[17] E.S. Silva, J.A.O. de Abreu, J.H.P de Almeida, V. Teichreib, 
and G.L. Ramalho. A Preliminary Evaluation of the Leap 
Motion Sensor as Controller of New Digital Musical 
Instruments. In Proceedings of SBCM - Brazilian Symposium 
on Computer Music, (Brasilia, Brazil, October 31 – November 
2, 2013). 
[18] S. Skogstad, A. Jensenius, and K. Nymoen. Using IR optical 
marker based motion capture for exploring musical interaction. 
In Proceedings of the International Conference on New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME), (Sydney, Australia, 
June 15-18, 2010). 
[19] A. Somers, AirHarp Demo. 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U2HFcfOwDtI2012 
(accessed 7th Feb 2014). 2012. 
[20] soylentcola. First experiment with Leap Motion and guitar. 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1cTI2GWlHY8 (accessed 7th 
Feb 2014). 2013. 
[21] T. Thompson. Experimenting with the Leap Motion device as a 
musical instrument. 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KGxo2A7VXuc (accessed 
7th Feb 2014), 2012. 
[22] S. Trail, T.F. Tavares, G. Odowichuk, P. Driessen,  W. A. 
Schloss, and G. Tzanetakis. Non-invasive sensing and gesture 
control for pitched percussion hyper-instruments using the 
Kinect. In Proceedings of the International Conference on New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression, (NIME) (Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, May 21-23, 2012). 
[23] Q. Yang, and G. Essl, Augmented Piano Performance using a 
Depth Camera. In Proceedings of the International Conference 
on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME) (Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, May 21-23, 2012). 
 [24] U. Yehezkel, Controlling music with Leapmotion Geco & 
Ableton. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=32iBfZVY_68 
(accessed 7th Feb 2014). 2013.  
(a) 
 (b) 
 (c) 
(d) 
 (e) 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
374