Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-188
LEMUR GuitarBot: MIDI Robotic String Instrument
Eric Singer
LEMUR
New York, NY
eric@ericsinger.com
Kevin Larke
LEMUR
New York, NY
kevin@soundball.com
David Bianciardi
LEMUR
New York, NY
david@av -controls.com
ABSTRACT
This paperd escribes the LEMUR GuitarBot, a robotic mus ical
instrument composed of four independent MIDI controllable
single-stringedm ovableb ridge units.D esign methodology,
developmenta nd fabricationp rocess, controls pecification
and results are discussed.
Keywords
Robotics, interactive, performance, MIDI, string instrument.
1. DESIGN  GOALS
In early 2001, LEMUR set out to create an ensemble of
robotic musical instruments controllable by MIDI and
playable by human musicians or from a computer. GuitarBot,
one of several instruments created by LEMUR, was designed to
be a responsive robotic stringed instrument controllable via
MIDI for the performance of live, generated or sequenced
musical works in concert or installed settings.
To help satisfy our goal that it could adopt any number of
configurations and aesthetic treatments, the instrument is
comprised of 4 identical modules which can be mounted and
arranged to suit the needs of a given work. Each module is a
monochord under tension suspended between 2 fixed bridges.
Pitch variation is achieved by a motorized servo-positioned
movable bridge which travels along the length of the string, in
amanner similar to a slide guitar. The string is plucked,
struck, bowed and otherwise excited by a system of plectra and
other mechanical and electromagnetic actuators. A solenoid
damper is employed to inhibit string vibration under control.
The sound of the string vibrating is electrified by an
electromagnetic pickup positioned above and adjacent to the
string, and processing and amplification are used to deliver
the instrument’s performance to the listener.
In ordert o maximize GuitarBot’s usefulness to the gre atest
number of users, we adopted the MIDI standard for
comm uni ca tio nb et ween th em odu les ’ onboard
microcontroller and the outside world. The instrument m odule
can be set to several MIDI modes which range from offering an
external sequencer complete access over all parameters and
functions of the robot, to condensed command sets suitable
for control of the in strument by a live p erformer using a
keyboard or other, more exotic controller.
General design principles also dictated that the instruments
be fabricated in a manner as precise and repeatable as possible,
with the goal of producing a series of durable, serviceable, and
upgradeable devices. To this end, the iterative design process
made heavy use of CAD to model and revise the instruments
prior to milling and assembly.
2. DE VELOPMENT
The current version of the GuitarBot is the result of three
design iterations. The first prototype was created
experimentally, crafting the basic design from aluminum and
investigating various mechanisms for the slide and picking
systems, modifying and refining parts until we had a working
proof of concept.
This unit was then modeled to scale in 3D using the
Vectorworks CAD package which allowed us to explore design
scenarios before committing to and machining the next
version. This second version was built to spec from the CAD
model and tested. Additional changes were made to the CAD
model, furtherr efiningt he accuracy andp layability of the
instrument.A sa reflectiono f our growing understanding of
the milling, machining and assembly processes, design
enhancements at this stage also served to increase the ease of
manufacturing and servicing the unit.
Following this round of changes, the third and current
version of GuitarBot was constructed and is described below.
2.1 Mech anical
Each Guitarbot module is assembled on a 36” x 4”
aluminum base. A steel electric guitar or bass string, with a
diameter range of .01” to .02” forp lain strings, a nd .02” to .1”
for flatwound strings, is stretched between 2 fixed bridges and
tensioned with a worm drive guitar tuning peg. Open string
pitches from E at 41.2Hz through E at 392.6Hz are within the
nominal range of the instrument. The effective maximum
length of the string is 27.03”, occuring when the moving
bridge is furthest from the base fixed bridge. The moving
bridge has a travel length of 21.44” inches, or 79.3% of the
effective length of the string, thus ensuring a pitch range of
over 2 octaves.
The moving bridge assembly tr avels in a ball bearing slide
track and is positioned by means of a drive belt affixed to the
Figure 1. GuitarBot prototype

Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-189
bridge andr iding on pulleys. The drive pulley is driven by a
DC servo motor, and the idler pulley is coupled to a 10-turn
rotary potentiometer. End-to-end travel time of the slide
assembly is under 250ms.
In contrast to previous mechanical guitar-like instruments
like Sergi Jorda’s 6 string hammer-on fretted robot[1], the
string is excited by means of a plectrum mechanism consisting
of 4 nylon guitar picks mounted on a block that rotates on a
shaft. Thes haft is belt and pulley driven by a DC servo motor
on the underside of the asse mbly. Position feedback is
derived from an encoder wheel mounted on the end of the
shaft, which passes between the emitter and detector of a
photosensor module. The closed loop servo motor system
guarantees that the pickwheel assembly can be quickly and
accurately rotated so that a note can be struck and the next
pick brought into position to await the next trigger.
Additionally, the pickwheel can be rotated at various speeds to
produce humanly impossible feats of tremolo.
A “clapper” solenoid is used as a damper which, when
activated, closes on the string and stops vibration. This
allows the instrument to respond to note-off requests and also
permits a playing technique in which the string is picked
while dampened, producing a muted “thumping” and more
percussive sound without sustain.
An electromagnetic pickup of our own design is affixed to a
flexible metal arm which clamps to the base. The design of the
arm permits the pickup to be positioned at various places
along the lengtho ft he string to take advantageo fv ariations
in tone. We used a 1/4” diameter rare earth magnet as the base
of our hand wound single coil pickup which, when complete,
prove dt oh avee xcelle nt gain an d noi se rejection
characteristics when compared to off the shelf systems with
which we initially experimented.
2.2 Electronics
Each GuitarBot module has onboard circuitry to handle all
actuators, motor control and feedback locally. Custom control
boardsw ered esigned around a Microchip PI C16F87x-series
microcontroller and contain two DC servo amps, MIDI I/O
circuitrya nd power supply and microprocessor s upport
components. The board additionally features assorted
diagnostic and status LEDs and in-circuit serial programming
connections.
Inputs to the microcontroller include opto-iso lated MIDI-
format serial,a nalogv alu es fro mt he slid e position
potentiometer and digital input from the pickwheel encoder.
The slide position pot values are sampled at 10-bit resolution,
which, as we are using approximately 95% of the pot range,
results in an effective resolution of almost 1000 linear
positioning steps over the 2 octave range of the instrument.
Outputs from the microcontroller include MID I-format
serial, PWM motor control, and digital control of the damper
solenoid.
2.3 Software a nd Control
The GuitarBot embedded software system can be broken
into three components: Input , Configuration a nd Control. The
Input component is responsible for receiving, filtering and
dispatching MIDI messages to the other components. The
Configuration component is used to save, restore and
implement control routing presets and the system tuning
table. The Control component is responsible for driving the
bridge and pickwheel motor and managing the damper state.
The bridge pos itioning subsystem is the most complex
piece of the Control component .T he primary ob jective of this
subsystem is to position the bridge smoothly and accurately
at a user definable speed. The following is a summary of the
structure and operation of the bridge subsystem.
The inputs to the bridge positioning subsystem:
1. The current position of the bridge as measured from
the idler pulley rotary potentiometer and c onverted
to ad igital value via the microcontroller’s on-board
analog-to-digital converter (ADC).
2. Au ser defined target position and travel velo city.
The travel velocity determines how fast the bridge
should travel to the target position.
The outputs calculated by the bridge positioning subsystem:
1. The bridge motor voltage. This output dir ectly
determines the speed of rotation of the motor and
therefore the speed of motion of the bridge.
2. The bridge positioning motor direction. This output
determines whether the bridge moves toward higher
or lower pitched notes.
The bridge positioning subsys tem periodically generates a
new set of output signals by running the following algorithm:
1. Determine the current bridge pos ition by reading the
rotary pot ADC.
2. If theb ridge target position is not the same as its
current position generate the best motor voltage and
direction for moving the bridge towards the target
position at the user defined travel velocity.
3. Wait until the next read time occurs then go to 1.
The obstacles to achieving smooth and accurate control of
the bridge can be demonstrated by considering how the
physical bridge system responds to repositioning requests at
very high and very low speeds. For example at high speeds the
bridge will tend to overshoot the target position. The
overshoot is a result of the momentum the bridge may have
gained during travel and the inevitable delay between when
ther otary pot ADC is read,w hent he next motor voltage is
computed, and how quickly the motor is able to respond to
that new voltage. At low speeds the physical system has a
different set of characteristics. For example it will tend to
move sporadically as it overcomes static friction or encounters
changing forces due to the sli ght twisting produced by the
side mounted drive belt.
After trying several ad-hoc motion control schemes we
arrived at a satisfactory software solution to the bridge
positi oni ng probl em by imp lemen tin ga Proportional-
Integral-Derivative (PID) based algorithm. The PID algorithm
accepts as input an error value and three user definable
coefficients referred to as P,I and D. In this case the error value
isthed ifferenceb etween thec urrent bridge position and the
target bridge position. The algorithm directly computes the
bridge motor voltage by scaling the error, the time derivative
of the error, and the time integral of the error by P,I, and D
respectively and then summing the three scaled values. We
arrived at values for the P,I, and D coefficients through
interactive experimentation.
The Control component also implements two pickwheel
operational modes. In the first mode the user can set when the
pickwheel is triggered and how many times the the string is
plucked per trigger. In the second mode the pickwheel spins
continuously and the user can control the speed of rotaion.
The Control components damper control subsystem
manages a set of user selectable trigger/release algorithms.
These include a mode which allows applying the damper
directly, a mode which keeps the damper on the string for a
predetermined amount of time after each damper trigger and
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-190
then automatically lifts it, and a mode where the damper is
lifted just prior to the pick wheel pluck and then put down
manually or automatically after an elapsed time.
Allo ft he controlc omponent variables used to determine
the bridge position, pickwheel triggering and damper state are
user programmablev ia MIDI.T he Configuration component is
responsible for deciding which MIDI messages are routed to
each of the control component variables. This logical
distinction between control and configuration allows for
maximum flexibility in defining user interface modes. By
default Note-on pitch values determine the center pitch, pitch
bend messages determine pitch offset above and below the
center pitch, and note-on velocity messages control bridge
velocity. This setup allows a MIDI keyboard to easily control
the instrument in the expected way. However the routing
configuration can be easily changed to more unus ual schemes.
Fore xample if theM IDIp itch wheel is routed to the center
pitch, the MIDI modulation wheel to the pick wheel velocity,
andt he note-on/offg ate to thed amper trigger, the pitch and
thep luck rate canb ec ontrolled quickly andc ontinuously for
interesting sonic results.
The Configuration component also manages the storing and
recalling of configuration presets and the system tuning table
to non-volatile memory. The default tuning table supports the
traditional Western twelve notes per octave equal-tempered
system however it can be changed by the user to contain any
arbitrary values.
3. FU TURE
Future aesthetic and functional improvements are planned.
The picking system is designed t ob ei n t e rchangeable, and
different actuation systems can easily be swapped in and out.
Other mechanisms under consideration for playing the string
include bouncing action, bow-like action, rubber and glass
wheels and electromagnetics (i.e. EBow).
Software improvements will include the addition of a load
balancing and dynamic allocation algorithm, allowing a
designated master unit to distribute monophonic and
polyphonic note data to the best available unit or units.
By making the units of the instrument modular, we are able
to place them into different sculptural and aesthetic contexts.
Future designs concepts in which to incorporate the guitar
units include a pyramidal structure with integrated speakers
and amplification and an anthropomorphic humanoid “Guitar
God” robot. Also, on-unit MIDI-controllable lighting effects
will be implemented.
4. ABOU T LEMUR
LEMUR – League of Electronic Musical Urban Robots – is a
New York City based group of musicians, artists, engineers
and technologists dedicated to producing robotic musical
instruments (http://ericsinger.com/LEMUR). Founded by Eric
Singer in 2000, LEMUR received a$30,000 Rockef eller
Foundation grant awarded in 2001 to create an orchestra of
musical robots. Under this development grant, LEMUR
completed four instruments in 2002: the string-based
GuitarBot,a n dt h r e ep e rcussion-based instruments, ShivaBot ,
!rBot and TibetBot .
LEMUR is affiliated with Harvestworks Digital Media Arts
Center,a non-for-profito rganizationf ounded in 1977 to
cultivate artistic talent using electronic tec hnologies
(http://harvestworks.org).
LEMUR research andd evelopment is headquartered at the
Madagascar Institute, a Br ooklyn-based collective of art stars,
geeks, pyromaniacs, insurgents and other misfits dedicated to
keeping NYC art spontaneous, hazardous and exciting by
means of guerilla street performance, techno-art, carnival rides,
kinetic sculptures and a whole lot of stuff blowing up.
(http://madagascarinstitute.com).
5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
In addition to the authors, LEMUR members include Kyle
Lapidus, Jonathan Huggins, Clay Lacefield, Jeff Feddersen,
Milena Iossifova, Michelle Cherian, Brendan J. FitzGerald,
Ahmi Wolf and Chad Redmon
LEMUR would like to thank the following people for their
support and assistance: Joan Shigekawa (Rockefeller
Foundation); Carol Parkinson (Harvestworks); Chris Hackett
andM aureen Flaherty (Madagascar Institute); Red Burns, Tom
Igoe and Greg Shakar (NYU Interactive Telecommunications
Program); Chico MacMurtrie (Amorphic Robot Works); Scott
Wolynski; Dave Liatti; Will Bowen; Heather Martin.
6. REFE RENCES
[1] Jorda, Sergi. “Afasia: the Ultimate Homeric One-man-
multimedia-band” In proceedings NIME02, Dublin,
Ireland
[2] Control Tutorials for Matlab.
http://www.engin.umich.edu/group/ctm/
[3] Davies, Bill. Practical Robotics: Principles and
Applications. CPIC Technical Books, 1997.
Figure 2. CAD model of current version

Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-191
[4] McMaster-Carr Supply Company Catalog #108. New
Brunswick NJ, 2002.
[5] MSC Insdustrial Supply Company Catalog 2002/2003.
Melville NY, 2002.
[6] Walker, John R. Machining Fundamentals. Goodheart-
Willcox Co. Inc., Tinley Park IL, 2000.
Figure 3: Completed GuitarBot in its
native urban environment
Saddle
Solenoid Damper
Pickwheel Belt
Pickwheel
Feedback Pulley
Drive Belt
Figure 4: Detail of Pickwheel and
Damper assemblies