Tango²: Software for Computer-Human Improvisation 
  
Henning Berg 
Försterstr. 25 
50825 Köln, Germany 
www.henning-berg.de 
Professor for Jazz Trombone 
Hochschule für Musik und Tanz Köln 
 
ABSTRACT 
 This paper describes Tango², software for Computer -Human 
Improvisation developed for more than 25 years by Henning Berg.  
 Tango² (T²) listens to an improvising musician, analyses what 
it hears and plays musical responses which relate directly to the 
musical input.  
 If the improviser in turn reacts to these answers, a musical 
loop between the human and the machine can emerge. The way 
input and reaction correlate and the predictability of Tango’s 
responses can be defined by the user via a setup of improvising 
environments, called Rooms.   
 Real-time sampling with knowledge of the musical content 
behind the samples and Midi-handling are unified via Tango’s 
own monop honic audio -to-Midi, time stretching and pitch 
shifting algorithms. Both audio and Midi can be used by 
Tango’s modules (e.g. Listeners, Players, Modifiers, 
Metronomes or Harmony) for input and output.  
 A flexible real time control system allows for intern al and 
external remote control and scaling of most parameters.  
  
 The free software for Windows7 with all necessary folders, 
English and German manuals, many example-Rooms and a few 
videos can be downloaded at www.henning-berg.de. 
 
Author Keywords 
improvisation software, computer-human interaction, feedback 
loop 
 
1. TANGO FOR THE ATARI AND TANGO² 
 After hearing George Lewis perform with his Voyager at the 
ICMC 1988 in Cologne, I decided to learn how to program in C 
and to  develop an interactive system for myself.  Improvising 
with a machine  was never meant to be a replacement or a 
practice tool for playing jazz with real people. Instead, it 
requires a rather different approach and has a quality of its own. 
 During the ninet ies I played many gigs with my first 
improvising software Tango for the Ata ri, published by 
Steinberg 1991 . The band “Tango & Company” with the late 
English jazz-pianist John Taylor, Tango and myself performed 
at important festivals in England ( Bath) and G ermany (e.g. 
Berlin), played gigs for West German Radio (WDR) and 
recorded a “Trio” - CD ( „Tango & Company“  1997, Jazzhaus 
Musik).  
Tango for the Atari  was the first program I had written, so 
due to its limited architecture and many additions, it started to 
lose some of its former stability and finally also its hardware 
platform, the Atari. Thus, in 1998 it was time to start over.  
 With Tango² I try to incorporate my concert - and 
programming experience in a software  that addresses many of 
the old, basic ideas in a more flexible and comprehensive way. 
2. BASIC IDEAS 
 The key feature of Tango² is its clear modular design:  
There are many different software devices (modules), which the 
user can use and connect in a Room . There are Listener -, 
Player-, Modifier- and other modules. They can be applied very 
flexibly to accommodate for simple or complex stimulus -
response configurations according to one’s needs.  
 Particularly important is the integration of Midi and audio in 
all parts of the program: T² has a built-in audio-to-Midi module 
for monophonic instruments such as wind -instruments, voice 
and strings. This makes it possible to communicate with the 
program via a Midi keyboard or directly via a microphone, 
without an external pitch-to-Midi device. Additionally, T² can 
not only play Midi sound generators but also use and modify 
the audio -signal it received moments ago from the human 
partner for its responses. The same modu les are used for audio 
and Midi f unctions so it makes no difference if Tango² works 
with Midi or with audio. This is possible, because T² analyses 
the musical structures behind the samples as if they were Midi 
signals. 
 The user configures Roo ms, i.e. environments, in which he 
will later improvise. A concert with Tango² usually consists of 
one “Room” or a “Suite” of several rooms, which are called 
upon in order to improvisationally pass through or move 
within. 
 
Figure 1. A very simple Tango² Room. The video for this 
demo was produced using this Room. 
7
3. MODULES 
 Many modules of the same or different types can be part of 
the same Room. For example, one Listener can be used for the 
user’s input, but another Listener can at the same time listen to  
the output of a Player in this Room. This way T² can also 
control and adjust its own output. Important modules are: 
 
3.1 Listener 
 The Listener remembers the most recent music it received 
over its signal input – note for note.  The user can determine a 
memory loop for audio and Midi data , therefore a trail of data 
for the Evaluation(s) is always available.  If audio (converted to 
Midi by the Listener’ s audio to Midi) and Midi data arrive in 
the Listener, both are saved so that the relevant information 
regarding pitch and volume over the course of every individual 
note can be accessed at any time.  Thus, Tango’s audio 
memory, other than ‘normal’ sampling memories, knows about 
the musical content of what is saved. 
 The input is then analysed with more than 200 parameters. 
These function on different time scales ( three short/long-term 
memories) and musical topics (e.g. intervals, harmony, tempo, 
loops, density, surprise...). 
 The results of this “Evaluation” can be scaled and wired for 
real time control of other parameters during a performance. 
 
3.2 Player 
 The Player uses the Listener’s memory to generate Tango’s 
responses. It can operate one or more tracks that play either 
simultaneously or alternately. With these responses the Player 
can react and also act in a rather flexible  and, if that is desired, 
surprising way. 
 Each track alone can produce monophonic or polyphonic 
material, including chords (Figure 2). 
 The Player’s output can then be sent to other modules to 
modify it according to the current needs.  
 
3.3 Modifier 
 The Modifier alters properties of Midi - or audio -notes (e.g. 
intervals, volume, legato -quality, quantization). The degree of 
those changes can be tied to defined conditions and – again - 
modulated via real time control. 
 
3.4 Harmony 
 The module’s purpose is to bend music, which is played by a 
Player without harmonic “objectives”, so that the result will 
sound harmonically organized. 
 This can be done via a Leadsheet (which is common in Jazz), 
or controlling and modifying the dissonances, as  they (happen 
to) come from a Player.  
 Furthermore t here is the possibility to develop individual 
systems of chords and scales, defining the “Ha rmonic 
Relevance” of each scale note with T-shirt sizes from XS to XL 
 Harmony can also be controlled by the Li stener’s harmonic 
Evaluation or come up with its own variations of given 
tonalities, e.g. “for harmonic variation use 20% diatonic steps 
with secondary dominants and only 5% diatonic modulations”.  
 
 Other module types are a Metronome and, of course , 
input/output modules. 
 
4. FURTHER WORK 
 Tango² is a work in progress. As of April 2016 I am working 
at a Listener function to get a percentage of confidence , 
whether my playing has to do with a certain melody – even, 
when it is played in a rather abstract way with many added or 
left out notes, different key or tempo or not from the beginning.  
 Next will be modules that organize time  and rhythm  in a 
more subtle way, something that already existed in the old 
Tango for the Atari, but had no priority until now for T².  
 Also, the GUI needs some work, e.g. groups of modules 
should work hierarchically to be able to simplify Rooms.  
 Finally I want to work at modules that  play modules rather 
than music, i.e. work on a higher level. 
 
 But m ost of all, I am glad to be able to play concerts with  
Tango² again after 18 years of developing it. 
 
5. ACKNOWLEGDEMENTS 
 Thanks to Clarence Barlow, Werner Kracht, George Lewis 
Robert Rowe and Christoph Windheuser for many good ideas 
and great inspiration. 
 
 
Figure 2. The Player Editor with one track. 
8