Zstretch: A Stretchy Fabric Music Controller 
Angela Chang 
MIT Media Lab  
20 Ames St. E15-347 
Cambridge, MA 02142 
+1 617 252 5622 
anjchang@media.mit.edu 
Hiroshi Ishii 
MIT Media Lab 
20 Ames St. E15-328 
Cambridge, MA 02142 
+1 617 253 7514 
ishii@media.mit.edu 
ABSTRACT 
Figure 1. Typical interactions with fabric involve (a) grasping 
and pulling, (b) scrunching and (c)twisting. 
We pres ent Zstretch, a textile m usic controller that supports 
expressive haptic interactions . The m usical controller takes 
advantage of the fabric’s topological constraints to enable 
proportional control of m usical parameters.  This novel interface 
explores ways in which one might treat music as a sheet of cloth. 
This paper proposes an approach to engage simple technologies 
for supporting ordinary hand interactions. We show that this 
combination of basic technology  with general tactile movements 
can result in an expressive musical interface. 
a b c 
Keywords 
Tangible interfaces, textiles, tactile design, musical expressivity 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Why is music fun to play? The wealth of actions available to our 
hands, coupled with the phy sical shape and material of an 
instrument allow for a wide range of musical expression. For 
example, practiced hands  can float and glide acros s the keyboard 
to lightly tickle the strings, or hammer down and rake across the 
keys to create thunderous sounds ringing with rage. Musical 
expressivity is closely related to haptic movement, and traditional 
interfaces support a wide range of m otions, such as percussion, 
lateral motion, static contact, pressure.  
However, in many novel musical devices, this focus on flexibility 
of gesture and expressive range is downplay ed in comparison to 
the focus on complex s ensing free ges ture m echanisms (e.g. 
capacitive sensing[18] or lasers[13] ). Instead of focusing on new 
interactions enabled by technological advances, it is our intention 
to explore how we simple sensing mechanisms can support 
routine tactile interactions. Something as com monplace as a 
stretchy piece of cloth m ight be quite s atisfying for us ers to 
interact with and allow for a wide range of musical expressions 
2. DESIGN CRITERIA 
Fabric is not the first m aterial people think of when controlling 
music. However, stretching fabric  can provide rich and dy namic 
expression (Figure 1). Fabric can  allow for a wide range of 
interactions (see Table 1). Furthe rmore, the idea of stretching is 
closely linked with m usical m anipulation. In sound editing 
software, one can often “ stretch” a piece of m usic by  increasing 
the duration or pitch. In the phy sical world the deformation of 
materials is often coupled to s ound, as when wooden beams creak 
as they bend, or when string is bent by plucking motions. 
There has been much prior research on integrating electronics into 
textiles [2,4,11,14,15] . However, these works have prim arily 
focused on the user touching the fabric in special discrete areas, 
rather than supporting the many  actions our hands and bodies can 
create [5] . The discrepancies in the hardness and texture of 
embedded electronics often interfere  with the haptic interactions 
at the surface level. The fragility  of the components often 
distracts the hands from the full force of their exploratory 
motions. Additionally , the specific localization of touch sensors 
and buttons often diminishes the freedom  of interactivity , as 
performers must focus on targeting instead of being able to 
expressively interact with a larger surface area. 
Some prior work on haptics in musical expression has employ ed 
the use of active haptics[3,7,17], exploiting the expressivity of the 
hands. Other works utilize proprioception, through manipulating 
tokens spatially  [9] to control audio. Beatbugs[8]  are a series of 
handheld toy controllers that control music based on squeezes and 
taps. We prefer to focus on how  an interface can support active 
haptic manipulation of physical properties for musical control [7]  
rather than developing s pecific localized m appings. W e are 
similarly interested in overc oming the learning barrier by 
supporting existing tactile interaction with fabrics, and the ty pical 
range of forces sustained duri ng fabric interaction. People 
Table 1. Design Space for Textile Music Controller 
 
Permission to m ake digital or  hard copies of all or  part of this wor k for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not m ade or  distr ibuted for  pr ofit or com mercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the fir st page.  T o copy  
otherwise, or republish, to post on ser vers or  to r edistribute to lists,  
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME07, June 7-9, 2007, New York, NY 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
46
Figure 3. Stretch stitch (at left) is stronger and exhibits lower 
dynamic range than the zigzag stitch( at right) 
typically pull on hems, push shirts under other clothes, and might 
even scrunch them up to toss a piece of fabric into the hamper. 
3. BASIC IMPLEMENTATION 
The implementation was guided by 2 main design criteria: 
• focus on supporting existing touch interactions of fabric 
• exploiting the physical properties of the fabric to alter 
musical parameters 
3.1.1 Mechanical Design 
The main consideration is that the instrument should feel like 
fabric—the surface should retain  the sm oothness and softness of 
fabric, regardless of the presence of electronics. Another 
consideration is  unim peded acces s to grab and manipulate the 
edges and surface of the fabric.  A 14”x14” portable wooden 
frame was built to support interactions such as stretching, 
twisting, and pulling. The tabletop frame (see Figure 2) supports 
the fabric using elastic thread connected to the four corners .  A 
2.5” vertical distance exists between the base and the fabric. 
3.1.2 Resistive Strain Sensing Circuit 
Another design consideration is th at the cos t and im plementation 
of haptic s ensing interfaces has been cos tly in terms of resources 
and equipm ent. Based on work by  [15] ,we settled on resistive 
strain transducers because they seemed simple to implement and 
did not distract from the soft feel of the fabric.  
After experim enting with various stitches, zigzag stitches  were 
used. Resistivity increased with amount of thread on the fabric, so 
dense zigzag stitches resulted in higher resistivity, but exhibited 
less change in res istance when stretched. Stretch stitches that had 
more contact points were also less likely to rip out of the fabric 
over prolonged use, although ther e was less dy namic range for 
changes in stretch length (see Figure 3 for comparison). A 
medium-sized zigzag stitch was chosen because it provided the 
greatest dynamic change of resistivity  in proportion to stretch, 
while also having m edium robustness against stitches becoming 
undone. The edges were sewn using a #4 wide zigzag stitch on a 
Brother LS-2125 sewing m achine.  The #4 setting resulted in a 
zigzag stitch ¼” wide, with approxim ately 10 stitches per inch. 
We stitched Bekaert conductive thread on all four sides of a piece 
of Lycra fabric [6] approximately 7.5" x 9". 
Figure 4. a)Layout of sensors on fabric and b)corresponding 
circuit diagram for each strain sensor 
 
Figure 2. System design of hardware and mechanical setup
The resistance of each side measured approximately 140kOhms at 
its initial state to 10MOhm s when fully stretched. A 1:10 voltage 
divider was used to increase the dy namic range. A LMC6482 
follower circuit im proved the im pedance of the voltage divider 
when connecting the signals to the A/D input pins of an Arduino 
sensor board[1] . The voltage ty pically varied between 3V and 
4.7V. Figure 4 shows the location of the resistive strain gauges 
along the sides of the fabric, and the corresponding schematic 
circuit diagram for measuring the change in resistance of one side.  
3.1.3 Software using PD 
A PD patch [12]  was created to map the fabric stretch directions 
to musical parameters.  The horiz ontal sides were mapped to the 
speed of a preloaded sound loop.  The vertical sides would alter 
the volume of the loops. There were  2 loops that could be loaded. 
Figure 5 shows the PD screen for controlling the volume and 
speed of the first audio sam ple at the lower left and sim ilar 
controls for the second sample located at the upper right. 
 
Figure 5. The PD screen showing the interface mapping 
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
47
4. Operating Characteristics 
Impromptu demos of the Zstretch were given to and tried by  10 
different fellow graduate and undergraduate students, as well as 
one performance in a small classroom setting of 12 students.  The 
Zstretch performed satisfactor ily, it responded quickly  to the 
speed of user motions. If a user tugged quickly , the audio would 
respond in real tim e.  The resulting em bodiment was also robust 
enough to support rough and fast stretching, while remaining 
sensitive to slow and gentle tugging motions. 
4.1 Haptic expressions supported 
In general, the Zstretch supported normal fabric interactions: 
stretching, grabbing, and twis ting on both the normal plane and 
edges. Stretching any  part of the edges allowed the different 
parameters to be changed. Users would ty pically use a 
combination of one-handed and two-handed movements. The user 
could alter all of the parameters by grabbing a corner or edge and 
twisting (as shown in Figure 6). Users often used one hand to tug 
on the lower left or upper right corners to amplify  the two sound 
loops. In one case, a user pushed down all four sides using a book 
and caused a cacophony  as both samp les blared loudly. A similar 
effect could also be created by  pulling the fabric upward from the 
center. 
The Zstretch’s coupling of phy sical properties constrained the 
musical param eters som ewhat, such that it was often hard to 
control just one parameter. Fi gure 7 shows how a user might 
focus the stretch using two hands, either by  localizing the stretch 
to a corner or stretching only  one side. In general, when one side 
was stretched, there was a tendenc y for the other sides to stretch 
in proportion to the deformation and place of interaction    If the 
user really wanted to control onl y one parameter, they might grab 
just one axis and stretch locally between points.   
4.2 Fabric coupling of musical parameters 
The spatial coupling of parameters in the Zstretch results in som e 
interesting constraints. As men tioned above, it was often natural 
for one motion to change m ultiple param eters. Because of the 
topological constraint of the fabr ic, stretching one side will result 
in deforming and affecting the other sides.  In the Zstretch, the 
coupling of playback speed to volume was intentional.  This 
relationship is reminiscent of the coupling between volume and 
pitch in many traditional ins truments. Tim panis and accordions  
exhibit the same coupling of para meters. The Zstretch response is 
analogous to an accordion, where the stretch of the interface alters 
the note frequency  and reverb in a coupled manner. 
Correspondingly, drums are essentia lly sheets of fabric stretched 
across a hollow cham ber. In percus sive ins truments like the 
timpani, many  parameters (pitch,  reverb, attack, and amplitude) 
are proportionally controlled and the instrument has high 
expressive range. 
4.3 Mapping Direction to Musical Parameters 
It is im portant to m ention that the choice of mappings presented 
could be easily reconfigured. Some preliminary investigation was 
done to mix and match different musical para meters to different 
locations. In general, an increas e in stretch seemed to map well to 
increases in volume or pitch.  However, stretch could be 
arbitrarily mapped to speed. Stretching the fabric to slow down a 
loop seemed to be just as reasonable a choice as increasing the 
speed of playback. In the slowing down case, the fabric represents 
a time scale. In the s peeding up cas e, s tretching repres ents the 
physical motion of pulling music, causing it to speed up. Many 
other musical controls, such as tim bre, tremolos, reverbs or filter 
frequencies may have arbitrary directional mapping. 
Figure 6. Some typical one-handed gestures. 
Figure 7. Two handed interactions 
4.4 Problems encountered 
The general expressiveness of our interactions with fabric started 
off being quite satisfactory .  Over time, however, it was noticed 
that the sensitivity would drift and recalibration to the voltage 
divider would have to be perform ed. As  the interface got more 
use, users had to stretch longer distances on the resistive strain 
gauges to achieve the same e ffect. Another problem was the 
comparatively lower resistance of the body could effectively short 
part of our sensor. One workaround would be to hem the sides so 
that the stitches remain insulated from  direct contact with the 
skin. 
4.4.1 Stitch Fatigue and Repair 
Although stitches had been specia lly selected for robustness, 
some of the stitches cam e out after repeated, forceful use. The 
repair consisted of shorting these is olated breaks  with m ore 
conductive thread.  There was also a tendency  for the sensors to 
drift over time, as the stitches exhibited lost sensitivity  over time, 
perhaps due to fatigue from cyclic stretching of the fabric threads. 
4.4.2 Fabric Wear 
The performance of the sy stem was also compounded by  the 
relaxation of the fiber mesh over time. As the fabric became more 
compliant, the stretch was only  partially  transm itted to the edge 
with the strain gauge. Perhaps a slightly  less stretchy fabric or a 
more robust fabric should be used so that the stretch is adequately  
transmitted across the fiber mesh. Another suggestion is to m ake 
conductive thread patterns that cover m ore surface area. Luckily, 
most users tended to grab the edge of the fabric, so users would 
inadvertently exert their stretches close to the strain gauge.  
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
48
4.4.3 Mechanical Considerations 
Because users were able to freely  exert variable am ounts of force 
(from 0.0 to -0.8 N) on the fabric, the wires connecting the fabric 
to the Arduino tended to shear off the fabric.  One solution was to 
increase the elasticity and thickness of the four supporting corners 
of the fabric. A second solution was to reinforce the connections 
between the conductive thread to the wires by reinforcing stitches 
around the areas where the wire and thread connect to the fabric. 
After a few weeks of us e, the fabric s tarted to tear.  The only  
solution for fixing the fabric tears was to sew up the holes.  Figure 
8 shows the wear and tear of the interface. 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
We have characterized the haptic design space and implemented a 
fabric music controller that uses  the stretch of fabric. Although 
the initial directional mappings for speed and volum e were usable 
there is still a lot of work to be done in developing a fram ework 
for musical mapping. Sometimes the dueling audio loops caused 
confusion or too much noise. In stead of using two opposite sides 
to control two separate sound l oops, we intend to try  mapping all 
four strain gauges to different parameters of one sound loop.  
The benefits  of the Zs tretch lie in its very reasonable 
implementation. It requires ve ry few components and basic 
sewing skills. The techniques shown in this paper can also be 
instantiated in many  other scales and orientations, such as 
wearable, wall or handheld installations. Finally , we hope that the 
articulation of the unobtrusive and experience-focused design 
criteria will find resonance with fellow music designers.   
Michel Waisvisz from STEIM noted during his keynote speech at 
CHI 2005, “We are too busy  inventing new interfaces, instead of 
pushing the boundaries of the interfaces we already  have [16] .”  
One interpretation of this view is to build upon our existing tactile 
interactions (in this case, fabric gestures) and explore the 
expressive mapping of known inte ractions to low-tech music 
controllers. Us ers can trans fer th eir existing fabric interaction 
knowledge to twisting, pulling and pushing the Zstretch. We 
acknowledge that Waisvisz may  be  right; even for our “simple 
interface”, many expressive m appings are possible (through 
altering the scale of interaction, the controller param eters, the 
stiffness of the fabric, the coupling of the param eters to each 
other, or adjusting sensitivity ), and num erous haptic-fabric 
taxonomies have yet to be identified, studied, and mastered.  
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Our thanks to Prof. Joe Paradiso, who taught the class on music 
controllers and teaching assi stant Dave Merrill. Jam es 
Gouldstone, Noah Vawter, Jami e Zigelbaum , Matt Malinowski, 
and Sajid Sadi gave many helpful suggestions on prototyping. We 
also acknowledge the members of the Tangible Media Group and 
Responsive Environments Group at the Media Lab who helped by 
testing and suggesting improvements. 
7. REFERENCES 
[1] Arduino Home Page http://www.arduino.cc/ 
[2] Bickerton, M. Effects of fibre interactions on conductivity, 
within a knitted fabric stretch sensor. Proceedings of 
Eurowearable 2003, (Sept. 2003), 67-72. 
[3] Cadoz, C., Lisowski, L. and Florens,J. L., “A modular 
feedback keyboard design,” Computer Music Journal, 14, 2,  
47–56, 1990. 
 
Figure 8. Holes and thread breakages on the fabric surface 
[4] Farringdon, J.,  Moore,  A.J. , Tilbury,  N., Church, J., 
Biemond, P.D., Wearable Sensor Badge and Sensor Jacket 
for Context Awareness, Proc. of  Intl, Symposium on 
Wearable Computers (ISWC'99),  1999, 107-113. 
[5] Lederman, S .J ., and Klatzky, R .L ., Hand movements: A 
Window into Haptic Object Recognition, Cognitive 
Psychology, 19,. 3, (July 1987) ,342-368. 
[6] Lycra ® http://www.lycra.com/ 
[7] O’Modhrain, M.S. Playing by feel: incorporating haptic 
feedback into computer-based musical instruments. Ph.D. 
Thesis. Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 2000. 
[8] Machover T: 'Shaping minds musically', BT Technology 
Journal, 22, 4, (October 2004), 171—179. 
[9] O’Modhrain, M.S. (2000). Playing by feel: incorporating 
haptic feedback into computer-based musical instruments. 
Ph.D. Dissertation. CCRMA, Stanford University. 
[10] Patten, J., Recht, B. And Ishii, H.: Audiopad: A Tag-based 
Interface for Musical Performance, Proc. of Conf. on New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression, (NIME’02), (Dublin, 
Ireland,  May 24-26, 2002), ACM Press, NY, NY 2002, 1-6. 
[11] Post, E.R., Orth, M., Russo, P. R., and Gershenfeld, N. “E-
Broidery: Design and fabrication of textile based 
computing,” IBM Syst. J., 39, 3&4, May 2000, 840–860. 
[12] Pure Data http://puredata.info/ 
[13] Rice, P. and Strickon, J. Stretchable music with laser range 
finder, Proceedings of SIGGRAPH, 1998,(Orlando, Florida,. 
1998), 123. 
[14] Rossi,D. et.al. Electroactive fabrics and wearable bio 
monitoring devices, AUTEX Res Journ, 3, 4, Dec. 2003. 180-
185. 
[15] Wijesiriwardana, R., Dias, T., Mukhopadhyay, S. and 
Mitcham, K. Resistive Fiber-Meshed Transducers, Proc. Of 
Intl. Symp of Wearable Comp., ISWC 2003, ACM Press, NY, 
NY 200-209. 
[16] Waisvisz, M. Closing Plenary at CHI 2005. 
http://www.chi2005.org/program/prog_closing.html 
[17] Weinberg, G. and Gan, S. 2001. The Squeezables: Toward 
an Expressive and Interdependent Multi-player Musical 
Instrument. Comput. Music J. 25, 2 (Jul. 2001), 37-45.
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
49