Play Fluency in Music Improvisation Games for Novices 
 
 
Anne-Marie Skriver Hansen 
Department of Architecture, Design 
 and Media Technology 
Aalborg University, Denmark 
email: amhansen@create.aau.dk 
 
Hans Jørgen Andersen 
Department of Architecture, Design 
and Media Technology 
Aalborg University, Denmark 
email: hja@create.aau.dk 
 
Pirkko Raudaskoski 
Department of Communication and 
Psychology, Aalborg University, 
Denmark 
email: pirkko@hum.aau.dk 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
In this paper a collaborative music game for two pen tablets is 
studied in order to see how two people with no professional 
music background negotiated musical improvisation. In an 
initial study of what it is that constitutes play fluency  in 
improvisation, a music game has been designed and evaluated 
through video analysis: A qualitative view of mutual action 
describes the social context of music improvisation: how two 
people with speech, laughter, gestures, postures and pauses 
negotiate individual and joint action. The objective behind the 
design of the game application was to support players in some 
aspects of their mutual play. Results show that even though 
players activated additional sound feedback as a result of their 
mutual play, players also engaged in forms of mutual play that 
the game engine did not account for. These ways of mutual 
play are descibed further along with some suggestions for how 
to direct future designs of collaborative music improvisation 
games towards ways of mutual play.   
 
Keywords 
Collaborative interfaces, improvisation, interactive music 
games, social interaction, play, novice. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
With interfaces such as the iphone®, the Nintendo Wii® 
controller, X-box Kinect® there is a potential that music 
consumption can evolve from being a relatively passive activity 
to being an active social and expressive activity. The actual 
musical content can be influenced by the way that people 
engage with musical expression through a variety of music 
oriented software and hardware interfaces. Rock Band® and 
Guitar Hero® are examples of music based game applications 
where players can engage in music performance, however on a 
theatrical level that does not involve co-creation of improvised 
music. By theatrical, we mean that players engage with 
precomposed music through avatars. However, there are several 
examples of collaborative music interfaces that involve more 
dramatic ways of engaging with music performance: Blaine, 
Fels and Weinberg have discussed mapping of joint user action 
in networked interfaces [1][16].  
Many collaborative music applications also take advantage of 
commercial interfaces like the iphone that have built-in sensor 
capabilities and can be added to a network. Some examples are 
presented in [10][15][11][12]. These kinds of collaborative 
music interfaces and interface applications could define a new 
kind of “casual games”, where the auditive, and not the visual 
is in focus, and where the joy of play replaces the idea of a 
‘high score’ [6]. 
This paper discusses the role of a music game application and 
how it encourages players to 1) establish mutual awareness 
towards each other’s actions and joint attention towards the 
object of music creation, 2) engage in varied forms of 
individual and mutual expression and 3) engage in play fluency. 
By the term play fluency  is meant meaningful musical 
expression perceived by players and a potential audience. Play 
fluency could be a sign of flow and the music game could 
potentially be intrinsically rewarding because it inspires players 
to engage in autotelic activity [2]. In the Continuator interface, 
Pachet has investigated how a player engages in a flow 
experience while improvising together with a music application 
as a ‘co-player’ in turn taking sequences [9]. This paper 
presents how two players improvised together when their 
musical performance was triangulated with a music application 
– if and how the music application facilitated play fluency. The 
main objective of this study was to see if a music-based game 
application that captured limited and specific aspects of mutual 
play was able to give appropriate sound feedback when two 
players managed to establish play fluency together. 
2. GAME DESIGN 
The music game was programmed in Max Msp [8] for two 
Wacom Intuos4® pen tablets [14]. This kind of interface has 
previously been used as an expressive electronic music 
instrument [18]. The game application borrowed the idea of 
drawing in order to make it easy to play for novices: Two 
players could either draw dots and lines, scratch movements 
and circles, where the sound feedback would differ according 
to these draw styles (see the sections 2.1-2). Players would get 
additional sound feedback if they chose to draw the same draw 
style and were able to synchronize and time their movements 
with each other. The game design was inspired from the idea of 
musical grounding, a concept presented in the field of music 
therapy that describes how a music therapist can establish a sort 
of musical and communicative understanding of a client by for 
example reflecting aspects of the client’s play style [17]. Here, 
the game application was designed to notice only limited 
aspects of two players’ mutual grounding: choice of playstyle 
synchronization and timing.  
2.1 Sound Feedback: Individual Action 
Measured x and y pen positions were translated into simple 
draw styles: dots/lines, scratch movements and circles (see 
figure 1-3). One player’s individual string instrument sound 
was based around high frequencies, and the other player’s 
individual string instrument sound was based around the low 
frequencies. All frequencies were fixed around a Balinese 
Pelog scale. It did not matter where on the tablet the draw styles 
(dot/line, scratch movements and circles) were made. Some 
features connected to the draw styles were detected: Size and 
 
Permission to make digital or ha rd copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy  
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.  
NIME’11, 30 May–1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway. 
Copyright remains with the author(s).  
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
220
speed, line and scratch degree (360) and circle drawing 
direction (cw/ccw). The shape detection was relatively simple, 
so the application could detect the draw movements in real-time 
(within a sample rate of 20 to 200 milliseconds). The extra 
features determined which combinations of tones were 
activated. In addition the pen’s x and y tilt angle influenced the 
length and volume of each activated tone. 
2.2 Sound Feedback: Mutual Action 
When two players chose to use the same draw styles (dots/lines, 
scratch movements or circles) in pairs, and when they drew at 
the same speed, they would activate an additional sound layer: 
Piano chords were played back on top of each individual 
player’s sounds. The rhythm of the piano chords was at the 
same pace as the mutual pace of the two players. If players kept 
drawing at the same speed, the rhythm structure of the piano 
would elaborate around the rhythm that the two players had 
found together. If the offset time between scratch peak points 
and circle top points was low, the two players activated high 
pitch chime sounds.  
 
Figure 1: Dots and lines. The grey dots = tones activated 
along a line (pen1), or tones activated when the pen touched 
the tablet (2a and 2b). 
 
 
Figure 2: Scratch movement. Grey dots = tones activated at 
the points of direction change. Scratch area and degree in 
360° was also noticed by the game engine. 
 
 
  
Figure 3: Circle movement. Grey dots = tones activated 
along the curved line of the circle. Circle area and clockwise 
/counter-clockwise movement was also noticed. 
3. EXPERIMENT PROCEDURE 
In nine game sessions we documented how two players played 
together. The teams consisted of either two females (4 teams 
total) or two males (5 teams total). Documentation happened in 
two ways: A video camera filmed the two players from the 
side, while the game application logged all incoming pen data 
and metadata generated by the game application. (see figure 4). 
 
 
Figure 4: Two players sat at a table opposite each other 
with the pen tablets in front of them. A microphone was 
placed on the table to record what the two players said. 
Speakers next to each player played individual sound 
feedback. The sound feedback that happened as a result of 
joint action was centered or panned between the two 
speakers. 
When the experimenter introduced the game and the different 
draw styles, the players were asked to find ‘additional sounds’. 
They were told to collaborate, but not what to do in order to 
find the additional sounds. When each player had explored 
his/her individual sounds, the two players could play together 
as long as they wished. 
4. DOCUMENTATION AND 
MEASUREMENT OF USER ACTION 
The video documentation of all game sessions provided 
material for qualitative analysis of individual and mutual player 
action and the social context that surrounded this action. In 
order to see how players negotiated mutual play and engaged in 
sequences of play fluency with each other, we used 
conversation analysis - see [3][4][5][7][13]. The video was 
analyzed on several levels: Did players for example use 
utterances, gestures and gaze to negotiate play? Was there a 
special rhythm or hierarchy of actions? Could individual and 
mutual pauses be related to the way players understood the 
sound feedback, especially the additional sound feedback that 
happened as a result of mirrored play style and common speed 
and timing?  
5. RESULTS 
This section presents first some video examples of 
characteristics of play fluency that we found in the nine game 
sessions. In general, it was impossible to find a single way in 
which two players engaged in play fluency together. Players 
were very inventive, and each player team acted differently. 
What all player teams had in common was the process of 
establishing play fluency: 
 First, in order to find a shared focus and start a musical 
relationship, players either mirrored each other by doing the 
same (getting the additional sound feedback), or one player 
tended to accompany the other player (see appendix, video 2a, 
3b, 6d, 7a-c, 8a, 8h, 9a-e). At most times, the player who 
initiated a draw style ended up playing solo, while the other 
player entered their relationship through accompaniment (see 
appendix, video 1a, 1d, 4a, 5a). However, in session 6 and 8, 
the player who introduced a relationship, introduced a 
background for a possible solo (see appendix, video 6a-c, 8g).  
 Second, there were many different kinds of relationships in 
terms of draw style. No matter which combination of draw style 
players engaged with, players tended to explore a variation of a 
found relationship shortly after it was clear that they had 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
221
established a relationship (see appendix, video 3a, 3c, 8a, 8b, 
8e, 8d, 9b, 9c). In one case (see appendix, video 1f), players 
changed the tempo as a way of varying a found relationship. It 
seemed like there was a hierarchy in that players needed to first 
agree on draw style combination before they started to engage 
in an exploration of e.g. pen position, pen tilt and play speed.  
 Third, players repeated each other’s utterances in a turn 
taking relationship (see appendix, video 1c, 1e, 4b, 8f, 8h). In 
the case of 1e, players ended up sharing the same timing, 
whereafter they started to play different play styles 
simultaneously, exploring other ways of playing together. In 4b 
it is clear that the additional sound feedback did not support 
turn taking.  
 Fourth, players tried to make sense of the additional sound 
feedback that sometimes happened as a result of their mutual 
play. Perhaps this was because players acknowledged that their 
task ‘find additional sounds’ was done. Some players also 
looked at the computer screen in order to find an answer. Some 
players ignored the additional sound feedback.  
 Fifth, play fluency seemed to arise, when two players 
managed to stay focussed on very limited ways of expression, 
often repeating a sequence of tones with slight variations (see 
appendix, video 1d). In a few cases, players negotiated a play 
relationship verbally (see appendix, video 9a-e). Some 
considered very sophisticated relationships that regarded the 
graphical layout of pen actions (see apendix, video 3e-f and 8e 
and figure 5). 
 
 
Figure 5: Transcription of player utterances in video 3f and 
8e (see appendix). 
6. ANALYSIS 
In general, the two players shifted between individual 
exploration and joint expression. The types of player 
engagement shifted between the three types of engagement 
presented by Ben Swift et al.: individual, unilateral and bilateral 
engagement [3]. In some cases, while one player engaged in 
individual exploration, the other player followed along without 
the first player was aware of it. In other cases both players were 
mutually aware of each other’s actions. The mutual player 
awareness (or problems in finding it) was visible in the 
following types of communication: 
6.1 Talk and Utterances  
None of the teams talked very much while exploring joint 
improvisation. Usually smiles and laughter was used to indicate 
if players had found a shared form of expression. They also 
sometimes commented on the sound feedback with single 
words like “hmm” and “ah”. When a few teams did talk, it was 
because they needed to negotiate some very specific pen 
actions with each other, and here some players used deictic 
gestures to explain.  
6.2 Gestures and Postures 
None of the teams used gestures that were related to musical 
expression. This was perhaps because they, unlike trained 
musicians, had no formal gesture vocabulary to use. However, 
when a player wanted to be very explicit about his/her actions, 
s/he tended to lift the pen higher than usual. This also happened 
at the end of each phrase that a player introduced. Players used 
body postures to direct each other’s pen movements (this is 
very clear in video 9a-e, see appendix). Players tended to move 
their bodies more, when they were engaged in play fluency. In 
the two examples, the player who introduced the leading 
musical content was very explicit about what s/he did. In 1d 
Right moved his torso along with the arm movements when he 
scratched and drew circles. In 4a Right introduced a melody by 
nodding along with the first couple of tones.  
6.3 Gaze 
In general, female teams tended to exchange gaze more than 
male teams. Players often switched between looking at their 
own tablet and the other player’s pen and tablet. In the 
following two examples gaze patterns in successful play 
fluency sections from a male and a female team, are covered in 
order to understand how play fluency was negotiated: In section 
1d Right did not look at Left before towards the end of the 
found relationship. This was in order to indicate a desire to 
‘take the floor’ by coming up with new material. In section 4a 
the two players looked at each other in turns. This could be to 
check if the other player was following along, and if the player 
who guided their mutual play had noticed that the other player 
was following. In both sections, gaze and pauses were 
intricately connected: In 1d Left looked at Right’s pen and 
tablet a moment before Right introduced the first phrase - 
perhaps in order to get an idea of timing. Perhaps it was easier 
for Left to follow Right’s movements, because Right is left-
handed? In general, Left checked more with gaze what Right 
was doing than vice versa. When Right then looked at Left’s 
pen and tablet before phrase 3 where Right introduced circles, 
Right’s gaze was a guidance. Then Left checked what Right 
did, when he actually switched to drawing circles. Left’s 
phrases 3 through 5 could be interpreted as one long phrase that 
was an elaboration on phrase 1 and 2. In the entire video clip, 
the game application did not provide any aditional sound 
feedback. The game application was not designed to interpret 
this type of play relationship as ‘meaningful’. In 4a both 
players started to look at each other’s pen and tablets in order to 
find a common relationship together. Right looked at Left when 
introducing the first tones of a melody, while Left responded by 
looking at Right’s pen and tablet while smiling. When Right 
doubled the tempo she looked at Left when she realized that 
Left followed her quite well. 
7. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper has presented a qualitative evaluation of how a 
music based game application supported players in establishing 
play fluency. On one level, the game application did 
successfully support players in improvising together. By 
providing players, who were not trained musicians, with a 
recognizeable physical interface and two kinds of string 
instrument sounds, there was enough material that players 
could use to relate to each other with. It was easy for the 
players to understand the three draw styles, and most players 
intentionally used combinations of those. However, the game 
application did not succeed in triangulating the two players 
mutual play. Very often players did not understand the 
additional sound feedback that happened when players used the 
same drawstyles and played those at the same speed and timing. 
Although the game application could measure the combinations 
of different draw styles, and all the features of the pen 
movement connected to these draw styles, only a fraction of 
these individual and joint interaction data were mapped to 
sound output. It was very clear that players expected more 
sound feedback as a result of even small changes in their 
mutual actions. The game application had too many expression 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
222
possibilities: Players could combine the different draw styles, 
and they could vary them with pen tilt, pen position, drawing 
direction and size. The variations in mutual draw styles were so 
big that no single description of how they played together was 
sufficient. It would have been a big task to design a game that 
could provide sound feedback on all the three kinds of draw 
styles and their related features. Instead, in future music based 
games, we suggest to narrow down the expression possibilities, 
so that it is possible to map all play combinations and features 
to some sort of musical and/or sound effect output.  
7.1 Play Fluency in Joint Improvisation 
As most of the video examples show, play fluency happened 
when players focussed on a few ways of expressing themselves 
with the available sounds. One player’s focus and repetitive 
movement gave the other player a chance to grasp what was 
going on and try out ways of attuning his/her actions to the first 
player’s actions. A game application that only asks players to 
draw lines could afford more focus on how players draw lines 
with each other. This would also focus the two players attention 
towards varying a found relationship even more, because a 
game application could support all types of line drawing in the 
sound feedback. The results and the analysis of the game 
application presented in this paper offered a glimpse into a 
wide variety of ways in which players chose to establish play 
fluency. Future designs could elaborate on a selected set of 
means of expression that were logical to players while engaging 
in play fluency together.  
7.2 The Role of the Game Application 
It was clear that the idea of musical grounding that was 
implemented in the game application was too narrow. It did not 
embrace the wide variety in which players established musical 
grounding through all the available expression possibilities. 
The idea of a triangulation of two players mutual play should 
be re-evaluated according to what a game application in fact 
can measure out of the entire embodied interaction of the social 
act of musical improvisation. It was seen that there was a 
hierarchy in how players explored the draw styles and draw 
features. A game application could be designed to give and 
vary sound feedback according to how: 1) draw style 
combinations are chosen, 2) variations of draw styles are made 
and 3) mutual timing and speed is negotiated among players. 
8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Thanks to students at Aalborg University for participating in 
game sessions. Also, special thanks to students from the music 
therapy department at Aalborg University for providing critique 
of the game design. 
9. REFERENCES 
[1] Blaine, T. and Fels, T. Contexts of Collaborative Musical 
Experiences. In Proceedings of the Conference of New 
Interfaces of Musical Expression (NIME’03) (Montreal, 
Canada, May 22-24, 2003), ACM Press, 2003, 27-33. 
[2] Csikszentmihalyi, M. Flow: The Psychology of Optimal 
Experience. Harper & Row Publishers Inc. 1990. 
[3] Goodwin, C. Conversation Analysis. In Annual Review of 
Anthropology, Annual Reviews, 1990, 283-307. 
[4] Goodwin, C. Action and Embodiment within Situated 
Human Interaction. In Journal of Pragmatics, no. 32, 
Elsevier, 2000, 1489-1522. 
[5] Goodwin, C. Participation, Stance and Affect in 
Organization of Activities. In Discourse & Society, no. 
18.53, SAGE Publications, 2007, 53-73. 
[6] Juul, J. A Casual Revolution: Reinventing Video Games 
and Their Players. MIT Press. 2010. 
[7] Kendon, A. Movement Coordination in Social Interaction. 
In Conducting Interaction: Patterns of Behavior in 
Focussed Encounters, Kendon, A. (ed.), Cambridge 
University Press, New York, 1990, 91-116. 
[8] Max Msp: http://cycling74.com/products/maxmspjitter/ 
[9] Pachet, F. On the Design of a Musical Flow Machine. In A 
Learning Zone of One’s Own, (Tokoro and Steels eds.), 
IOS Press (Amsterdam, The Netherlands), 2004, 111-134. 
[10] Swift, B. et al. Engagement Networks in Social Music-
making. In Proceedings of OZCHI (Brisbane, Australia, 
November 22-26, 2010), ACM Press, 2010. 
[11] Tahiroglu, K. Towards and Experimental Platform for 
Collaborative Music Performance. In Proceedings of 
Sound and Music Computing Conference (SMC 2009) 
(Porto Portugal, July 23-25, 2009), 2009, 183-188. 
[12] Tanaka et al. Facilitating Collective Musical Creativity. In 
MULTIMEDIA (MM 2005) (Singapore, Malaysia, 
November 6-11, 2005), ACM Press, New York, 2005, 
191-198. 
[13] Tannen, D. Silence: Anything But. In Perspectives on 
Silence, Tannen, D. and Troike, M.S. (eds.), Ablex 
Publishing Corporation, New Jersey, 1985, 93-112. 
[14] Wacom Intuos4: http://www.wacom.com/intuos/ 
[15] Wang, G. et al. SMULE = Sonic Media: An Intersection 
of the Mobile, Musical, and Social. In Proceedings of the 
International Computer Music Conference (ICMC 2009) 
(Montreal, Canada, August 16-21, 2009), 2009, 283-286. 
[16] Weinberg, G. Interconnected Musical Networks: Toward a 
Theoretical Framework. In Computer Music Journal, vol. 
29, No. 2, MIT Press, 2005, 23-29.  
[17] Wigram, T. Improvisation. Methods and Techniques for 
Music Therapy Cliniciand, Educators and Students. 
Jessica Kingsley Publishers, London, UK, 2004. 
[18] Zbyszyński, M. et al. Ten Years of Tablet Musical 
Interfaces at CNMAT. In Proceedings of the Conference 
of New Interfaces of Musical Expression (NIME’07) (New 
York, USA, June 6-10, 2007), 2007, 100-105. 
10. Appendices may follow the references 
The following nine web addresses are links to selected video 
sequences of the nine game sessions where 18 persons 
participated. In order to see the videos, this following password 
is needed: AMSH5research. The selected videos show 
sequences where the teams established mutual play fluency. 
The sub-section times are indicated on the website below the 
video.  
Video 1a-f: http://vimeo.com/19119476  
Video 2a-b: http://vimeo.com/19119262  
Video 3a-g: http://vimeo.com/19119134  
Video 4a-b: http://vimeo.com/19118761  
Video 5a-c: http://vimeo.com/19118652 
Video 6a-e: http://vimeo.com/19118358 
Video 7a-b: http://vimeo.com/19117874 
Video 8a-i: http://vimeo.com/19117700 
Video 9a-e: http://vimeo.com/19116889 
On the following two links pen x and y positions for the 
examples 1d and 4a are presented as time/color diagrams. 
Pen positions I: 1d/left player: http://vimeo.com/19384019 
Pen positions II: 1d/right player: http://vimeo.com/19384067 
Pen positions III: 4a/left player: http://vimeo.com/19384161 
Pen positions IV: 4a/right player: http://vimeo.com/19384216 
 
 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
223