 The Interactive Dance Club:
Avoiding Chaos In A Multi Participant Environment
Ryan Ulyate
Synesthesia
415 South Topanga Canyon Boulevard #210
Topanga, CA 90290 USA
+1 310 455 0585
ryan@synesthesia.com
David Bianciardi
Synesthesia
415 Lafayette Street, 2nd floor
New York, NY 10003 USA
+1 212 353 9087
david@synesthesia.com
ABSTRACT
In 1998 we designed enabling technology and a venue
concept that allowed several participants to influence a
shared musical and visual experience. Our primary goal was
to deliver musically coherent and visually satisfying results
from several participants' input. The result, the Interactive
Dance Club, ran for four nights at the ACM SIGGRPAH
98 convention in Orlando, Florida.
In this paper we will briefly describe the Interactive Dance
Club, our "10 Commandments of Interactivity", and what
we learned from it's premiere at SIGGRAPH 98.
THE INTERACTIVE DANCE CLUB
The Interactive Dance Club is a multi-participant interactive
venue with real-time computer graphics lighting and video,
synchronized to dance music (such as acid jazz, trance,
ambient, drum & bass).
Instead of dancing to prerecorded music and images,
members of the audience become participants. Within
interactive zones located throughout the club, participants
influence music, lighting, and projected imagery. There are
zones for single participants, dual participants and groups.
Moving from zone to zone, participants experience different
blends of musical and visual elements. Like sections in an
orchestra, output from the interactive zones contribute to
the formation of an overall performance. Our software
analyzes and filters participant's input, in order to deliver a
musically coherent and visually satisfying experience.
Design Goals
The Interactive Dance Club is designed to:
• Allow group and individual participation in the
modulation of multiple musical and computer graphics
elements while maintaining a musically coherent and
visually satisfying whole.
• Create a compelling social environment that amplifies
the uniqueness of the individual and reveals the
synergy of the group.
• Deliver to "unskilled" participants the euphoria of the
artistic experience.
Interactive Zones
Various interfaces are located in zones throughout the club.
Beam Breaker
The Beam Breaker zone consists of parallel light beams
above participants' heads on a dance floor with sensors that
detect when a beam has been broken. Participants trigger 4-
16 note musical phrases by observing when the light beams
are present and "breaking" the beams with their hands.
Infrared
This zone consists of a state-of-the-art infrared (IR) video
camera focused on an area of the dance floor. This camera
registers participants' body heat. Projecting the infrared
image on a large screen provides visual feedback.
Stomp
Stomp is a two-person zone characterized by lots of
physical motion. Participants interact by dancing and
stepping on 10 12"X12" floor-mounted pads (Tap Tiles,
(manufactured by Infusion Systems). Discrete pad hits
control short non-percussive musical phrases and projected
computer graphics.
Go-Go
In this zone, participants step up onto a platform two feet
above the dance floor and enter a cone of light. Once inside
the cone, they interact by extending their arms and breaking
the surrounding light beam, casting a shadow on a circular
array of sensors embedded in the platform below. This
controls melodic musical elements. There are 2 Go-Go
zones.
Meld Orbs
The Meld Orbs are two four-foot-diameter spheres.
Mounted on the surface of each Orb are nine near-field
proximity sensors. Participants interact with each Orb to
affect projected computer graphics imagery and individual
notes of musical chords.
NIME01-54
Proceedings of the CHI'01 Workshop on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-01), Seattle, USA
Reach
Reach is a one-person zone positioned on a raised platform.
The participant must reach in order to touch four trigger
pads positioned in a half-circle. Each pad controls an aspect
of kaleidoscopic imagery and musical chords.
Tyre-O-Mania
Participants rotate two wheels mounted on a horizontal bar
to affect projected computer graphics as well as modulate
effects applied to the preprogrammed bass and drum
sounds. A pair of foot pedals allows the participant to
change which aspects of the computer graphics and music
the wheels are controlling,
Tweak
Tweak is a one-person zone in which a participant interacts
by swaying his or her hips between two infrared proximity
sensors (D-Beams, manufactured by Interactive Light) The
participant also breaks 4 light beams with their hands
resulting in the triggering and modulating of percussion
loops and projected computer graphics. There are 2 Tweak
Zones
Voyeur
Participants sit on couches and manipulate remote control
cameras located throughout the club. Each of the 2 Voyeur
zones has 2 remote controlled cameras and 2 rear projection
displays, encouraging collaboration between participants
OUR "10 COMMANDMENTS OF INTERACTIVITY"
To realize the Interactive Dance Club, several volunteers, in
many different cities, were enlisted. Given a compressed
schedule, and minimal opportunities for face to face
meetings with the full group before arriving on site, much
of the work had to be done in parallel. We created the
following guiding principles to keep everyone on track.
#1: Interfaces and content should encourage
and reward movement
No QWERTY keyboards, no mice! Allow unencumbered
interaction. A dance club is geared towards unrestricted
movement, social interaction and spontaneity. Don't use
restrictive, cumbersome or isolating interfaces involving
wires, gloves, goggles, etc. Content designed for the
interfaces should encourage the participants to dance.
#2: Participant's actions get an immediate and
identifiable response
No participant should ever ask "am I controlling this, or
not?" Interfaces and content should respond to the
participant with the same level of feedback as an
automobile responds to a driver.
#3: No instructions
Learning to "work" the interactive zones must be intuitive
and simple. There should be adequate enough feedback to
for the participant to intuit if she is doing it "wrong" or
"right".
#4 People don’t need to be experts to
participate
Participants are encouraged to drop their inhibitions and
have fun. Nothing should be designed that intimidates
people into feeling they are not good enough to participate.
The system can, of course, offer deeper interaction for those
that want to go further.
#5 No thinking allowed
The goal is to keep the participants in their "body" and not
in their “head”.  Like a jazz musician, or a dancer, euphoria
occurs when the participant gets lost in the moment,
focusing on their intuitive nature. Game-like behavior
causes participants to focus on their analytical side and is
not appropriate in this artistic context.
#6 Actions get aesthetically coherent
responses
Participants should navigate through and affect several
"good" choices. Ensure that all participants' actions cause
meaningful responses in the context of the overall
performance.
#7 Keep it simple, immediate and fun
How long could participants do it without getting bored?
Usually simpler is better. Think “Pong”
#8 Responsiveness is more important than
resolution
In computer graphics this translates to "more speed is better
than more polygons". A simple visual object that reacts
quickly to participant input is better than a complex visual
object that reacts too slowly.
#9 Think modular
Everything is a component.
#10 Just do it… on time!
The project will never be "finished", so hit your deadline
with whatever you have ready. Then watch what it does and
watch what the people do with it!
WHAT WE LEARNED
The Interactive Dance Club provided an opportunity to test
out several ideas. Here are some of the things we learned.
Interfaces
Interfaces which allow for more freedom of movement
(such as those incorporating infrared sensors) are more
compatible with a dancing participant than are target driven
interfaces (such as fixed, floor mounted pads). Predictable
interfaces encourage predictable behavior, no matter what
they actually control; if it looks like a drum, users will
bang on it, even if a caress was what you’d hoped for.
Interfaces with an unfamiliar appearance encouraged
serendipitous interactions; if participants didn’t know what
to think, they didn’t, and just jumped in!  People will
work the interfaces as hard and fast as possible; unbreakable
construction and heavily filtered data were the order of the
day. Based on what we learned are currently moving away
NIME01-55
Proceedings of the CHI'01 Workshop on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-01), Seattle, USA
from physical manipulation interfaces, and focusing our
development on IR-aided machine vision systems.
Control Systems
Distributed, scalable systems are preferable; a little
localized intelligence can go a long way towards decreasing
design, programming and troubleshooting complexity.
The MIDI (Musical Instrument Digital Interface) protocol
can be stretched a long way, but in the end, a TCP/IP
(Transport Control Protocol / Internet Protocol) LAN
(Local Area Network) with enough spare bandwidth to
minimize latency is a more useful and flexible, and pretty
much all protocols can be packetized and transported over
IP. Top level processes need dedicated control surfaces; just
like participants get user interfaces customized for their use.
Experience Jockeys need dedicated controls, not mice and
keyboards. By creating a balance between freedom and
constraint, like a well designed game, our experiences
should give enough freedom to encourage real exploration,
while focusing the user. Based on what we've learned, we
are currently developing a solid, scalable operating system
for interactive environments.
Music
Contemporary dance music has a strong rhythmic
component. To achieve our desire for cohesiveness we did
not let any participant alter the basic drum and bass
elements of the music. We chose to let participants add (or
"overdub") compatible sounds on top of this basic
structure. This did not diminish the participants'
experience, but enhanced it by giving them a solid
foundation on which to build upon. Popular music also has
an identifiable beginning, middle and end. The traditional
verse-chorus-bridge structure applies varying levels of
musical intensity to a performance within a fixed time
frame. This structure is an important element that we
wanted to introduce into an interactive environment. To
accomplish this, we created the role of the "Experience
Jockey" (E.J.) The E.J. was able to react to the crowd and
vary the overall structure in real time, providing a meta
layer of direction over the entire environment. By applying
this structure to the interactivity, we gave the participants a
familiar framework to experience something new.
Some participants did manage, however, make a mess out
of the most carefully chosen palate of compatible sounds!
It's difficult to get participants to listen like musicians and
react to what their neighbors are doing. There is always the
tendency by some to make as much noise as fast as
possible.
Not surprisingly, some of the simplest things are the most
satisfying. Simply tracking participants' hip movements to
modulate a band pass filter on a percussion samples was
successful. This literally "hip" wah-wah effect was the
source of much fun for the participants (and their friends).
Visuals
Real time computer graphics (CG) were done with a
custom version of Side Effects Software's Houdini 3D
animation software. Interfaces that we configured for trigger
impulses (like drum pads and the floor mounted Tap Tiles)
could not anticipate the participant gestures until they were
hit, and the trigger was transmitted. This was not a
problem for musical events, but it made visual events (such
as a CG figure jumping when a pad is struck) look delayed
and out of sync. We need to make more graphical events
that correspond to the attack envelope of percussive sounds,
and we need design interfaces that can give us data before a
participant hits the trigger. In other words, we need to
know not just when the bat strikes the baseball, but when
the batter starts to swing. A lot of what we did visually
was too "slow" We are developing visual content that
corresponds to the percussive nature of contemporary
music.
Audience Reaction
People shared interfaces that were designed for one (such as
the Reach Zone), manipulating different parts of a one-user
zone in unintended ways.  People are impatient and want
instant gratification; experiences with too much story or
plot required more attention span than participants were
willing to devote. People made up their own games with
the IR zone; given some basic tools and a context, folks
will self-organize fulfilling activities autonomously.
People like a range of involvement from passive to active.
The inclusion of couch-potato Voyeur zones, gave users
remote control of pan-tilt-zoom video cams focused on the
action, allowing less involved interaction.
While SIGGRAPH attracts technology savvy attendees, our
venue was also patronized by attendees of a neighboring
aerobic dance convention, giving us an interesting mix of
mostly 18-40 year olds. Judging from the overall audience
reaction, we have proceeded with technological and
business development of the Interactive Club concept. We
believe that the public is ready for such venues and are
pursuing the goal of licensing Interactive Clubs and related
technology worldwide.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We wish to thank ACM SIGGRAPH and Walt Bransford
(SIGGRAPH 98 Chair) for their support. Thanks to Judith
Crow, Alan Kapler, Greg Hermanovic, Peter Wyngaard,
Paul Simpson, Kristen Stratton and the other SIGGRAPH
98 volunteers as well as the 22 companies that provided
equipment and support for the Interactive Dance Club
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION
www.synesthesia.com    
info@synesthesia.com
NIME01-56
Proceedings of the CHI'01 Workshop on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-01), Seattle, USA