Rhythmic Instruments Ensemble Simulator Generating 
Animation Movies Using Bluetooth Game Controller
Ayaka Endo 
Department of Media Art, Tokyo Polytechnic University 
1583 Iiyama Atsugi Kanagawa Japan 243-0297 
+81 46 242 4111 
endayak@media.t-kougei.ac.jp 
Yasuo Kuhara 
Department of Media Art, Tokyo Polytechnic University 
1583 Iiyama Atsugi Kanagawa Japan 243-0297 
+81 46 242 4111 
kuha@media.t-kougei.ac.jp 
ABSTRACT
We developed a rhythmic instruments ensemble simulator 
generating animation using game controllers. The motion of a 
player is transformed into musical expression data of MIDI to 
generate sounds, and MIDI data are transformed into animation 
control parameters to generate movies. These animations and 
music are shown as the reflection of player performance. Multiple 
players can perform a musical ensemble to make more varied 
patterns of animation. Our system is so easy that everyone can 
enjoy performing a fusion of music and animation. 
Keywords
Wii Remote, Wireless game controller, MIDI, Max/MSP, Flash 
movie, Gesture music and animation. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Many persons have a desire to perform music with instruments. 
However, playing musical instruments requires some degree of 
training, and as a result, it is difficult to obtain the skill of 
performing well. 
Recently, as computer technology advances, numerous music 
video games have been developed as simulators of musical 
instrument performance, for example, Beatmania or Guitarfreaks 
of Konami. However in those games, players are so passive that 
they are only pushing buttons on controllers according to 
preloaded music. They cannot perform their own music. A video 
monitor shows only the performance data and provided images. 
In this paper, we proposed a musical instrument performance 
simulating system, which generates animation. Players use a 
normal wireless game controller known as a Wii Remote, which 
is developed by Nintendo using Bluetooth technology. They can 
play rhythmical instruments by operating the controller. The 
action of players is reflected to sound data, such as velocity, 
timing, etc. Additionally animation movies are generated based 
on the sound data. If multiple players perform an ensemble, each 
player generates his own movie and influences the images of the 
others. They can enjoy a performance by not only music from the 
ears, but also animation from the eyes. 
2. METHOD 
2.1 Concept 
We use rhythmic instruments as a musical ensemble, which 
include drum sets and percussions in various genres, such as pop, 
latin, ethnic, techno, etc. They have no clear melody and it is easy 
to make a sound by a comparably simpler action like hitting than 
other melodious instruments. The performing action is directly 
related to the generating of sound expression. Even beginners or 
children can play them in a demonstration. 
We use a Wii Remote as the wireless controller by Bluetooth 
technology, which is easily connected to a computer. In past 
reports, Bluetooth controllers are often used for musical 
performance [1][2]. Wii Remote is an obtainable device on the 
market at a reasonable price, and has useful operation. A wireless 
device can make it possible to construct an unfettered 
environment for the music performance, and players can perform 
freely from bothersome wires. Wii Remote has three axis 
acceleration sensors, and various physical motions can be 
detected, such as shake, hit, slide, turn, twist, etc. Rhythmic 
performance is highly related to these handy actions, and it means 
players directly make rhythmic sounds by handling it. 
Our system generates animation movies synchronized in real time 
with music performing by players. The visual aspects of playing 
music are as important as the sound itself. Players enjoy 
performing music more by animation, which can be controlled 
and make various patterns synchronized with musical expression 
such as tone, velocity, tempo, etc. If multiple players perform an 
ensemble, an animation generated by each player interacts with 
the others, and as a result, variations of animation are increased. 
The interaction of movies is interesting for all players related to 
the ensemble, because unexpected motion graphics are generated. 
In our system, a maximum of four players can perform together at 
a time. 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to po st on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME08, June 4-8, 2008, Genova, Italy 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
PC
Figure 1. System configuration.
Wii Remotes  
Max/MSP
Motion to
MIDI 
Bluetooth 
Speakers playing music 
Flash 
MIDI to
Movie
Display animation 
flashserver 
MIDI 
transmitted
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
345
2.2 System Configuration 
Our system is configured on a PC, Wii Remotes, speakers, display, 
Max/MSP software, and Adobe Flash player (see Figure 1). 
Players perform rhythmic music by handling Wii Remotes. The 
motion data of a controller are transmitted to the Max/MSP. The 
aka.wiiremote [3] external for Max/MSP can handle the Wii 
Remote. In the Max/MSP, motion data are transformed into 
musical expression data of MIDI. Acceleration data are assigned 
to MIDI parameters such as, note number, velocity, duration, and 
some control change values, which cause a MIDI sound module 
to generate music. The flashserver [4] software allows for a 
communication between Max/MSP and Flash. The MIDI data are 
transmitted to Flash to be transformed into animation control 
parameters, such as, color, shape, motion, timing, etc. As a result, 
music and animation are synchronized with the action of players. 
In the case of multiple players, basically it works similarly except 
for the animation. If a collision of two animations originated from 
different players occurs, both animations are interacted with each 
other to change their patterns of movies. 
2.3 Performance 
To perform music, we aim to evolve to more creativity, while 
keeping the simplicity and popular attractiveness. A player uses 
the Wii Remote like beating a drum to generate sounds and 
animation movies. The generated sound is one of rhythmic 
instruments selected in advance. Anytime a player can change his 
instruments by pushing buttons on the Wii Remote. Each button 
has assigned rhythmic instruments, such as hi-hat, snare, kick, 
cymbal, bongo, conga, wood block, triangle, castanets, maracas, 
etc. The vertical axis of an accelerometer is used to trigger sounds 
with velocity, and the horizontal axis to change tones and colors. 
Our system can handle a maximum of four Wii Remotes at a time. 
The generated animations are consisted of moving patterns of 
small geometrical figures or graphics of natural products such as 
leaves, flowers, stars, lightings, etc. As the motion gets faster, the 
volume of sound and the size of patterns of animation become 
lager (see Figure 2). Each controller has its own color for drawing 
graphical patterns, for example red, yellow, green, and blue. If the 
different colored patterns are collided, two colors are mixed to 
make a new color and the size, direction, and velocity are 
changed. Consequently, multiple players can perform an 
ensemble in animation movies.  
3. DISCUSSION
In 2006 we developed a circle canon chorus system for enjoyable 
singing ensemble [5]. In its demonstration someone hesitated to 
sing. Meanwhile, our rhythmic performance system is easy to 
play without feeling shy. In a demonstration, everyone enjoyed 
playing rhythmic music and was surprised by the generated 
animation. Additionally, our system can connect a normal MIDI 
controller via the MIDI interface, for example, MIDI keyboard, 
MIDI guitar, and Wind synthesizer (see Figure 3). Therefore, we 
can perform a session with melody or chord instruments, and a 
different type of animation ensemble is expected. Some photos 
and movies of the demonstration are shown on our web site [6]. 
4. CONCLUSION  
Using a Wii Remote, we developed a rhythmic instrument 
performance system generating animation, which is so easy that 
everyone can enjoy it. In the near future, we will build a friendly 
interface for playing more varied instruments and enjoying the 
ensemble of sounds and images. 
5. REFERENCES
[1] Bowen, A. Sound stone: A 3-D Wireless Music Controller. 
In Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, 
Canada. 2005, 268-269.  
[2] Hashida, T. Naemura, T. and Sato, T. A System for 
Improvisational Musical Expression Based on Player's Sense 
of Tempo. In Proceedings of the 2007 International 
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression 
(NIME07), New York, USA. 2007, 407-408. 
[3] http://www.iamas.ac.jp/~aka/max/ 
[4] http://www.nullmedium.de/dev/flashserver/ 
[5] Nakamoto, M. and Kuhara, Y. Circle Canon Chorus System 
Used To Enjoy A Musical Ensemble Singing "Frog Round". 
In Proceedings of the 2007 International Conference on New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, 
USA. 2007, 409-410. 
[6] http://www.media.t-kougei.ac.jp/wiimu/ 
Figure 2. Screenshot of movie collaborated with two players. 
Figure 3. Ensemble of Wii remote, wind synthesizer, and 
MIDI guitar with animation projected in a back wall. 
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
346