Epi-thet: A Musical performance installation 
and a choreography of stillness
Tim Humphrey
Griffith University
Parklands Drive
Southport. Qld. 4222
617 5552 8097
t.humphrey@griffith.edu.au
Madeleine Flynn
157 Westbourne Grove
Northcote Vic. 3070
613 9489 0931
contact@madeleineandtim.net   
Jesse Stevens
Cake Industries
3 Station Street, 
Brunswick East, 3056.
613 8060 5248
jesse@cake.net.au   
ABSTRACT
This  paper  articulates  an  interest  in  a  kind  of  interactive 
musical instrument and artwork that defines the mechanisms  
for instrumental interactivity from the iconic morphologies of  
“ready-mades”,  casting  historical  utilitarian  objects  as  the 
basis  for  performed  musical  experiences  by spectators.  The 
interactive  repertoires  are  therefore  partially  pre-determined 
through  enculturated  behaviors  that  are  associated  with 
particular objects, but more importantly, inextricably linked to  
the thematic  and meaningful  assemblage  of the work itself. 
Our  new  work  epi-thet  gathers  data  from  individual  
interactions  with  common  microscopes  placed  on platforms 
within  a  large  space.  This  data  is  correlated  with  public 
domain genetic datasets obtained from micro-array analysis. A  
sonification  algorithm  generates  unique  compositions  
associated  with  the  spectator  “as  measured”  through  their 
individual specification in performing an iconic measurement  
action.  The apparatus is a receptacle for unique compositions  
in sound, and invites a participatory choreography of stillness  
that is available for reception as a live musical performance.  
Keywords
Sonification  installation  spectator-choreography  micro-array 
ready-mades morphology stillness
1.  INTRODUCTION
The  incorporation  of  ready-made  morphologies  into  new 
musical  interfaces  has  been  a  widespread  approach,  with 
examples  including  keyboard,  guitars  and  all  the  other 
traditional  music-instrumental  shapes  that  carry  with  them 
cultures of interaction, imperatives of bodily engagement, and  
a  fruitful  starting  point  for  the  addition  of  “augmented” 
capabilities that can link well-defined performance technique  
with the digital domain. 
There  is  a  particular  meaning  associated  with  these  
morphological traditions, this being the subject of the field of  
musical iconography. “Musical instruments” remain within a  
certain kind of realm, a specialist sub-class of iconic meaning  
within cultural production. 
The  very  technologies  that  allow  for  the  augmentation  of 
traditional  instrumental  morphologies,  also  present  the  
possibility  that  these  morphological  traditions  can  be  done 
away with altogether, thus separating the production of sound  
from  a human body (or other “naturally-occurring”  acoustic  
agent),  a  reality  that  first  emerged  with  the  mechanical 
reproduction  of  sounds.  The  separation  of  the  means  of 
production of sound from a physical gesture, is a subject of  
broad enquiry and controversy, for example, as addressed by  
Pedro Ferreira, who  quotes R. Murray Shafer's famous epithet  
of  “schizophrenic”  to  describe  the   separation  of  musical 
sounds from a corporeal production [1]. 
An  alternative  approach  views  the  separation  as  a  kind  of 
liberation,  creating  a  new  opportunity  for  abstracted  
morphologies  associated  with  sonic  production.  A  related 
liberation  has  re-defined  the  long  tradition  of  inter-
disciplinary engagement (as old as musical production itself)  
and given particular shape since the late twentieth century as  
digital  data  has  been  able  to  flow  freely  between  artistic 
modes.  More  pertinently,  Schafer's  “schizophrenia”  has 
enabled  a  greater  participation  in  the  unfolding  of  creative 
sound  works  by  so-called  “spectators”.  The  authentic  
execution of musical works is no longer solely the province of  
specialised physical skill sets.  
Dance,  being  a  medium  of  non-instrumental  movement 
expression,  is  an  obvious  candidate  for  the  application  of 
flexible  data  mapping  and  dancers  have  been  testing 
interactive systems since their modern emergence some forty  
years ago. Despite this uptake of an abstracted sonic means of  
production that saw dancers wearing early versions of today's  
ubiquitous  sensors,  Birringer's  review  of  interaction  and 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for  
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies  
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that  
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy  
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute  to lists,  
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
NIME2010, 15-18th June 2010, Sydney, Australia
Copyright remains with the authors.
Figure 1: epi-thet at Arts House Meat Market, Melbourne  
January 2010
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
69
interactive  systems  in  dance,  highlights  the  relatively  late 
uptake by contemporary dance to the notion of “active viewer  
participation”,  a  crucial  principle  of  interaction,  which  had 
been identified way back in the 1970s, as characterised by the  
“artistic  strategies  used  to  engage  audiences  in  a dialogue” 
[2]. 
Since Birringer's review was published in 2004, many dancers  
have  taken  up  the  relational  sense  of  interaction  with  a 
vengeance.  Australian/New  Zealand  choreographer  Simon 
Ellis  and  Shannon  Bott,  in  their  work  Inert,  integrate  an 
audience of two into a choreographic design that is a creates  
an  architecture  of  prone  spectators  and  variously  revealed 
dancers  in  real  and  virtual  space  [3].  The work  Tank  Man 
Tango,  [4] presented at various locations in Australia during  
2009, represents the other end of the participatory scale, and  
recalls  the  dance  craze  phenomenon  of  the  Lambeth  Walk 
from  Britain  in the  1930s  with its  widespread  participatory 
involvement,  and its adoption  as a technique for subverting  
fascist rallies of the time [5]. 
A common feature of interaction, both in highly specialised  
skill  contexts,  such  as  traditional  musical  performance,  and 
also in particular interactions with objects is the held shape, or  
posture of the body that is a functional pre-condition for the  
articulation of finer and more nuanced body actions, or, in the  
case of certain instruments, a focussed gaze.
These held postures suggest an aesthetic of “stillness” across a 
vast array of human performance contexts. This principle has  
been widely discussed, particularly in relation to the nature of  
artistic experiences and their relationship to time and process.  
Stillness was was the provocation for the 2007 Computers in  
Art and Design Education  (CADE) Conference.  A paper by  
composer  Cat  Hope  reviewed  various  applications  of  
infrasonic or low-frequency inaudible sounds, pointing to the  
qualities of resonance and overtone complexities that “allow  
listeners an individualised role in their own experience of a  
work” [6]. This experience of resonance is the “felt” vibration  
of  inaudible  sound,  a  phenomenon  well-known  to  the  deaf 
community,  and  conveyed  to  the  authors  through  our  work 
developing  musical  structures  and  instruments  with  the 
deaf/blind performer Michelle Stevens [7]. Another reference  
to the choreography of stillness can be found in Susan Jone's  
recent article that examines the relationships of T.S Eliot to  
various  choreographers  of  his  time,  and  the  particular 
resonance of a passage from his Four Quartets:
At the still point of the turning world. Neither flesh nor fleshless;
Neither from nor towards; at the still point, there the dance is
Within  the  paradox  of  movement  and  non-movement  is  an 
expression of a choreography of stillness [8] that is also apt as  
a  metaphor  for  the  minute  processes  at  the  core  of  living 
function.
We have gathered these strands of interest – the cultures of  
instrumental  movement,  the free  flow of data in the digital  
realm,  the  receptacles  that  allow  for  participatory  musical 
expression and the choreography of stillness – into a form for  
the  presentation  of  investigations  and  compositions  that  we 
undertook  during  an  ANAT   Synapse  Residency  with  the 
Garvan Institute for Medical Research in 2008.  The piece is  
called  epi-thet,  the  title  evoking  the  poetics  of  the  unique 
individual and the given moment. The resultant music arises  
from  an  interactive  system  that  sits  somewhere  between 
somewhat static, installed sound works on the one hand, and a  
musical  instrument  configured  to  recursively  iterate  its 
original iconic function (a microscope).
2.  BACKGROUND
epi-thet  is  a  culmination  of  our  compositional  work  with 
genetic  material,  re-incorporating  a bodily  enactment  into  a 
poetic  reflection  on  the  enterprise  of  genetic  research.  The 
mechanisms  for  ontogenetic  and  phlyogenetic  variation  and 
function, through generations and within individual life are the  
fascinating subject of genetic research, with immense and epic  
repercussions  for  human  life  yet  taking  place  on  an 
infinitessimal scale. A live multimedia sound installation, epi-
thet constructs a unique sonification and visualisation of the  
public-domain  genetic  data  from  Stanford  University.  Each 
expression  of  data  is  a  realised  as  a  new  and  unique 
composition,  read  through  the  specific  time,   space  co-
ordinates, and physical  character of audience members.  epi-
thet reflects on the minute and the epic, with human genetic  
data  in  the  centre  of  an  experience  of  the  scale  of  being 
human.
In  genetic  research,  a  central  technology  for  researching 
genetic  functioning  is micro-array  analysis.   This technique 
literally  visualises  the  degree  of  involvement  of  particular 
gene  fragments  through  comparisons  of  the  intensities  of 
luminescence on tiny arrays.  The results of these experiments  
are the static datasets that are then available for sonification.
Epi-thet builds on our previous developments of installation  
that are focussed on the contextual and relational qualities of  
sound  in  culture.  Our  previous  works  in  this  vein  have 
included John Cage's Musicircus  and the megaphone project . 
Our interest is with the cultures of  interactivity  that feature 
specific  gestural  and postural  repertoires,  the contextualised 
shapes assumed  by the body in relation  to the operation  of  
classic archetypal machinery, devices or objects. In the case of  
epi-thet, the device is the common microscope, the universal  
symbol of biological enquiry. The specific engagement with a  
microscope  requires  a  still,  slightly  bent  posture  and  a 
focussed gaze.
The shape of the musical expression is then achieved with the  
active completion of the work – a selection, modification, and  
shaping – by the varied physicality  of the audience. Unique  
information  from  the  postural  variation  between  different 
Figure 2: Actual micro-array image, with varying  
luminescence indicating degree of particular Genetic  
function (courtesy Stanford University)
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
70
individuals  selects  appropriate  micro-array  datasets  and 
shapes the musical realisation.  
3.  EXPERIENCE
The  microscopes  stand  in  large,  resonant  spaces  on  small 
platforms, lit from above. As the viewers lean down to look  
through  the  microscopes,  the  light  changes  and  the  sound 
emerges  around  and  from  under  the  viewer,  allowing  the 
infrasonic  experience  referred  to  above.  The  viewer  is 
conductor of an enveloping sweep of sound: the individual at  
the centre  of the sound world of self.  Gazing at the visual  
image in the microscope shows continually changing patterns  
of luminescence comprised of thousands of single gene chip  
arrays in sequence, and linguistic epithets gathered from the  
canon  of  language.  The  light  overhead  fades  as  the  sound 
rises. As the viewer moves away, the light rises in intensity  
again,  and  the  sound  fades.  Others  in the  space  watch  and 
listen. A free-contrapuntal rise and fall is seen and heard. 
The  gestures  and  postures  of  the  microscope  viewers  are 
observable  and  instrumental  as  poetic  elements  within  the 
assemblage.  Specific  measures  of  posture,  as  held  in  the 
typical viewing stance for microscope viewing, determine the  
assembly of unique musical passages.  audience members to  
articulate  the  artwork,  like  a  conductor,  or  orchestral 
musician. 
4.  IMPLEMENTATION
Epi-thet consists of several microscopes, on stands of variable  
height, located on platforms the size of a conductor's podium  
that are also the sound diffusion devices. Simple lighting is  
mounted directly above the podium, activated by the presence  
or absence of a spectator on the platform. The rest of the large  
space is ambiently and dimly lit.  
Within  each  microscope  stand  a  netbook  computer,  an 
arduino  processor  board,  associated  distance  and  weight 
sensors, and a mini- data projector (3M Pro 110) are located. 
Each computer  is  linked  using  OLSRd mesh  networking  to 
pass  information  sensed  from  spectators  via  the  arduino  
boards to a custom  dimmer  control  interface  (using  another 
netbook/arduino which also links to the remote public domain  
genetic  data  site.  The  computers  are  also  running  two 
instances of Pure Data.  
The first instance drives the musical realisation, using static 
datasets that are accessed dynamically, with choice of dataset  
based on  a simple physical  characteristic  of each spectator  
(distance  from  the  microscope  platform  indicating  angle  of 
“stoop”).  The  sounds  themselves  are  constructed  from 
elemental sine tone generators and granular synthesis routines  
with  synthesis  parameters  determined  by  variations  in  the 
genetic data. 
The  second  instance  of  Pure  Data  utilises  the  Gem  object 
library to drive the video that is projected onto a tiny screen  
and viewed through the microscope. The video is both a literal  
echo of the information that is gathered in the actual scientific  
process  of  micro-array  analysis  (see  Figure  2,  showing 
varying luminescence in two hues), and a unique compilation  
of  linguistic  epithets  as  evoked  by  the  spectator.  These 
compilations are again selected by the “stoop” angle.  
The  microscopic  projection  screen  is  achieved  through  a 
reversal of the usual objective to enlarge images. Here we are  
aiming to create a tiny, sharp image that is focussed onto the  
usual  viewing  surface  of  a  common  dissecting  microscope. 
We  have  developed  a  customised  optical  pathway,  using  a 
non-refracting  mirror  to  direct  the  projector  beam  onto  the 
screen.   
5.  CONCLUSION
We have developed a musical work that visually and sonically  
references the position of individuals within the enterprise of  
genetic research. While the benefit of sonification of genetic  
function  as  measured  through  the  micro-array  technique  is 
beyond  the  scope  of  a  practice-based  development  of  an 
installation/performance,  our  work  does  represent  a cultural 
benefit:  that  of  a  musical  interface  whose  morphology  is 
fundamentally linked to the cultural context of its origins. It  
creates a sense of homage to the efforts of researchers through  
the coincidence of still postures that are part of the everyday  
life of research, but also a symbol of reverence and humility  
in human relationships. 
Created live by the interactions of the group who activate it,  
the experience is one of a free-polyphonic activity of sound  
and body. 
6.  REFERENCES
[1] Ferreria, Pedro Peixoto, When Sound Meets Movement:  
Performance In Electronic Dance Music. Leonardo  
Music Journal, 18 (2008), 17-20.
[2] Birringer, Johannes, Dance and Interactivity, Dance 
Research Journal. 35/2 and 36/1 (Winter 2003 and  
Summer 2004) 90 . 
[3] Perkovic, Jana. Lateral Intimacies Real Time Arts –  
Magazine  
http://www.realtimearts.net/feature/Dance_Massive/0368
. Accessed 02/05/10. 
[4] See http://www.forget2forget.net/here/  Accessed 
02/05/10.
[5] Read, Alan, Theatre and Everyday Life: An Ethics of  
Performance. Routledge, New York, pp. 111-114, 1993.
[6] Hope, Cat,  Silence As Stillness? Sonic Experiences in  
Art using Infrasonics. In Proceeding, Biennale of  
Electronic Arts Perth: CADE: Computers in Art and  
Design Education Conference 12-14 September 2007, pp. 
118-121.
[7] See http://www.roundangle.com.au/  Accessed 02/05/10.
[8] Jones, Susan, “At the still point”: T.S. Eliot, Dance, and  
Modernism, Dance Research Journal, 41/2, Winter 2009,  
pp. 31-51.
Figure 3: A small image projected onto the viewing 
screen of the microscope
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
71