The KarmetiK NotomotoN: A New Breed of Musical 
Robot for Teaching and Performance 
 
Ajay Kapur 
 
Jordan Hochenbaum 
 
 
 
Michael Darling 
 
Dimitri Diakopoulos 
 
KarmetiK LLC 
Reno NV, USA 
info@karmetik.com 
 
Jim Murphy 
 
Trimpin 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper describes the KarmetiK NotomotoN, a new musical 
robotic system for performance and education. A long time 
goal of the authors has been to provide users with plug-and-
play, highly expressive musical robot system with a high 
degree of portability. This paper describes the technical details 
of the NotomotoN, and discusses its use in performance and 
educational scenarios. Detailed tests performed to optimize 
technical aspects of the NotomotoN are described to highlight 
usability and performance specifications for electronic 
musicians and educators. 
 
Keywords 
Musical Robotics, Music Technology, Robotic Performance, 
NotomotoN, KarmetiK 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The field of musical robotics has long been in the domain of 
highly specialized one-of-a-kind instruments. Such instruments 
are typically only played by their creators, while those 
unfamiliar with the robotic instrument would likely be faced 
with a confusing system which is highly specific to the given 
instrument. With the KarmetiK NotomotoN, we aimed to 
address these issues by creating a user-friendly robotic music 
system with plug-and-play ease-of-use, a highly modular 
design, and high-performance components. Our ultimate goal 
for the NotomotoN was to create a teaching and performance 
tool that can serve both as an introduction to musical robotics 
for those unfamiliar with the field and as a powerful instrument 
that pushes the boundaries of robotic music performance. 
 The NotomotoN's ease of use lies in part in its use of the new 
Arduino-based USB MIDI handler. Users can simply plug into 
the robot's USB jack and select the robot as a standard MIDI 
device. Unlike many previous robotic music systems, highly 
specialized custom software is not needed. Section 2 focuses on 
the MIDI handling as well as custom-designed high-
performance hardware utilized in the NotomotoN. Section 3 
presents a detailed performance analysis of the solenoid striker 
assemblies utilized on the NotomotoN, with special focus 
dedicated to striker latency, force, and rate of action. Finally, 
section 4 focuses on live-performance and educational uses of 
the NotomotoN. 
1.1 Robotic Percussion: Related Work 
Automated percussion systems can be traced back to 
mechanically sequenced instruments related to player pianos. 
However, Trimpin is one of the pioneers of computerized 
robotic percussion instruments and since the 1970's has created 
a diverse array of percussion works [8]. Another significant 
early innovator in the field is Godfried-Willem Raes of the 
Logos Foundation: his works from the early 1980's, though, 
were "soundsculptures in the full sense: not real musical 
instruments, and not playable1”.  
 The 1990's and 2000's saw an explosion in robotic percussion 
research with a focus on interactivity: Eric Singer's LEMUR 
creations were truly live-performance capable [7], and both the 
first author [4] and Gil Weinberg [10] explored performer/robot 
interaction. In recent years, such performances as Trimpin's 
2007 collaboration with the Kronos Quartet and the KarmetiK  
Machine Orchestra [2] have highlighted the benefits of fully 
integrated robotic music systems which do away with the need 
for in-depth calibration and focus on ease of configuration. The 
success of Pat Matheny’s Orchestrion 2 with Eric Singer’s 
instruments has proven that the public is ready for robots on 
stage. The KarmetiK NotomotoN builds on the previous work 
done in the field of musical robotics to further allow for faster 
deployment time and ease of use. 
2. TECHNICAL DETAILS 
The KarmetiK NotomotoN is a robotic drum featuring twin 
drum heads, a metal body, and 18 solenoid beater assemblies 
(see Section 2.2). Each NotomotoN is a fully integrated unit: all 
power supply components and electronics are self-contained 
within the drum's body, and all beater assemblies are mounted 
to the robot's dual circular superstructures. The NotomotoN is 
intended to be usable as a desktop unit. 
 
                
    Figure 1. The KarmetiK NotomotoN 
 
                                                                 
1 http://www.logosfoundation.org/g_texts/ibart-leonardo.html 
2 http://www.patmetheny.com/orchestrioninfo/ 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee p rovided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME’11, 30 May–1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
228
2.1 Hardware 
The NotomotoN has two types of beater assemblies each 
utilizing a different actuation technique (see Section 3.1). The 
two types of beaters used were c a l l e d the TrimpTron and the 
KalTron. The solenoid beater assemblies utilized CNC 
manufacturing techniques to allow for interchangeability, 
precision, and consistency. In addition to the listed solenoid 
drumbeater assemblies, extra electronics and wiring have been 
allocated to allow for the attachment of additional actuators. 
2.1.1 The TrimpTron  
 The TrimpTron makes use of a rotary solenoid mounted 
perpendicular to the NotomotoN's drumheads. Its aluminum 
mounting bracket can be rotated on the robot's superstructure, 
allowing for a wide variety of timbres as the drum head is 
struck in different places. 
 
 
Figure 2. TrimpTron Solenoids 
 
2.1.2 The KalTron  
 The KalTron drumbeater (See Figure 3) assembly uses a 
modified pull-type solenoid arranged such that its linear motion 
is converted to rotational motion. The pull solenoids used in the 
KalTrons allow for very rapid-fire actuation: high-speed rolls 
are possible using the KalTrons.  
 
 
 Figure 3. KalTrons on the  NotomotoN's Superstructure 
 
2.1.3 Additional Actuators 
In addition to the TrimpTrons, and the KalTron, the 
NotomotoN has electronics and wiring for up to six additional 
actuators. The use of additional actuators can prove greatly 
useful in a teaching environment, as discussed in Section 5.2. 
 
2.2 Power and Electronics 
A chief design objective in the conception of the NotomotoN 
was the integration of a 12V DC power supply and electronics 
in the main body of the drum. Prior experience indicated that, 
in a teaching and performance environment, having numerous 
external enclosures for power and communication resulted in a 
highly entropic cabling situation. The NotomotoN, on the other 
hand, needs only two cables: one for power and a USB cable 
for communication. This highly flexible configuration allows 
for those lacking extensive experience with musical robotic 
systems to simply plug in and begin composing and 
performing. 
2.2.1 MIDI Subsystem 
The AVR-based Arduino physical computing platform was 
chosen as the means of communication between users' 
computers and the NotomotoN's actuators. The Arduino was 
chosen due to its open-source nature, extensive documentation, 
and compact size. A custom-developed daughterboard was 
utilized to convert 5V control voltages from the AVR to 24V 
actuator signals. The daughterboard (dubbed the KarmetiK 
Trinity board) connects to the Arduino as a shield, sitting 
directly on the header pins of the Arduino board. The Arduino 
and Trinity board combination proved quite compact, allowing 
the entire assembly to rest next to the power supply, completely 
concealed inside the NotomotoN's drum body. To communicate 
with the Arduino board, users plug in to a USB jack on the 
NotomotoN's outer shell. 
 
2.2.2 Power Subsystem 
In order to allow for the 24V DC power supply to fit within the 
NotomotoN's body, an aluminum cradle assembly was built. 
The cradle seats the power supply and is secured to the drum 
body's sides. As with the communication assembly, all power 
components are concealed within the NotomotoN's metal body. 
To power the actuators on the NotomotoN, users plug in to the 
female IEC connector. 
 
2.3 Software  
In an effort to enable plug-and-play ease-of-use on the 
NotomotoN, MIDI was chosen as the main communication 
protocol between the robot and performers' computers. Thanks 
to the Arduino's adoption of the user-configurable ATMega8U2 
USB to serial converter, MIDI over USB HID proved possible. 
For performance and educational use, custom-build middleware 
is used. This middleware allows users and administrators to 
customize outgoing messages, preventing potentially harmful 
messages from reaching the NotomotoN and allowing messages 
to be analyzed and rerouted as desired. Additionally, this 
middleware serves as an OSC to midi translator, opening up the 
possibilities of communicating with the NotomotoN from many 
other software and hardware platforms. 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
229
 
   Figure 4. KarmetiK NotomotoN Software GUI 
 
3. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 
In order to optimize the actuators' behavior, experiments testing 
the drumbeaters' speed, dynamics, and latency were conducted. 
These experiments allowed us to understand the advantages and 
disadvantages of both beater types (see Section 3.4) and 
optimize their use in an educational and performance context. 
All tests were conducted with the beaters striking 20mm away 
from a piezo sensor on a 20cm diameter drum head. Tests 
involving the TrimpTron were performed with the drum beater 
15mm above the drum head. Due to design differences, 
KalTron tests were performed with the drum beater 10mm 
above the drum head. 
 
3.1 Actuator Speed Test 
To test the frequency at which the actuator assemblies were 
capable of striking surfaces, we conducted actuator speed tests. 
Incrementally decreasing intervals between MIDI Note On 
events were sent to the NotomotoN, with the fastest strike 
frequency recorded. Table 1 and Figure 5 illustrate the data. 
Table 1. TrimpTron and KalTron Actuator Strike 
Frequency 
MIDI 
Velocity 
TrimpTron 
Strike Frequency 
4. KalTron Strike 
Frequency 
127 18.69Hz 20.40Hz 
64 30.21Hz 43.10Hz 
50 39.9Hz 68.90Hz 
 
 
Figure 5. Actuator Speed Tests (X-axis = MIDI velocity; Y-
axis = Strikes/Second) 
 
3.2 Actuator Dynamics Test 
Figure 6 illustrates output velocity plotted against the actual 
velocity of the actuators. The purpose of this experiment was to 
determine the response curve of the actuators as output 
velocities increased in order to better understand the real-world 
behavior of the actuators. MIDI notes were sent 1 second apart 
to allow for the system to return to equilibrium before 
subsequent note on events were sent. 
 
 
Figure 6. Actuator Velocity vs. Measured Output Velocity 
(X-axis = output velocity; Y-axis = Actuator velocity) 
 
3.3 Actuator Delay Test 
Actuator latency is defined here as the time between a MIDI 
message being sent from a server to the time at which the 
actuator makes contact with the surface to be struck. Table 1 
shows the results under testing conditions (20mm above the 
drum head on the TrimpTron and 10mm above the drum head 
on the KalTron). 
 
Table 2. Actuator Delay Time With Differing Velocities  
MIDI Velocity TrimpTron 
Latency  
KalTron 
Latency  
127 0.041 seconds 0.034 seconds 
64 0.052 seconds 0.032 seconds 
50 0.058 seconds 0.029 seconds 
 
4.1 Test Conclusions 
The Trimpin Rotary Solenoid Assembly was found to 
compliment the KalTron: while the KalTron is capable of very 
rapid strike frequencies, its dynamic response curve is less 
consistent than the TrimpTron. The TrimpTron, then, can serve 
as a more dynamically expressive actuator while the KalTron 
plays the role of performing high speed drum rolls. 
 
5. PERFORMANCE AND EDUCATION 
5.1 Live Performance Use 
Through testing and use in a live musical context, the 
NotomotoN has been found to excel as a performance tool 
thanks to its ability to respond rapidly and dynamically to user 
commands (see Section 3) as well as its compact size and fast 
setup time. In a live performance context, the NotomotoN has 
been tested and played with a diverse array of software and 
hardware-based musical interfaces, including the RadioDrum 
[5], the Kinetic Engine [1], the ESitar [4], the Helio [6], and the 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
230
Arduinome [9]. Thanks to its ability to respond subtly to 
parametric control, the NotomotoN was found to be highly 
expressive when used by the greatly differing above 
performance interfaces. 
5.2 Educational Applications 
The NotomotoN was designed to serve as the centerpiece for a 
musical robotic education curriculum [3]. The unit works both 
as a completely integrated robotic instrument with multiple 
beater types and as a central module onto which six additional 
drum-beater mechanisms can be attached. In its role as a central 
module with external actuators, the NotomotoN serves as a 
means by which students can rapidly test new beater designs 
and test existing actuators against new materials such as found 
objects and drums. In an educational context, the NotomotoN 
has been used to introduce students to musical robotics and 
allow them to begin composing for them rapidly. 
 
6. CONCLUSION 
The KarmetiK NotomotoN is a new breed of musical robot 
allowing for rapid deployment and heretofore unseen ease of 
use in a self-contained package. For performance scenarios, the 
NotomotoN's consistent and high-performance actuators allow 
for highly expressive musical performance capable of taking 
advantage of the expressivity offered by new musical 
performance interfaces. While the NotomotoN excels in 
performance situations, it also serves as an excellent 
educational package due to its ease of use and extensible 
actuator options. To foster further work in the field of musical 
robotics, the KarmetiK NotomotoN has been made available to 
all performers and educational institutions. Please visit 
http://www.notomoton.com for further information about the 
KarmetiK NotomotoN. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7. REFERENCES 
[1] Eigenfeldt, A. The Evolution of Evolutionary Software: 
Intelligent Rhythm Generation in Kinetic Engine. In 
Proceedings of the EvoWorkshows 2009 on Applications 
of Evolutionary Computing. 2009. Berlin. 
[2] Kapur, A., et al. The Machine Orchestra. In Proceedings 
of the International Computer Music Conference. 2010. 
New York City.  
[3] Kapur, A., Darling, M. A Pedagogical Paradigm for 
Musical Robotics. In Proceedings of the International 
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression. 
2010. Sydney. 
[4] Kapur, A., Digitizing North Indian Music: Preservation 
and Extension using Multimodal Sensor Systems, Machine 
Learning and Robotics. VDM Verlag Dr. Muller, 
Germany, 2008.  
[5] Mathews, M., and Schloss, W. Andrew. The Radio Drum 
as a Synthesizer Controller. In Proceedings of the 
International Computer Music Conference. 1989. Ohio 
State University. 
[6] Murphy, J., Kapur, A., Burgin, C. The Helio: A Study of 
Membrane Potentiometers and Long Force Sensing 
Resistors for Musical Interfaces. In Proceedings of the 
International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical 
Expression. 2010. Sydney. 
[7] Singer, E., et al. LEMUR's Musical Robots. In 
International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical 
Expression. 2004. Hamamatsu, Japan. 
[8] Trimpin, SoundSculptures: Five Examples. 2000, Munich 
MGM MediaGruppe Munchen. 
[9] Vallis, O., Hochenbaum, J., and Kapur, A., A Shift 
Towards Iterative and Open-Source Design for Musical 
Interfaces. In Proceedings of the International Conference 
on New Interfaces for Musical Expression. Sydney, 
Australia. 2010. 
[10] Weinberg, G., S. Driscoll, and T. Thatcher. Jam'aa - A 
Middle Eastern Percussion Ensemble for Human and 
Robotic Players. In International Computer Music 
Conference. 2006. New Orleans. 
 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
231