Not Hyper, Not Meta, Not Cyber but Infra-Instruments
John Bowers
School of Music
University of East Anglia
Norwich, UK
+44- 1603-592452
j.bowers@uea.ac.uk
Phil Archer
School of Music
University of East Anglia
Norwich, UK
+44- 1603-592452
o_k_boy@hotmail.com
ABSTRACT
As a response to a number of notable contemporary aesthetic
tendencies, this paper introduces the notion of an infra-
instrument as a kind of ‘new interface for musical expression’
worthy of study and systematic design. In contrast to hyper-,
meta- and virtual instruments, we propose infra-instruments as
devices of restricted interactive potential, with little sensor
enhancement, which engender simple musics with scarce
opportunity for conventional virtuosity. After presenting
numerous examples from our work, we argue that it is precisely
such interactionally and sonically challenged designs that
leave requisite space for computer-generated augmentations in
hybrid, multi-device performance settings.
Keywords
Infra-instruments, hyperinstruments, meta-instruments, virtual
instruments, design concepts and principles.
1. INTRODUCTION
Since 2001 the NIME series of conferences has seen the
presentation of a wealth of interface and instrument design
ideas. Uniquely at the intersection of the musical and the
techno-scientific, much work reported to NIME has combined
design innovation with practical playability and no little
humour. Our current paper wishes to deepen this vein of
playful yet practical musical design by naming an approach
which we feel has been under-investigated to date: we seek to
encourage the construction of what we call infra-instruments .
Let us introduce this concept, and connect our paper with
existing literature, through a comparison with such notions as
hyperinstruments, meta-instruments and cyber- (or virtual-)
instruments. Although there are differences in emphasis, it is
the common themes between these overlapping terms which
will serve to initially ground our alternative orientation to
instrument construction and musical performance issues.
Tod Machover [7] writes: “The technology we developed for
this opera project [VALIS] came to be called
‘hyperinstruments’. By focusing on allowing a few
instrumentalists to create complex sounds, we continually
improved the technology and reduced the number of actual
musical instruments. The resulting opera orchestra consisted
of two performers: one keyboard player and one percussionist.
They controlled all the music for the opera, and almost all of it
is live… [To build effective hyperinstruments] we need the
power of smart computers following the gestures and
intentions of fine performers”. It is clear from these passages
that the hyperinstrument concept is bound up with the
expansion of human capability at the musical interface.
Indeed, just two musicians can serve orchestral duties in the
production of something as ambitious as an opera, and do this
live, before the audience’s very eyes. As Machover hints at the
end of the quote, initial work on “classic” hyperinstruments
was to do with enhancing the capabilities of already virtuosic
performers. Since the early 1990s, however, the
Hyperinstruments Group at the MIT Media Lab has enlargened
its remit to bring hyperinstruments to the masses through, for
example, musical toys for children and devices requiring no
pre-existing traditional instrumental competence. The
hyperinstrument influence is a powerful one in the emerging
NIME literature with, for example, [12] and [13] connecting
their innovations to the concept.
Following Greek etymology, the difference between something
hyper (above and beyond) and something meta (among and
besides) should be quite large but, in practice, both the
Machover-Ma hyper-cello [7] and Jonathan Impett’s meta-
trumpet [6], for example, involve enhancing a traditional
instrument with various sensors to enable features of the
gestural activity of performers to control augmentations of the
existing instrumental sound. In Impett’s meta-trumpet,
amongst other sensors, Polhemus devices capture its position
and orientation and enable these, suitably remapped, to serve
as controllers for material derived from live sampling the
trumpet. Sensor-based augmentations of instruments are
common in NIME with [3] and [9] being just two examples.
Axel Mulder’s [8] notion of a virtual musical instrument
(VMI) arises from a comparison of acoustic (e.g. violin)
through electroacoustic (e.g. electric guitar) to electronic (e.g.
synthesizer) instruments. In this development, he detects a
progressive decoupling of the physics of human gesture from
the physics of the sound making mechanism. He also notes
that attempts to model electronic instruments on the basis of
acoustic instruments are often found to be inadequately
expressive. From these observations, he argues for VMIs as
instruments not based in any literal way on existing physical
instruments but as “gestural interface[s]… to provide a greater
freedom in mapping movement to sound”, in particular, as
interfaces to virtual physical sound-models. In an extreme
case, the performer may be “empty handed” with movement
tracking data, rather than any contact events, providing the
means to interact with a VMI which mediates between gesture
and sound synthesis. Talk of the virtual suggests a connection
with Virtual Reality (VR) and numerous attempts to exploit
features of ‘immersive’ 3D computer graphics to construct
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Nime’05, May 26-28, , 2005, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
5
musical instruments and interactive sonic environments exist,
see [10] for a review and [2] for a relevant NIME contribution.
Although the details of these proposals (and of specific
projects conducted in their terms) sometimes differ, we can
identify a number of recurring themes.
• Rich interactive capability.  Hyper, meta and virtual
instruments enable you to do a lot. Two players can
substitute an orchestra. Meta-trumpeters can incite swarms
of sound processing Alife agents (as in Impett’s latest work).
• Detailed performance measurement.  This enrichment
typically requires many and varied gestural measurements
through tracking or enhancing instruments with sensors.
• Engendering of complex music. The target, even if for just
demonstration purposes, is commonly the production of
complex musical textures live. Forms which are loosely
symphonic, orchestral or operatic provide the asymptote.
• Expressivity and virtuosity. Meta-instruments and the rest
are commonly made with virtuosic and highly expressive
performance in mind. This is typically the case when a
musician devotes attention to the augmentation of an
instrument they may already have considerable competence
with, or when a designer notes frustrations with traditional
designs, or, if expressive participation in music is to be
made more accessible. The concern for widespread
participation in music and an interest in enhancing
virtuosity are not necessarily exclusive and the
hyperinstrument concept is often intended to cover both.
2. THE IDEA OF AN INFRA-INSTRUMENT
While the four tendencies we have just noted plot a
characteristic position in the ‘design space’ of new instrument
construction, they do not map its entirety. We feel that the
research agenda of NIME includes but extends well beyond
these percepts. To bring this into focus, let us note some
currently influential tendencies in musical aesthetics.
There is considerable interest in lo-fi music and ‘circuit-
bending’, to use Q. Reed Ghazala’s phrase [11], or ‘hardware
hacking’, to use Nic Collins’ [4]. Sometimes such endeavours
yield quite complex interfaces but more often the aesthetic
pleasure and technical interest of a good hack comes from its
simplicity and appositeness. Reed Ghazala may well add
switches and sensors to, say, a circuit bent Casio SK-1 sampler
but these will be lower in number than the count of gestural
degrees of freedom typically measured in a VMI construction.
In the world of improvisation at the moment there is interest in
forms of music sometimes (and controversially) named
‘reductionist’. In part as a reaction to busy, dense, complex
improvised musics, including the ready-to-hand complexities
possible in laptop performance, some are seeking very pared-
down forms. Toshimaru Nakamura’s work with his ‘no input
mixing board’ (see www.japanimprov.com/tnakamura), for
example, is typically static, very calm gesturally, and
sometimes outside the range of human hearing.
It is in recognition of these tendencies in musical aesthetics,
and the contrary orientations towards technology and
interaction that they sometimes express, that we formulate our
idea of an infra-instrument. Provisionally, let us take an infra-
instrument as being dedicated to the opposite of the
tendencies we noted earlier. Infra-instruments support:
• A constrained interactive repertoire  (there will not be so
very much you can do)…
• Through the deployment of few sensors  or making few
gestural measurement s (or just allowing the mechanism or
circuitry to be directly engaged with or run free)…
• To engender relatively simple musics (or at least ones
which are non-symphonic, non-orchestral, non-operatic)
performed in manners that are…
• Restricted in their virtuosity and their expressivity  (at
least in terms of romantic aesthetic construals of those
matters)…
but are nonetheless aesthetically engaging and technically
intriguing for all that. It is infra-instruments as a design
concept which the rest of this paper seeks to explore and
exemplify, and give a preliminary evaluation of.
2.1 Making Infra-Instruments
To explicate our notion of an infra-instrument let us describe
some of the ways one might go about constructing one.
• Take an Instrument and Make it Less. Break an existing
instrument (irreversible procedures) or restrict its operation
and/or how one interacts with it (reversible procedures).
• Take Materials Partway to Instrumenthood.  Instruments
are typically assemblies of multiple components and
different materials. Do not go all the way in making a
complete integrated, rigid construction. Investigate
temporary assemblies of stuff. Leave the case off.
• Build an Instrument but Include Obvious Mistakes.  Like
selecting fresh vegetables as the material for construction
(see The Vegetable Orchestra, www.gemueseorchester.org),
encouraging fret-buzz or loosely winding pickups to
enhance microphony. Hopkin’s books on instrument
construction [e.g. 5] are excellent resources for infra-
instruments if properly misread.
• Take Something Non-Instrumental and Find the
Instrument Within. A DTMF phone dialer can be regarded as
an infra-synthesizer, a Geiger counter as infra-percussion,
and so forth. The percept here is that the instrument you find
within something conventionally non-instrumental is likely
to be an infra-instrument.
• Find Infra-Instruments Readymade. In contrast to the
above, here we have in mind instruments which already are
infra in status, at least in the minds of aesthetic snobs. This
would include many musical toys or musical boxes and
other ‘amusements’. One might also want to argue that
historical ‘rejects’ fit here, the antecedent forms of modern
instruments which have fallen by the wayside. Bits and
pieces of stuff which sound nice just as they are might be
readymade infra-instruments awaiting recognition as such.
3. SPECIMEN INFRA-INSTRUMENTS
Having introduced our concept by way of contrast with other
notions, and sketched the ways design might go with this
concept in mind, let us now provide some examples of infra-
instruments from our own work. We proceed by looking at, to
use the jargon, infra-chordophones, followed by infra-
electrophones, then infra-idiophones before discussing how to
put it all together (infra-mixers). Our intention in selecting
these examples is to illustrate our concept of an infra-
instrument. We do not necessarily select them because they are
the best things we have built. Nor, singly , do they manifest
much in technical innovation. The research value we hope to
offer you is by means of the interest of our overall design
concept of infra-instruments and the consequences for the
NIME research agenda that this concept might have.
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
6
3.1 Broken and Re-Built Violins
Figure 1. The bow-stab infra-violin.
Atonement for Violin Quartet  (by John Bowers, first
realisation at the Norwich Gallery, UK, 2004) is a combined
installation-performance-webcast work which revisits the
instrument destruction preoccupations of the Fluxus artists.
Atonement  specifically builds upon Nam June Paik’s 1962
work One for Violin Solo . In One, a violin is slowly raised
above the performer’s head and then brought down suddenly
upon a table-top. Atonement  continues the action by re-
building the broken violin and, indeed, over four days, repeats
this ritual four times to create a quartet of refashioned
instruments. The performance of a quartet composition
completes the work. Atonement, in our terms, involves the
transformation of violins into infra-violins. The broken
bodies of the violins are difficult to use for good string
tension. Other sonic possibilities have to be sought in the
strings: lengthwise scrapings and low-tension thunks for
instance. The broken shards present percussive opportunities
with perhaps violin bows becoming beaters or scrapers.
Figures 1 and 2 depict two different styles of infra-instrument
building from fragments of broken violins.
Figure 2. The splinters-on-a-string infra-violin .
3.2 Monochords,  Zithers, Guitars
The Strandline guitar (see Figures 3 and 4) has a pickup, a
whammy arm, and steel strings. All of its other components are
objects found at the strandline, the area of a beach at the high
tide marking where sea-borne detritus gets deposited. Notably
string tension is achieved using pebbles which have eroded to
have a hole in the middle, the string being knotted around the
pebble, and the pebbles left to hang over the edge of a table. Of
course, the pebbles provide inadequate weight for a coherent
pitch to be heard on plucking. Indeed, furious one handed use
of the whammy arm is commonly preferred to plucking, the
swinging of the pebbles leading to string tangles, slippages
and scrapings against the pickup, all contributing to a
characteristic sound when amplified. Spring reverberation can
be added to underline the surf guitar inspiration of the design.
Figure 3. The Strandline guitar (front), The Tone Arm Bandit
(record deck tone arm and processing , left and middle, not
discussed here).
Figure 4. The Strandline guitar (detail).
In contrast to the Strandline and the infra-violins, we have
built string instruments with a string tension adequate for
coherent pitch. However, other features of the design suggest
the infra status of the instruments. In many respects a
monochord can be thought of as one of the earliest infra-
instruments, the infra-instrument of choice for Pythagoras
certainly. The purity of the monochord can be nicely corrupted
by the use of a movable bridge pickup to divide the string
length in two. While positions for the bridge pickup can be
found where Pythagorian ratios obtain between the string
segment lengths, we prefer dissonant relationships when a
little more ‘fuel’ is required for live processing and sound
transformation. Our four string zither design also has a
movable centre bridge but this time we employ pickups at
either end. This means we can conventionally amplify the
vibrating string segment over the pickup or obtain ‘behind the
bridge effects’ like those associated with Hans Reichel and
Glenn Branca’s guitar constructions [see 5]. A rewired stereo
volume pedal serves as a foot-operated cross-fader to mix
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
7
these effects. In terms of pitch selection, the zither has just
eight notes at most. However, this constraint enables other
(spectral) possibilities to become the focus of exploration.
Figure 5. Monochord below a double-ended electric zither .
3.3 The CD Player Slide Guitar
Various essential elements from a CD player and an electric
guitar are combined to create an instrument with the rich tonal
and expressive possibilities of neither. The motor-driven sled,
which would typically determine the playback position of a
CD, has its laser replaced with a metal ‘slide’ which governs
the pitch of a single guitar string plucked by an electric motor.
 Figure 6. The CD Player Slide Guitar.
The CD player sled motor is connected to that of a second,
fully functional CD player set on ‘random play’, while the
plucking arm motor is powered by a hacked USB cable. In this
way the position of the slide on the guitar string is directly
related to the playback position of the accompanying CD. We
have found that the actual voltage delivered over USB on some
computers is sensitive to the machine’s CPU load.
Accordingly, we can influence the plucking motor’s speed by
forcing bogus computations at the other end of the USB cable.
Sonic interest arises from the interconnections of these simple
devices, as the various motors and power sources are mutually
influential with unpredictable interactions and interferences.
The physical surface of the CD is also prepared with clear tape
and ink [cf. 4] to cause further irregularities in playback (and
hence slide position), the resultant musical structure deriving
from the (ir)regular functioning of the devices themselves.
3.4 The Victorian Synthesizer
The Victorian Synthesizer is an ongoing project to construct a
synthesizer using methods known to the Victorians but which,
nevertheless, has some of the features and sound generation
and shaping units associated with more modern instruments. It
is this collision of contemporary concepts and aspirations
with outmoded means that creates the Victorian infra-
synthesizer as an imagined historical reject.
Generally, the Victorian synthesizer needs to be electro-
mechanical rather than electronic, manual rather than voltage
control is typically required, and some synthesis units will
present especial challenges. Oscillators constructed through
feeding back the output from amplifiers are, for example, post-
Victorian inventions (c.1920 by Barkhausen and Kurz).
Accordingly, we make the most of electro-magnetism (an 18th
century discovery much celebrated by the Victorians) and the
minimum of circuitry.
Figure 7. Battery-driven loudspeakers.
Our initial, most primitive, most infra, constructions involve
directly driving a loudspeaker with a battery. We make and
break the circuit with a switch or two bare wires to create
impulses and square waves as the speaker cone jumps around.
This basic design can be enhanced by introducing a textured
metal plate (see bottom right of Figure 7) over which a probe
(of the sort used in test equipment) can be scraped to make the
circuit. As the probe varies in its contact with the plate, an
uncannily good rendering of the surface texture can be heard
from the speaker, regular textures producing regular ‘waves’.
The use of two probes and two batteries (wired to associate the
probes with opposite polarities) enables the speaker cone to
flex both in and out. While drawing the probes across textured
conductive surfaces creates manually controlled infra-
oscillators, we have had success with various methods
requiring less intervention. For example, a mercury switch can
be introduced into the circuit and rested on the speaker cone
(see the speaker on the left of Figure 7). As the cone moves in
and out, the switch makes and breaks creating a feedback loop
which will give a form of self-oscillation, at least for a while.
Under certain circumstances, feedback and self-oscillation can
also be created by touching the moving metal band attached to
the speaker cone directly with a probe (see right of Figure 7).
3.5 Home Keyboard, De-Housed
Here, a Yamaha Portasound keyboard, perhaps already an infra-
instrument to some, is opened up and played with ‘restricted
technique’. The device’s lower casing is removed to expose the
circuit-board, then the inverted instrument is placed on the
performer’s lap and played by making connections between
components on the board with a stripped piece of wire.
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
8
 Figure 8. A De-Housed Home Keyboard.
These connections induce tones, bursts of noise and corrupted
‘auto-accompaniment’ sequences which are unpredictable in
their details but generally ‘steerable’ with practice. The
precision afforded by the standard keyboard interface is
eschewed in favour of direct contact with the circuit, and the
performer is continually forced to rethink and re-evaluate their
engagement with the instrument in light of the sonic results.
3.6 Percussive Printer
In this example the two primary motors essential to the
operation of an inkjet printer (paper feed and print head
position) are extracted from the housing and repurposed for
musical goals. Divorced from their initial functionality, the
motors are built into small mechanical percussion instruments
constructed from other writing implements.
Figure 9. Percussive Printer.
The first motor causes a ball-point pen to strike a piece of
wood, bouncing until it comes to rest, while the second drives
a guiro-like device constructed from a pencil and a cable-tie.
The instrument, an infra-percussion kit, is played as it would
be utilised in its everyday incarnation: a text file is sent from a
computer causing the motors to move as if printing the
document. Instead of a page of text, this ‘score’ produces
rhythmic material relating to the horizontal and vertical
position of the characters as well as the density of the text.
3.7 Max Plank and The Mixing Bowl
We have created a number of infra-mixers designed to combine
sound sources (perhaps other infra-instruments) and/or
variably distribute sources to destinations. Our approach has
involved creating a circumscribed ‘micro-environment’ in
which sound makers (including loudspeakers) and sound
transducers (microphones, contact elements, pickups) can
come together and be directly manipulated. A crude example
instantiating a culinary pun is The Mixing Bowl (Figure 10) in
which vibrating devices (including two wiggly pen-toys)
bump up against piezo-elements and microphones of varied
quality, or electro-magnetically interact with guitar pickups.
Figure 10. The Mixing Bowl.
Figure 11. Max and Plank. Max Plank!
A more sophisticated design is Max Plank, a plank of wood
designed as a physical mix surface as well as a controller for
patches running under Max/MSP (™Cycling74). Small
amplifier-loudspeakers (here three half-watt Marshall MS-2
combos) can be directly manipulated and positioned on or
near the wooden surface. On top of the surface are also two
small omnidirectional microphone capsules and the
monochord described earlier, as well as various beaters,
scrapers and vibrators. Beneath the wood are two strips of
piezo film which act as contact microphones for any surface-
contact activity. A Max/MSP patch analyses the relative
amplitudes from these two piezos to gain an impression of the
distribution of sonic activity across the surface. Statistics
describing this distribution are mapped as controllers for
patches which process the sound picked up by the small
capsules and the piezo films. In this context, we have
successfully used Max/MSP patches for pitch shifting,
brassage, granularisation, and other processing techniques.
This all creates an extremely flexible and lively performance
environment. Sounds can be mixed through the surface (and
filtered through the wood) by placing loudspeakers. Moving
the loudspeakers affects the distribution of sound on the table
and hence how the processing is controlled. Sound from the
loudspeakers can be mixed through the wood or, by holding a
loudspeaker above the surface, only routed to the small omni-
capsules. The wood surface itself can be struck or scraped to
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
9
yield percussion sounds or to influence how the processing
takes place. Figure 11 shows the monochord resting on top of
the plank. This creates a greater acoustic resonator for its
string and a larger responsive surface for its bridge piezo. This
can be most spectacularly exploited by amplifying the bridge
piezo through one of the mini-loudspeakers. Feedback can be
controlled by placing or removing the loudspeaker and, on a
good day, its pitch varied by adjusting the area of contact
between monochord base and plank.
4. DISCUSSION
We have presented our notion of an infra-instrument through
contrast with hyper-, meta- and (to keep consistency of Greek
prefixes) cyber-instruments (though we know full well that
cyber should not be equated with virtual on etymological
grounds). Infra-instruments come from beneath and are below
the standards we would want of well-constructed instruments.
However, we believe that infra-instruments are a valuable
addition to the NIME research agenda with its concern for
technology, musical practice and playful aesthetics.
Infra-instruments have strongly featured in performance and
composition work by ourselves and others. For example, based
on the work described here, Nic Collins has composed a piece
The Bowerbird in which several individuals each armed with a
loudspeaker and battery make ‘Victorian synthetic’ sounds
from all around a concert hall. The first author typically
improvises with an ‘assembly’ of infra-instruments,
synthesizers and computer-based transformations. The second
author is concerned to use infra-instruments to explore the
hinterlands between improvisation and composition,
performance and sound sculpture, the digital and the electro-
mechanical. On the basis of this experience, we would like to
make some preliminary evaluative claims.
• Usability.  In many respects, it is not hard to use an infra-
instrument as they do not do very much and what they do is
usually simple. Some merely require starting up and a little
maintenance. Also we have often preferred methods of direct
physical interaction with our infra-instruments and, in one
of the cases where we have discussed interfacing to software
processes, we have noted the value of having a direct
manipulation method for sound mixing (this isn’t really an
interaction ‘metaphor’ here as one really is moving sound
makers around). None of this means, of course, that practice
doesn’t improve things. Indeed, intuition acquired over the
years has been especially useful for homing in on…
• Emergent interactions between components and devices.
The possibilities for feedback between the amplified
monochord and Max Plank were discovered in the course of
an improvised performance. Looking out for interactions
between things can readily become part of the business of
performance because components are more accessible in the
ad hoc or half-built construction that is an infra-instrument.
• Infra-instruments, technique and virtuosity.  Rather than a
virtuosity based on ‘extended technique’, infra-instruments
are concerned with supporting a more mundane, prosaic yet
honest practice. It is a virtuosity of restricted technique, or
bricolage, if you will.
• Infra-instruments and sonic augmentation.  The live
computer-based transformation of instrumental sound is a
common format for contemporary electro-acoustic music.
Much work on meta-instruments and the rest falls naturally
within this interest. However, improvisations and
compositions in this format can run into problems of
spectral-temporal complexity. Traditional instruments are
often already timbrally very rich, so the computer-based
multiplication of this richness can sometimes be excessive,
especially if a virtuoso instrumentalist is having a good
workout. Infra-instruments, precisely by virtue of their
producing degenerate or simplistic tonalities, can work very
well with live processing or computer-derived parts – more
spectral-temporal latitude is available for augmentation.
• Infra-instruments, interaction and ‘assemblies’ of
performance technology.  If you have a bunch of stuff before
you in performance, it makes sense if some of those devices
are dumbed-down-reduced-restricted in the demands they
make on you. The restricted techniques involved in
interaction with infra-instruments often enables a hand to be
kept free for other purposes – more interactional latitude is
available for engaging with other devices. Important to both
authors’ performance aesthetics is the juxtaposition of
devices which vary in technical idiom (acoustic, mechanical,
electric, electronic, digital) [1]. Handling an assembly of
stuff is often facilitated by an infra-instrument design
philosophy, where each device plays its part in a manageable
hybrid environment. Indeed, this is where infra-instruments
come into their own and, ultimately, where we would wish
our design notions to be evaluated: to the extent that they
engender playable and engaging performance settings [1].
The whole performance setting becomes the unit of analysis,
design and evaluation, not just a single ‘new interface for
musical expression’. Our positing of infra-instruments is a
rhetorical move in a general argument for that position.
5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the UK’s Engineering and Physical Sciences
Research Council for granting a Research Fellowship to the
first author, and Nic Collins for divine inspiration.
6. REFERENCES
[1] Bowers, J. Improvising Machines. ARiADA 4. Available
at:     http://www.ariada.uea.ac.uk/ariadatexts/ariada4/    .
[2] Burtner, M. Composing for the (dis)embodied ensemble.
Proceedings of NIME 03, Montreal, Canada 2003.
[3] Burtner, M. Noisegate 67 for metasaxophone. Proceedings
of NIME 02, Limerick, Ireland 2002.
[4] Collins, N. Handmade Electronic Music: The Art of
Hardware Hacking, London, Roultedge, expected 2006.
[5] Hopkin, B. Musical Instrument Design. See Sharp Press,
Tucson, Arizona, 1996.
[6] Impett, J. A Meta-Trumpet(er).   Proceedings International
Computer Music Conference. Aarhus, Denmark, 1994.
[7] Machover, T. ‘Classic’ Hyperinstruments. Available at:
http://brainop.media.mit.edu/Archie/Hyperinstruments/cl    
assichyper.html    .
[8] Mulder, A. Design of virtual instruments for sound
control. PhD Thesis, Simon Fraser University, 1998.
[9] Palacio-Quintin, C. The hyper-flute. Proceedings of NIME
03, Montreal, Canada 2003.
[10]  Pressing, J. Some perspectives on performed sound and
music in virtual environments. Presence, 6, 1-22, 1997.
[11]  Reed Ghazala, Q. Circuit-bending and living instruments.
Experimental Musical Instruments, 9, 21-23, 1993.
[12]  Weinberg, G., Aimi, R.   and  Jennings, K. The  beatbug
network. Proceedings of NIME 02, Limerick, Ireland 2002.
[13]  Young, D. The  hyperbow controller. Proceedings of NIME
02, Limerick, Ireland 2002.
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
10