An Exploration of Peg Solitaire as a Compositional Tool 
 
 
Kirsty Keatch 
Department of Music 
University of Edinburgh 
Alison House 
12 Nicolson Square 
Edinburgh 
EH8 9DF 
kcikeatch@gmail.com 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT  
Sounds of Solitaire  is a novel interface for musica l expression 
based on an extended peg solitaire board as a generator of live 
musical composition. The classic puzzle game, for one person, 
is extended by mapping the moves of the game through a self 
contained system using Arduino and Raspberry Pi, triggeri ng 
both analogue and digital sound. The solitaire board, as 
instrument, is presented as a wood and Perspex box with the 
hardware inside. Ball bearings function as both solitaire pegs 
and switches, while a purpose built solenoid controlled 
monochord and bal l bearing run provide the analogue sound 
source, which is digitally manipulated in real -time, according to 
the sequences of game moves. The creative intention of Sounds 
of Solitaire  is that the playful approach to participation in a 
musical experience, pro vided by the material for music making 
in real-time, demonstrates an integrated approach to concepts of 
composing, performing and listening.  
 
Keywords  
Interface, Peg Solitaire, Monochord, Arduino, Raspberry Pi, 
Pure Data. 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Sounds of Solita ire is an undergraduate final year music 
technology project presented to Edinburgh University. The aim 
is to develop a novel interface to allow for  interactivity between 
the mapping of the moves of a traditional game to both 
analogue and digital music syst ems, in order to generate 
musical compositions. 
 
2. CONTEXT 
In the mid 20th century, John Cage's aleatoric theatre piece, 
Reunion (1968), used a “sound distributing chess board” [1], 
built by Lowell Cross. There, the moves of the game played by 
Cage and his Dadaist friend Duchamp, triggered sounds played 
by musicians, essentially using the chess board as a form of 
mixing desk.  
 
Despite the semi indeterminate nature of the playful 
characteristic of game pieces of music, the rules of the game do 
help with "h arnessing"[2] compositional formats. Such was the 
approach taken by John Zorn and his teams of improvisers in 
pieces such as Lacrosse (1976) and Cobra (1984). The 
application of the game format, in Sounds of Solitaire, is useful 
in structuring musical expe riences where a playful approach is 
taken to composition, by way of interaction with the 
musical material provided. 
 
2.1 Peg Solitaire 
Peg Solitaire has been a popular game for a single player for 
centuries (see Figure 1). The object of the game  is to begin with 
a peg in each of the 33 holes, except the centre, and then, by 
making a series of leapfrog style moves, the peg that is jumped 
over is removed until the situation is reduced to a single peg  in 
the centre. The game does not stop at one solution: it is also 
possible to play the game from starting points other than the 
centre, returning to the chosen point. 
 
 
Figure 1. Traditional peg solitaire g ame 
 
3. EXPERIMENTATION 
Inspiration for the experimentation stage was taken from 
kinetic artist, Jean Tinguely's curious sound sculpture Meta 
Matic 17, which reportedly made “40,000 unique drawings”[3] _ 
on paper strips reminiscent of the graphic scores used in 
pianolas and programmable music boxes. The first stage in the 
project was to experiment with  a way of mapping the moves to 
a musical context using an analogue music generator. The 
moves of a correct solution were mapped onto a punched paper 
strip to be wound through a music box mechanism. An 
analogue sound was produced simply by turning the handl e of 
the music box, but the result was limited to a fixed melody 
punched laboriously onto the paper, the focus of  attention at 
this point was turned to real -time melodic generation and the 
question of action reaction to improve user experience.  
 
3.1 Real-time Interaction  
Joel Chadabe defined interactive music as: "A performance 
process wherein a performer shares control of the music by 
interacting with an instrument that itself generates new 
material”[4]. In the context of the project, a Raspberry Pi and 
Arduino were brought in to make the augmented peg solitaire 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on 
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME’14, June 30 – July 03, 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
102
board operate as a stand -alone instrument. Pure Data was used 
to trigger analogue sounds in real -time using solenoids, while 
simultaneously manipulating the sounds through the use of 
digital signal processing. 
 
3.2 Autonomous self-contained system 
The first prototype experimented with incorporating the 
hardware inside the installation. I have a slight issue that some 
real-time performances and installations have laptop s on show 
even when not in acti ve use by the performer. So one of the 
requirements of the prototyping stage was to use compact and 
relatively powerful hardware such as the Arduino and 
Raspberry Pi. 
 
Raspberry Pi is a tiny computer that can run open source 
software and due to its small size is ideal for use inside the peg 
solitaire installation. The Raspberry Pi runs the CCRMA 
Satellite image to load a Pure Data patch on startup, allowing 
the box to run autonomously, waiting for user interaction, 
through the Arduino. The Raspberry Pi come s with only one 
audio out socket, so in order to feed it audio for installation, a 
compact Behringer Xenyx 302USB soundcard was used to 
improve audio output to that of the Raspberry Pi, while 
providing the necessary balanced input for the contact 
microphone, as well as channels for the monochord.  A 
flowchart of connections in the board is outlined in Figure 2.  
 
Figure 2. Flowchart of connections 
 
Useful for its compact size, the open source Arduino Nano was 
chosen as a micro controller for interfacing the switches and 
solenoids with Pure Data, run on the Raspberry Pi. Like the 
majority of Arduino boards it only has 8 analogue inputs: to 
extend the number of inputs to match the 33 positions of the 
game, five CD-4051 BE multiplexing chips were used, 
providing 40 inputs. The rules of the game were programmed 
onto the Arduino, using se rial communication to send game  
statistics such as number of available moves, peg locations and 
move stage detection as a continuous stream , for mapping in 
Pure Data. 
 
3.3 The Board 
The first working prototype was a wooden box topped with an 
array of split washers as peg holes, copper caps completed the 
circuits to trigger sound (see Figure 3). The Arduino and 
Raspberry Pi were wired inside the box. The copper caps were 
rejected as they had stability problems and were awkward to 
handle. 
 
 
Figure 3. The prototype 
 
In a more elegant solution, the final peg solitaire board is 
designed with an array of 33 x 3 contact points forming tripods 
to hold 20mm ball bearings. The ball bearings act as conductive 
pegs to serve as switches: placing the ball bearing on the tripod 
sets the switch to "on" completing the circuit with the tripod 
and so a musical event can be triggered. (see Figures 4 and 5). 
 
 
Figure 4. The tripod switch 
 
 
Figure 5. Profile of the switches 
 
4. AUDIO DEVELOPMENT 
The main focus of the musical intention was the 
experimentation with automation of an electric guitar. Rather 
than preparing a ready-made guitar, an automated electric 
monochord was built, played by an EBow and s olenoids, 
triggered from within Pure Data, interacting with the solitaire 
game.  
 
4.1 The Monochord 
The monochord is built using a single electric guitar string, 
resonated using an EBow [5] (see Figure 6). A 24 gauge 
unwound string was chosen as it require s less vibration to 
produce the same volume as a thinner string and also provides a 
richer tone. EBows set up electromagnetic fields causing the 
string to vibrate, this is positioned directly above a hum -bucker 
pickup for optimum resonance.  
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
103
 
 
Figure 6. Front side of board showing monochord  
 
To generate seven different notes, six 12v solenoids are 
positioned to act as movable frets (see Figure 7). Often 
solenoids are used in similar applications to press down on 
strings as a mechanical finger, however, the  approach of 
pushing up on the string from below seems to be a more 
elegant, space-saving solution.  
 
 
Figure 7. Solenoid moveable fret 
 
The solenoids and EBow are controlled from serial 
communication from Pure Data to the Arduino. Each time a 
move is mad e, Pure Data triggers a solenoid to raise a fret bar 
to contact the string , depending on  the coordinate of the ball 
bearing on the board. Two clear rods are positioned at either 
end of the fret to keep it orthogonal to the string. The EBow is 
used to contr ol duration of the notes and is controlled in the 
same way as the solenoids.  Each solenoid is connected as 
shown in the circuit diagram in Figure 8.  
 
 
Figure 8. Circuit diagram for one s olenoid 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.2 Ball Bearing Run 
 
Figure 9. Ball bearing run 
 
There was a small issue with what could be done with the ball 
bearing once removed from the board. For Sounds of Solitaire , 
they are placed through a hole in the side of the box to roll 
down a wooden run, punctuated with a pathway of nails of 
various sizes, ad ding a percussive dimension to accompany the 
melody of the monochord (see Figure 9). As the ball bearings 
zig zag down the incline colliding with the nails, the sound is 
picked up by a contact microphone. The floor of the run is lined 
with velvet to reduce  the sounds of rolling, allowing the nail 
sounds to be emphasised, adding an industrial timbre explored 
in the compositional development. 
 
4.3 Composition Generation 
4.3.1 Interaction of player, game and monochord  
The composition generation occurs in Pure  Data which is 
responsible for the mapping of values to melodic patterns for 
the monochord and audio manipulations. Sounds of Solitaire  
invites participation following the rules of the game. Every 
interaction with the board has the potential to create a un ique 
composition within the constraints of the hardware, depending 
on the way in which the game is played. The real-time musical 
composition generation begins with the first move of the game. 
The Arduino has been programmed to report legal moves; if an 
illegal move is made it recognises this and waits for the move 
to be rectified or until a new move is made.  
 
4.3.2 Solenoid Melody  
The monochord solenoid melody is determined by the 
coordinates of the peg that is lifted to be repositioned (see 
Figure 10). Each move generates 3 or 4 different notes 
depending on the direction of the move. The overall effect is 
that positive direction moves have an ascending melodic 
pattern whereas negative direction moves have a descending 
melodic pattern. 
 
4.3.3 Note Duration 
Note duration is determined by the time take n for each move to 
be completed. The EBow is switched on when a peg is lifted to 
be repositioned and switched off after the time taken to 
complete the move has elapsed since the move was completed.  
The composition al effect of the duration feature is that if the 
game is played quickly then the notes will have a shorter 
duration and vice versa.  
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
104
 
Figure 10. Diagram of peg co-ordinates 
 
4.3.4 Effects Modules 
Adding to the sound character of the board, four effects 
modules were programmed: delay, reverb, bit crushing and 
cross synthesis. The effects process both the marble run sounds 
and the monochord; the effects applied depend on the location 
in which the peg is repositioned. Each effect pertains to one of 
the four q uadrants of the board: the upper quadrant triggers 
reverb, the right quadrant triggers bit crushing, the bottom 
quadrant triggers delay and the left quadrant triggers cross 
synthesis (see Figure 11). The middle peg has no effect, and 
there are 4 pegs that  have two effects, these are pegs of 
importance when the common solution is played. The effect 
parameters are controlled by statistics from the game: direction, 
lift duration, peg count and available moves; these values are 
scaled appropriately for each eff ect. The order in which the 
effects modules are triggered builds structure into the pieces.  
 
 
Figure 11. Locations of effect application 
 
4.3.5 Loopers 
Two four-track loopers were implemented: one for the marble 
run and another for the monochord, to estab lish a sense of 
coherence in the composition. Loop playback speed is 
independently controlled on each track, determined by the 
number of moves available when at rest and the direction of the 
preceding move, if the direction was negative then the loop is 
played in reverse and vice versa. The monochord looper 
records a new track each time a new solenoid is triggered; the 
loops are played back at slow speeds determined by the number 
of available moves. The loops are cleared one at a time to 
create a slowly morphing drone texture. 
 
4.3.6 Structure 
The instrumental structure is hard coded to change when 
specific n umbers of pegs are on the board; determining  
different combinations of ma rble run, monochord and loopers. 
The variations in time taken by the player to complete these 
sections mean that each composition acquires an individual 
nature.  
 
The final board design is constructed in wood and Perspex, 
with the electronics contained inside (see Figure 12). A 
demonstration of Sounds of Solitaire  can be found at: 
http://youtu.be/GUkLDZmi9bM  
 
 
 
Figure 12. Final board design  
 
Once the hardware is set up, ultimately it would be possible to 
change the way in which Pure Data responds to the moves. By 
altering the default patch via SSH connection, the solenoid 
mappings, effects and structure can be changed and 
consequently generate radically different pieces. This opens up 
possibilities for changing contexts.  
 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
Sounds of Solitaire  is designed with a playful approach to the 
realisation of an algorithmic, inte ractive interface, capable of 
generating multiple runs of music. Due to the correlation 
between game participation and the material presented for 
making music in real -time, the participant generates variations 
in musical output.  Through the restricted form at of a game, 
Sounds of Solitaire  presents a recognisable interface for real -
time composition generation.  
 
There may be a possibility of using the Raspberry Pi's 
networking potential to allow a larger audience to interact with 
the music generating process via smart phones; for the time 
being, the project is characterised by it s direct physical 
participatory nature. 
 
6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Michael Edwards and Peter Nelson (University of Edinburgh)  
 
7. REFERNCES 
[1] L. Cross, Reunion: John Cage, Marcel Duchamp, 
Electronic Music and Chess, Leonardo Music Journal  Vol. 
9, (1999) 35-42. 
[2] C. Cox, and D. Warner. Audio Culture. Continuum, New 
York, 2008. 
[3] M. Landy, and J. Tinguely. Joyous Machines. Tate 
Publishing, London, UK, 2009. 
[4] J. Chadabe. The Performer Is Us , Contemporary Music 
Review, 18(3) (1999), 25-30. 
[5] EBow Website : http://www.ebow.com/  
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
105