NIME: A Mis-User’s Manual
Sally Jane Norman 
NZSM, Victoria University of 
Wellington, Aotearoa/NZ 
sallyjane.norman@vuw.ac.nz 
Paul Stapleton 
SARC 
Queen’s University Belfast
 p.stapleton@qub.ac.uk
John Bowers 
Independent Artist-Researcher
john.m.bowers@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
Ever since the initiating workshop at the 2001 ACM CHI'01 
Conference, annual New Interfaces for Musical Expression 
conferences have seen a proliferation of work featuring different 
forms of music, research values, philosophical, ethical and 
political standpoints. The 2025 ‘Entangled’ theme celebrates 
this diversity of creative, technical, and social ‘intelligencings’ 
(Thrift [68, p153-154]). It is precisely the non- or 
pluri-paradigmatic character of NIME that is its strength.  
  Drawing on Maria Lugones [41], we characterise NIME less as 
an entangled weave—where threads maintain their separate yet 
assembled and interconnected character—than as a ‘curdling’ 
where relationships are more complex, varied, mutually 
interrupting and shaping, indeterminate and unknown without 
careful dialogue. We do not consider it appropriate to offer 
unifying frameworks or mappings with often hidden 
authoritarian implications. Rather, following Ranci
ère [5], we 
prefer a radically democratic dissensus and, following Lugones, 
a spirit of ‘festive resistance’ where we poke at the limits of our 
inherited metaphors to undermine attempts to provide a fixed 
orderliness, (re)framing topics to kickstart exchange on new 
fertile grounds for collaboration. Multiple kinds and collisions 
of agency, and the lively openness of what some might deem 
‘failure’ are prioritised over the often inhibiting closure and 
certainty of ‘success’ [e.g. 10, 11, 12, 40].  
  Our topics include: multiple ways of making as a means of 
maximising exposure to possible failure; shifting from interfaces 
to interfacing to create arenas for action rather than tools for 
purposes; foregrounding risk, inefficiency and forgetting; 
formulating improvisation as knowing-when and 
composing-the-now; performance practice, settings and 
contingencies; alternative resourcings/reframings for research; a 
wild spirit of tactical oppositionalism, dynamic uncompromise, 
and existential pluralism, to embrace the independence of 
divergent voices.  
Author Keywords
curdling, performance, festive resistance, dissensus, existential 
pluralism, dynamic uncompromise, interfacing, failure, risk  
1. INTRODUCTION
This paper relays a conversation between authors with multiple 
links to NIME and cognate research communities. NIME’s 
diversification is exemplified by themes including Accessibility 
of Musical Expression (Birmingham, 2020), Decolonising 
Musical Interfaces (Auckland, 2022), and Frugal Innovation 
(Mexico, 2023), and by NIME-related publications emphasising 
the epistemological and political complexities our community 
seeks to address [e.g. 34, 40, 46]. These are made explicit by 
this year’s theme, which evokes Barad’s approach to 
entanglement [5] and diffraction, paying tribute to Haraway’s 
description of diffraction as “a mapping of interference, not of 
replication, reflection, or reproduction. A diffraction pattern 
does not map where differences appear but rather maps where 
the effects of difference appear” [32, p466]. Haraway’s and 
Barad’s writings have spawned readership in areas relevant to 
NIME including feminist studies [69], cultural humanities [26], 
science and technology studies (STS) [42], and Human 
Computer Interaction (HCI) [23]. While such interdisciplinarity 
demonstrates the power of entanglement and diffraction 
concepts, diversity of approaches to these concepts also raises 
risks of weakly assured claims of consensus or shared interest, 
and of reluctantly avowed babelisation. Far from critiquing 
entanglement per se, we seek to uphold its values by addressing 
these risks in both form and content, maintaining our triad 
chords as notes of creative mis-use and productive interference. 
Different kinds of practice-based work, and writings of 
musicians and artists emphasising its unique importance, are 
referenced throughout this paper to exemplify the ethos and 
creative conduct we advocate, attending to our – and other – 
multiple voices in their diversity.  
  Referencing Lugones ‘curdling’ and Rancière’s ‘dissensus’, we  
begin by addressing openness to failure as a creative strategy, 
but one that also haunts the diehard ideals that tend to drive faith 
in scientific replication methods. The second section argues for 
interfacing as an activity charged with indeterminacy and 
ambiguity, dislodging the interface from its substantive status as 
an (all-too-)proper noun, to propose a new ‘I’ for NIME. We 
next draw attention to the creative wealth harboured by 
inefficient, forgetful ways of making, leading beyond 
functionalist over-purposing of tools to embrace the playfulness 
of unforeseeable creative encounters. ‘Knowing-when’ and 
‘composing-the-now’ as improvisational strategies then 
reformulate the entanglings of rhythms and agencies, pleading 
for a reimagining of NIME settings to accommodate these lively 
creative energies. Our penultimate section considers research 
framings and re-framings, and the need for design spaces that do 
not merely accept, but encourage and value the dis-order and 
dissensus of work that is necessarily and constantly in progress. 
The demands of tactical oppositionalism, dynamic 
uncompromise, and existential pluralism, end these 
never-fully-curdled/ever-curdling textual aggregations and, as  
keywords, underpin conclusions that reinforce our call for 
diversity and multiplicity, evidenced by cited practices that are 
open to, and that open up, new kinds of creative endeavour.  
  Together with the NIME Mis-User’s Manual zine, linked at the 
end of this paper and distributed at the conference, we hope that 
our un-easy, unorthodox effort is recognisable as a gesture of 
festive resistance, motivated by our deep desire to share and 
dialogue as part of the NIME community.  

2.  FAILURE,  CURDLING,  DISSENSUS,  METHOD   
 
“It's  very  likely  that  on  the  basis  of  the  philosophy  that  every  error  has  to  be  caught,  explained,  and  corrected,  a  system  of  the  complexity  of  the  living  organism  would  not  run  for  a  millisecond.  Such  a  system  is  so  well  integrated  that  it  can  operate  across  errors.”    John  Von  Neumann  [70,   p71]   Von  Neumann  denounced  the  systematisation  of  error  management  that  inhibits  the  re-organisational  plasticity  on  which  evolution  depends.  Re-organisational  plasticity  is  key  to  the  creative  improvisation  authors  of  this  paper  consider  a  determinant  NIME  activity.  Incremental,  optimised,  technology  product-focussed  development  at  odds  with  NIME’s  creative  values  boils  down  to  what  Derrida  calls  a  mere  programmatics  of  invention  [18],  its  lineages  and  path  dependencies  cleanly  mapped  out  by  fail-safe  ways  of  making.  NIME’s  socially  shaped  and  experienced,  human  and  technological-cum-  computational  encounters  are  however  full  of  unpredictability,  accidents,  and  the  possible  failure  intrinsic  to  dynamically  evolving  processes.  Performance  practices  are  the  work  of  purportedly  intelligent,  lively  organisms  playing  with  multiple  kinds  of  agency  ranging  from  the  known  to  the  inconceivable,  and  with  their  simultaneously  operative  temporalities.  Potential  failure  is  integral  to  the  knife-edge  enjoyment  of  performance  and  its  creative  responses  to  AI’s  encoded  biases  and  thinly  calibrated  mimicry  of  humans,  that  risks  turning  us  into  stochastic  parrots  [7].   Insofar  as  errance  means  deviation  from  well-trodden  paths,  the  unforeseen  opportunities  offered  by  multiple  ways  of  making  are  necessarily  offset  by  unforeseen  instances  of  possible  failure.  “Try  again.  Fail  again.  Fail  better.”  —as  Samuel  Beckett  wrote  [6].    In  NIME,  ideals  of  techno-scientific  methodology  sometimes  inform  notions  of  success  and  failure.  The  iterative  improvement  of  a  sensor  technique  or  interface  or  instrument  design  might  be  seen  as  akin  to  the  repeated  testing  and  maturing  of  a  scientific  theory.  The  sustainability,  longevity  and  uptake  of  a  Digital  Musical  Instrument  (DMI)  might  be  seen  as  akin  to  scientific  replication  where  published  work  is  re-enacted  as  a  test  of  its  robustness  and  reliability.  Yet  these  ideals  of  science  and  technology  bump  up  uneasily  against  sociological  and  anthropological  studies  of  scientists’  and  engineers’  actual  practice.  Since  the  1980s,  Harry  Collins  [17]  and  others  have  pointed  out  that  replications  are  rather  rare—scientists  and  engineers  prefer,  on  trust,  to  get  on  with  new  work  of  their  own—and  in  none  of  the  studies  reported  in  [17]  do  we  find  a  researcher  replicating  work  on  the  basis  of  published  accounts  alone—direct  contact  on  some  or  other  detail  of  method  seems  essential,  with  much  failure  along  the  way.  Donald  MacKenzie  [43]  makes  the  striking  claim  that,  other  than  the  US  Manhattan  Project  (1942-1946),  no  nation  has  ever  successfully  built  and  tested  a  nuclear  weapon  on  published  physics  alone  and  without  someone  on  the  development  project  already  having  that  experience.  MacKenzie  and  Spinardi  [44]  thus  draw  the  optimistic  conclusion  that  it  is  possible  to  uninvent  the  Bomb  through  test  and  proliferation  bans  and  waiting  for  expertise  to  die  out.  It  is  in  the  practice  of  making  that  differences  are  revealed.  It  is  in  interaction  that  troubles  are  navigated.  It  is  through  disseminated  know-how  that  communities  of  practice  support  themselves.  It  is  through  forms  of  experimentation  which  continually  expose  themselves  to  risk  and  which  are  equally  likely  to  treat  failure  as  a  friend  as  success  an  imposter  that  we  might  create  vital  cultures  of  musical  making  and  technological  excitement.   
 Maria  Lugones’  work  helps  think  about  the  value  of  multiplicity  as  a  form  of  festive  resistance  to  monoculturalism’s  desire  for  sameness,  a  kind  of  failure  in  purity  that  Lugones  articulates  as  “the  act  of  curdling”  [41,  p478].  In  her  article  Purity,  Impurity,  and  Separation ,  curdling  strategies  include  “playful  reinvention  of  our  names  for  things  and  people,  multiple  naming”  [ibid].  There  is  a  compelling  resonance  with  Jacques  Rancière’s  concept  of  dissensus  [60].  For  Rancière,  since  the  real  is  always  a  matter  of  construction,  “Political  and  artistic  fictions  introduce  dissensus  by  hollowing  out  that  ‘real’  and  multiplying  it  in  a  polemical  way.  The  practice  of  fiction  undoes,  and  then  re-articulates,  connections  between  signs  and  images,  images  and  times,  and  signs  and  spaces,  framing  a  given  sense  of  reality,  a  given  ‘commonsense’.  It  is  a  practice  that  invents  new  trajectories  between  what  can  be  seen,  what  can  be  said  and  what  can  be  done”  [ibid.  p148–9].  Design  fiction  and  absurd  making  are  approaches  familiar  to  NIME  artist-designers  including  Andersen  and  Wakkary  [3],  and  Lepri  et  al  [40].  It  is  this  direction  of  travel  that  we  explore,  as  a  means  of  opening  up  and  nurturing  the  possible.  Elizabeth  Grosz  is  insightful  here,  in  bettering  our  understanding  of  how  the  future  is  dependent  on  but  not  determined  by  the  past.  “The  future  is  that  which  overwrites  or  restructures  the  virtual  that  is  the  past.  The  future  that  emerges  is  only  one  of  the  lines  of  virtuality  from  the  past.  The  past  is  the  condition  for  infinite  futures”  [29  p18].  Grosz  extends  Henri  Bergson’s  conception  of  time  as  duration—in  contrast  to  smooth  and  continuous  growth,  duration  proceeds  through  “division,  bifurcation,  dissociation—by  difference”  [30,  p53].  Crucially,  not  all  (indeed,  not  most)  of  the  virtual  lines  afforded  by  the  past  are  necessarily  ever  realised,  but  by  multiplying  the  manifold  possible  conditions  for  failure,  we  can  become  more  agile  and  less  easy  to  predict  and  control.  And  while  this  position  has  obvious  political  implications,  it  goes  to  the  heart  of  what  is  meaningful  in  our  attempts  at  designing  and  improvising  with  new  musical  instruments   [e.g.  11,  12,  28,  40].   
3.  INTERFACING,  ECOLOGIES,  ARENAS  FOR  ACTION   
 
The  concept  of  interface  was  key  to  the  emergence  of  HCI  as  a  distinct  body  of  research,  evolving  from  orientations  to  computer  systems  development  encountered  in  ergonomics  or  software  engineering.  The  interface  is  the  meeting  ground  between  two  entities  taken  as  bounded  and  separate  but  in  need  of  bringing  together—the  user  and  the  system.  Early  HCI  researchers  who  were  formative  and  programmatic  including  Card,  Moran  and  Newell  [16]  saw  cognitive  psychology  as  the  key  to  understanding  action  at  the  interface,  and  informing  good  technical  design.  This  picture  began  to  creak  through  the  1980s  with  growing  sensitivity  to  the  organisational  and  workplace  contexts  of  computer  use,  networking  technologies,  and  considerations  of  social  organisation  of  the  workplace  and  the  politics  of  automation—as  expressed  in  the  Computer  Supported  Cooperative  Work  (CSCW)  conferences  of  that  time.  While  this  history  is  familiar,  two  contributions  from  the  early  1990s  are  instructive  for  NIME  today.  Grudin  [31]  saw  HCI’s  historical  developments  as  suggesting  that  the  computer  was  ‘reaching  out’  such  that  ‘the  interface’  was  now  a  mobile  boundary  of  concern  rather  than  something  that  could  be  located  at  the  ‘skin’  of  the  machine.  Bowers  and  Rodden  [9]  took  this  still  further  and  argued  for  the  ‘explosion’  of  the  interface  so  that  distributed  fragments  of  interface-work  could  be  seen  wherever  ontologically  distinguished  entities  bump  up  against  each  other—be  they  traditional  HCI’s  user  and  system,  or  early  CSCW’s  networked  system  and  worker—or,  as  we  might  say  
now,  wherever  matters  of  entanglement  are  encountered  in  whatever  situated  form  they  have.  A  turn  to  interfacing  as  a  primary  research  topic,  as  a  new  I  for  NIME,  shifts  focus  to  under-investigated  topics.  Rather  than  somehow  mend  (or  make  seamless)  separations  through  good  design,  how  do  we  create  arenas  for  action  in  which  complex  and  variable  relations  between  elements  can  be  explored  (performing  interfacing)?  Rather  than  making  tools  for  purposes,  how  do  we  mobilise  ambiguity  and  indeterminacy  such  that  multiple  relationships  and  identities  can  be  engendered  (not  just  those  where  intentions  are  realised  within  an  ontologically  fixed  schema  of  user  on  the  one  hand,  system  on  the  other,  and  interface  between)?  Perhaps  we  should,  adapting  a  slogan  of  J.  J.  Gibson’s,  “Ask  not  what’s  in  the  machine  but  what  the  machine  is  in”  and  explore  what  becomes  of  the  machine  and  those  who  ask  when  we  think  this  way,  that  is,  ecologically.     
“What’s  important  is  creating  spaces  for  inspiration,  spaces  where  contentious  thinking  can  be  productive.  Ways  to  take  those  energies  beyond  the  perimeters  of  closed  communities.”   Simon  Waters,  personal  correspondence  with  the  authors     Like  musicking,  interfacing  has  the  potency  of  a  verb.  We  engage  with  the  action-laden,  time-hungry  efforts  of  interfacing  rather  than  the  constituted—albeit  relational—tools  that  are  interfaces ,  and  with  performance  practices  committed  to  ethico-onto-epistem-ology’s  intertwining  of  ethics,  knowing,  and  being  [5,  p185].  Side-stepping  separations  between  ontology  and  epistemology,  we  subscribe  to  the  narrative  processes  of  ontography:  “investigations  of  particular  world-making  and  world-sustaining  practices  that  do  not  begin  by  assuming  a  general  picture  of  the  world…”  as  defined  by   Lynch  [42,  p444].  Our  tools  are  engendered,  used,  and  misused  in  arenas  of  festive  resistance  which  welcome  the  quirkiness,  redundancy,  and  oddity  of  idiosyncratic  encounters  that  condition  deep  diversity  evoked  by  Thrift  [68,  p119]  and  Agre  [1,  p281].      
4.  INEFFICIENCY,  FORGETTING,  GESTURAL  ABUNDANCE   
 
“Inefficiency  and  forgetting  are  threatened  species  in  our  creative  ecology.”  Waters  [73,  p59]  [paraphrased]   In  his  durably  relevant  text,  Waters  evokes  information  overload—driven  by  the  constant  quest  for  enhanced  storage  of  and  access  to  data—as  a  threat  to  inefficiency  and  forgetting,  which  he  names  as  preconditions  for  creativity.  Yet  we  need  these  threatened  species,  just  as  we  need  dithering,  errance,  tinkering,  and  choosing  to  tackle  unnecessary  obstacles  as  useful  if  not  optimal  courses  of  action  where  situations  are  not  amenable  to  quick-fix,  one-track,  goal-focussed  approaches,  as  recounted  by  Kirsh  and  Maglio  [35],  Law  [38],  Suits  [67].  Such  approaches  are  at  loggerheads  with  those  sometimes  witnessed  at  NIME,  where  systematic  demonstrations  of  successive  sensors  or  programmed  functions,  however  technically  impressive  and  intriguing,  rarely  make  for  the  most  exciting  creative  experiences.  Improvisational  performance,  on  the  other  hand,  involves  riskily  live,  crafted  encounters  of  multiple  species  and  temporalities.  In  short,  NIME  activities  demand  a  trade-off  between  being  open  to  the  propensity  of  things  and  timescapes,  and  re-membering  models  of  encounter  that  can  inspire  further  creative  work.  Gauging  this  trade-off  is  risky,  but  to  underestimate  its  significance  is  to  make  live  performance  either  a  questionably  memorable  cry  in  the  wilderness  or  a  mechanistic  exercise  in  iterative  prototyping.    
  Recognition  of  the  inherent  politics  and  diverse  legacies  of  musical  instruments  evoked  by  Morreale  et  al   [56]  beyond  western  innovation-centrist  tendencies,  incites  reflection  on  the  roles  and  influences  of  memory  in  our  work.  By  providing  insights  into  musicking’s  social  and  technical  affordances,  NIME  media  archaeological  investigation  of  instruments  from  different  parts  of  the  globe,  exemplified  by  practices  of   Cadavid  [15]   and  Armitage  et  al  [4],  opens  up  exciting  terrain  for  21st  century  explorer  developers  and  performers.  In  parallel,  the  swift  obsolescence  of  recent  technologies—  programmed  or  unplanned—reinforces  the  need  to  rethink  our  notions  of  technological  time  [20].  The  drive  to  prolong,  adapt,  reuse,  or  repurpose  instruments  and  DMIs,  acknowledging  maintainability  and  sustainability  issues  as  a  community  [47,  53],  is  prompting  appreciable  creative  responses  [21].  The  wicked  question  that  then  arises  is  whether  recycling  and  updating  might  not  turn  NIME’s  infamous  DMI  graveyard  into  a  land  of  zombies.      Regardless  of  the  cultural  importance  of  memory  and  legacies,  of  archives  and  historically  charged  objects,  the  social  value  of  live  performance  energies  risks  being  overridden  by  preservationist  agendas  and  by  zeal  to  digitise  everything—  willfully  or  unconscionably  generating  resources  for  AI.  Such  zeal  might  overlook  the  human  need  to  forget  (at  the  very  least,  to  avoid  cognitive  overload),  and  the  fact  that  ill  recalled  or  misconstrued  readings  of  past  events  have  opened  up  unexpected  creative  avenues  (flawed  renaissance  understandings  of  the  Aristotelian  unities  inspired  writers  including  Shakespeare).  NIME  explorations  of  legacy  practices  and  artefacts  may  productively  err,  misread,  and  misinterpret  in  a  context  of  live  creation,  not  museification.     A  practice-grounded  example  of  the  value  of  errance  is  illuminated  by  Conor  McAuley’s  description  of  learning  the  one-handed  roll  technique  on  the  drum  kit  while  studying  the  playing  of  Chris  Corsano  [49].  Over  time,  McAuley’s  approach  diverged  from  the  original  technique  in  a  way  that  could  be  described  as  less  efficient,  causing  him  at  one  stage  to  think  he  “was  employing  the  wrong  technique  entirely”  [ibid,  Section  2.3].  Later,  he  recognised  that  his  failure  to  precisely  imitate  the  conventional  version  of  the  one-handed  roll  was  in  many  ways  a  positive—a  realisation  that  occurred  while  watching  Mark  Sanders’  performance  of  the  technique—similarly  less  focused  on  optimisation  and  more  about  opening  up  new  musical  pathways.  “It  was  simply  a  different  way  of  getting  my  hands  around  the  drum,  another  nod  to  motor  abundance”  [ibid].  Here  McAuley  is  referencing  a  recent  shift  in  the  study  of  skillful  movement  in  psychology,  from  “motor  redundancy”  as  excessive  and  undesirable,  to  what  Latash  calls  “motor  abundance”  [37]  as  multiplicity  providing  for  greater  adaptability  and  resilience.  This  point  has  been  developed  in  the  context  of  ecological  aesthetics  and  musical  interaction  by  Rodger  et  al  [61].      On  related  lines,  David  Sudnow’s  The  Ways  of  The  Hand  [66]  is  an  account  of  his  development  as  an  improvising  jazz  pianist.  He  discusses  pianists  who  notably  accompany  their  playing  with  swaying,  quietly  singing  to  themselves,  holding  a  hand  poised  in  the  air,  all  manner  of  what  Wanderley  et  al  describe  as  ‘ancillary  gestures’  [72]—gestures  which  do  not  seem,  on  first  inspection,  to  matter  to  the  piano’s  striking  of  strings  by  hammers  propelled  by  fingers.  Sudnow  started  experimenting  with  introducing  these  activities  into  his  own  playing  and  experienced  considerable  benefit.  Rather  than  being  ‘ancillary’  adornments  to  performance  they  enabled  him  to  ready  his  body  and  parts  of  it  to  what  might  happen  next  in  the  unfolding  music  or  what  needs  response,  for  example,  a  co-performer’s  contribution  or  an  unexpected  resonance  from  a  complex  chord  he  had  found  himself  playing.  A  hand  poised  in  the  air  could  fall  down  to  
parts  of  the  keyboard  that  a  hand  still  resting  on  the  last  keys  played  might  stumble  over.  A  swaying,  humming  body  might  give  a  literal  sway  to  the  music  that  a  taut,  silent  body  would  not—and  so  forth.  Rather  than  separate  ancillary  from  functional  gestures,  or  think  about  what’s  efficient  and  inefficient,  or  what’s  risky  and  safe,  or  what’s  remembered  and  what’s  forgotten,  or  right  or  wrong,  we  prefer  to  ask  about  the  potential  musicality  of  all  these  matters.  Inefficient  machines  and  performers  that  take  ridiculous  risks,  forget  all  that  is  trusted,  true  and  worthy,  amidst  a  flurry  of  camp  ancillary  gestures  may  well  rock  hard.   
5.  KNOWING-WHEN,  COMPOSING-THE-  NOW:  IMPROVISATION  AND  PERFORMANCE   
 
Joel  Ryan  describes  “Knowing  when”  in  his  Music  and  Machines  IX  seminar  [62]  as  a  knowledge  that  is  as  articulate  as   language:  performance  actions  mobilise  an  acute  sense  of  precision  and  immediate  awareness,  where  reaction  times  are  often  much  faster  than  self-conscious  thinking  or  action.  Tangible  and  intangible  things  with  which  we  engage  in  performance  are  more  than  just  sensitively  placed:  they  are  opportunistic  agents  in  a  collaborative  process.  “Knowing  when”  seminar  conversations  raised  knotty  (entangled)  questions,  regarding  the  paucity  of  our  imaginations  in  applying  logical/digital  knowledge  with  its  necessarily  discretised  parameters  to  the  necessarily  intersensory,  physical,  sensible,  embodied  experience  of  musicking.  And  as  a  corollary  or  counterweight,  questions  regarding  the  viability  of  our  all-too-human  quest  to  match  discretised  abstractions  of  computational  processes  onto  the  grainy  resistance  of  our  embodied  experience.  Ryan’s  “Knowing  when”  is  anchored  in  performance  practice  informed  by  his  deeply  interdisciplinary  interests,  and  longstanding  collaboration  with  STEIM  and  the  late  Michel  Waisvisz.      Waisvisz  introduced  his  2006  “On  composing  the  now”  NIME  performance  as  “a  live  electronic  performance  of  musical  thoughts  about  immediacy,  involvement,  touch,  energy,  engagement,  grooves,  narrative  sound,  reckless  jumps,  modest  anticipation,  desired  change,  intention  space,  absent-minded  play,  gamble,  instinct,  and  disaster  executed  by  leaving  these  words  behind  and  diving  into  sound”  [71,  p423].  Improvisation  curdles  multiple  forms  of  existence  and  entangles  threads  of  dialogue,  generating  performance  experienced  as  exuberantly  overflowing,  as  poignant  bearer  of  what  Thrift  calls  “the  precarious  ‘emptiness’  of  the  now”  [68,  p135],  or  as  anything  and  everything  else  implied  by  “knowing-when”.      Let’s  add  two  further  ways  to  think  about  temporality  in  relation  to  improvisation,  one  inspired  by  Elizabeth  Grosz  and  another  by  Mark  Fisher.  First,  an  extract  from  a  film  essay  by  Stapleton  et  al  that  references  Grosz’s  approach  to  futurity:  “But  all  the  while  the  virtual  remained  material,  mattering  in  the  multiple  senses  of  that  word,  providing  resistance,  confronting  me  bodily,  co-constituting  virtual  lines  from  the  past  into  the  condition  of  infinite  futures  (after  Elizabeth  Grosz)”  [65].  Entanglements  are  what  we  investigate  and  that  is  our  improvisatory  prima  materia .  Improvisation,  after  Grosz,  might  be  understood  as  emerging  from  a  lived  laboratory  of  material  possibilities  in  which  open  futures  are  made  through  improvisatory  acts,  entangled  in  the  present  by  the  virtual  threads  of  the  past  and  the  future  [29,  p18].  Improvisation  is  an  acceptance  or  even  a  celebration  of  coevalness.  A  shared  now.  Crucially,  for  Grosz,  duration  is  qualitative,  structured  by  specific  and  unique  rhythms,  which  are  only  rendered  
quantitative  through  the  spatialisation  of  time  into  discrete  and  standardised  units  [29,  p17].  Many  musicians  are  intimately  familiar  with  the  distinction  between  the  quantitative  timing  of  ‘the  grid’  in  step  sequencers  and  DAW  timelines,  in  contrast  to  the  qualitative  nature  of  felt  time  which  makes  possible  groove  and  swing.  Knowing  when  in  qualitative  musical  time  thus  requires  intersubjective  negotiation.     Second,  Fisher.  In  the  context  of  networked  forms  of  improvised  music  making  (geographically  separate  but  connected  online),  it  can  become  more  difficult  to  develop  a  shared  sense  of  the  here  and  now.  Improvising  at  a  distance  can  be  eerie ,  as  Fisher  (after  Sigmund  Freud)  describes  the  absence  of  that  which  should  be  present  [22].  We  are  together,  but  apart,  often  feeling  and  falling  in  and  out  of  time  at  the  same  time.  While  latency  is  a  reality  in  any  acoustic  environment  due  to  the  speed  of  sound,  it  is  more  pronounced  the  greater  the  separation  between  players,  and  even  the  speed  of  the  light  used  in  optical  cables  to  transmit  audio  data  online  is  bound  by  physical  limits  based  on  distance.  While  this  is  not  a  significant  issue  for  many  forms  of  remote  communication,  it  poses  challenges  for  certain  forms  of  real-time  music  making.  The  sense  of  eerie  temporal  separation  that  is  amplified  by  the  spatiotemporal  distances  of  network  musicking  can  bring  both  micro-  and  macro-  temporal  discontinuities  to  the  fore.  However,  in  our  experience  [65],  even  in  such  conditions,  with  enough  care,  a  shared  sense  of  time  is  possible—a  coevalness  no  matter  how  fractured,  layered,  desynchronised,  proleptic  or  analeptic.  Such  care-ful  navigation  of  discontinuity  has  aspects  in  common  with  the  concept  of  charity  in  Umberto  Eco’s  semiotics  [19],  i.e.  we  never  really  know  precisely  what  other  people  mean  when  they  utter  a  specific  word  (your  ‘green’  is  not  identical  to  my  ‘green’),  but  we  still  manage  to  communicate  through  paying  attention  to  resonances  that  can  bridge  these  differences.  Knowing  when  in  improvisation  requires  focused  attention,  but  also  something  like  this  form  of  charity,  where  shared  resonances  can  articulate  dissensual  grooves.      In  her  studies  of  jazz  improvisation,  Ingrid  Monson  takes  as  her  starting  point  the  collective  production  of  rhythm  and  how  this  is  accomplished  by  the  bass,  piano  and  drums  [54,  p26-72].  She  introduces  each  instrument  before  discussing  soloists’  melodic  activities.  Indeed,  Monson’s  informants  insist  on  the  melodic  and  harmonic  potential  of  each  instrument  in  the  rhythm  section.  A  ‘walking’  bassist  can  break  the  pattern  to  echo  or  vary  one  of  the  ‘front  line’s’  melodies.  A  ‘comping’  pianist  can  bring  out  right  hand  melodies  from  an  otherwise  chordal  accompaniment.  A  drummer  can  select  particular  drums  to  shift  the  harmonic  register  of  the  ensemble  or  can  play  short  sequences  of  pitches  (e.g.  on  tuned  toms).  In  short,  each  instrumentalist  has  a  melodic-rhythmic  flexibility  which  enables  varied  relationships  to  be  taken  to  each  other  and  to  any  soloist  who  might  be  playing  at  the  time.  For  nearly  all  of  Monson’s  informants  it  is  the  collective  production  of  a  groove  which  makes  for  effective  jazz  ensemble  playing.  The  groove  is  an  aesthetic  ideal  but  also  a  matter  of  practical  coordination  between  players—real-time  achievement  of  coevalness,  not  any  kind  of  enactment  on  a  grid—where  players  maintain  a  dynamic  flexibility  of  identity  with  heterogeneous  means  at  their  disposal  to  create  hooks  or  handles  for  others  to  latch  onto.  Coevalness  and  knowing-when,  when  time  is  non-gridded,  curdled.     Marquez-Borbon  and  Stapleton  in  the  The  NIME  Reader  [46]  argue  that  “performance  is  the  biggest  casualty”  at  NIME.  While  “NIME’s  mix  of  disciplines,  methodologies,  outputs  and  proclaimed  openness  to  diversity  has  been  widely  celebrated  […]  Not  all  actors  in  NIME  are  speaking  from  the  same  position  of  power,  and  an  openness  to  diversity  does  not  automatically  result  in  other  voices  being  heard”  [46].  In  the  past  decade,  there  have  been  improvements  in  this  area,  exemplified  by  Federico  
Visi’s efforts to increase access to conference performances 
through greater attention to peer-reviewed Music Proceedings 
for NIME 2019. These efforts have unfortunately been 
inconsistent, and pragmatic issues remain, such as the 
pay-to-play conference fee model which disincentivises 
freelance musician participation, as well as the bizarre 
requirement to anonymise music submissions resulting in the 
censoring of performers’ submitted video documentation. More 
fundamentally, Owen Green’s observations on NIME’s lack of 
engagement with “wider issues” of performance practice 
continue to ring true [27]. As Green points out, and 
demonstrates through his practice [e.g. 28], practice-led research 
can be “complementary to quantitative, controlled-condition 
methods” by augmenting the “generality of observation” found 
in these methods “in order to contend with musical practice in 
local, socially entangled, contentious and noisy complexity” 
[27]. But what would this look and sound like? What structures 
need to be bent, or reimagined entirely, to encourage all NIME 
participants to attentively engage with the messiness of 
performance practice?  
6. REFRAMING RESEARCH,
INTERPRETATIVE MULTIPLICITY,
MANY MAKINGS
Diversification of NIME research is borne out by responses to 
thematic shifts, and solicitations for contributions from beyond 
the self-perpetuating expertise of academic communities. The 
need nevertheless remains to durably and equitably strengthen 
NIME research links, internally and externally. While financial 
means and access to infrastructure are prominent research 
enablers or inhibitors, focus on specific kinds of environments 
may inhibit the multiplicity of research avenues, if not their 
potential linkages. For Pelinski et al, while “most practice 
research contributions in NIME do not address the technical 
phases of instrument building […] Technical processes are still 
mainly discussed from linear, goal-oriented narratives focused 
on technical implementation.” [59, p11]. Proposing critical 
practice as their locus of knowledge production, they assert 
scientific legitimacy while acknowledging the messy 
complexities of art-design-engineering type inquiry. Beyond 
institutional disciplinary or interdisciplinary nexūs, and beyond 
the dictates of material resources, alternative research 
reframings might more broadly reference the communicability 
and affective contagion of live performance as a force that 
exceeds and binds communities. This is what Simondon calls 
the transductive power of aesthetic intention: leading “from one 
domain to another; it is the exigency of an overflowing and of 
the passage to the limit; it is the opposite of the sense of 
propriety, of the limit, of the essence contained in a 
definition…”  [63, p210]  
Another curdling strategy proposed by Lugones is: 
“undermining the orderliness of the social ordering; marking our 
cultural mixtures as we move” [41, p478]. This strategic move 
against order and clarity is reminiscent of Gaver et al’s framing 
of ‘ambiguity as a resource for design’ [24]. Those authors 
argue that ‘things themselves are not inherently ambiguous’ but 
rather ambiguity is created through an ‘interpretative 
relationship between people and artefacts’ [ibid. p235], an 
argument that opens out a design space for artefacts that have 
ambiguity built in or themselves afford polyphonic 
interpretation [ibid]. Lugones’ perspective is helpful in pointing 
to how marking heterogeneity in social (dis-)ordering is a 
primary source for creating meaningful ambiguities.  
  If we are serious about enabling curdled cultural mixtures, then 
many of our approaches to research, making and musicking, 
need not so much adjustment as multiplication. That is, our 
methods, musics, and knowings become legion. But, in the face 
of democratic dissensus, we cannot do this naively in the hope 
that some peaceful rationalism will even everything out. 
Entanglement becomes less a phenomenon, more a way of 
being. And it may well be awkward and painful as much as 
elegant and joyful.   
  Through work in NIME and adjacent fields over the last 15 
years, John Bowers and colleagues [e.g. 10, 12, 13] have staged 
multi-participant making sessions which are thematised, 
typically abstractly or poetically, sometimes around a design 
‘provocation’, more rarely in terms directly derived from an 
academic research preoccupation. Multiple responses are 
invited, proposed, compared and contrasted, and worked on, in 
varying patterns of collaboration, emphasising breadth rather 
than depth, usually over the course of a few days ending with a 
public showing. If these making sessions are hosted by an 
institution, the aim is to make a bona fide contribution to their 
concert or exhibition program, or however they engage with 
their publics. The philosophy is one where everything made is 
treated as fully-(or equally-)fledged, not a prototype or demo. 
This is not work-in-progress (because all work is in progress). 
Similarities and differences between things made are discussed 
and annotated. These annotations may be used to, say, structure 
a performance and, subsequently perhaps, to organise 
documentation or, even, research implications. But consensus is 
not assumed, nor is convergence hoped for. Rather, a 
multi-lateral exploration of possibility is anticipated— Many 
Makings in the title of [10]—where disciplinary, conceptual, and 
practical affairs are taken together.  
7. TACTICAL OPPOSITIONALISM,
DYNAMIC UNCOMPROMISE,
EXISTENTIAL PLURALISM
“Personally, over the years, I have absolutely been driven by an 
oppositional stance: ‘lots of people do this, so let’ s not’. And, I 
confess, much like early STS, this was motivated by the belief 
that ‘science’, whatever that is, was over-believed and 
over-privileged— in the era of vaccine and climate scepticism 
this is of course disastrous and all of Latour, Haraway and me 
[cough]  have completely changed our minds. My 
oppositionalism is  now more tactical. When Owen Green and I 
wrote our piece a few years ago it was to open out ‘design 
spaces’, create new topics and ways of thinking about research 
performatively—not just to take the piss. Taking the piss is 
indeed a viable research strategy but only taking the piss, less 
so. You need other methods too!” [Bowers self-interview, 2024].  
Continuing with curdling strategies from Lugones: “announcing 
the impurity of the pure by ridiculing his inability at 
self-maintenance” [41, p478]. The false promise of 
self-sufficiency has been critiqued by many, not least by Donna 
Haraway: ‘Nothing makes itself; nothing is really autopoietic or 
self-organizing’ [33, p58]. While this can be (mis-)interpreted as 
a jab at the enactivist concept of autopoiesis developed by 
Maturana and Varela [48], Haraway advocates for a way of 
understanding systems that is less focused on boundary making 
and more on interaction: ‘Sympoiesis is a word proper to 
complex, dynamic, responsive, situated, historical systems. It is 
a word for worlding-with, in company’” [33, p58]. Lugones is 
also wise to the sympoietic and relational dimensions of 
curdling, taking frictions in our interactions a step further: “We 
not only create ourselves and each other through curdling but 
also announce ourselves to each other through this art, our 
curdled expression. Thus curdled behavior is not only creative 
but also constitutes itself as a social commentary” [41]. 
Lugones’ argument gives weight to the view that NIME’s 
creative contributions should be subjected to a similar level of 
tactical oppositionalism and criticality as other forms of social 
discourse, and that such a process can create meaningful 
intersections and interdependencies. Performance making at 
NIME, often misunderstood and under-supported, would 
benefit—like all NIME facets—from thoughtful, rigorous 
critique from its multiple constituencies. This interference of 
angles, like those relayed by a diffraction grating, would yield 
multiple beams—views—that illuminate and provide fresh 
colour to our endeavours as a community.  
  NIME’s openings onto feminist, postcolonial, relational 
philosophies, and onto Malafouris’ and Hodder’s theories of 
material engagement [45, 35], are timely. We are well placed to 
develop a privileged perspective as a community embracing 
musicking described by Waters as a social system with 
distinctive practices [74], and as a platform whose history we 
are uniquely competent to explore and creatively exploit. 
Etienne Souriau affirms that a historical review of philosophy 
lets us embrace existential pluralism: Aristotle’s identification 
of actual and potential being, the status of imaginaries and of 
future contingents, resulted in the “extreme plurality of modes 
of existence” developed throughout the Middle Ages [64,  
p104]. Whether dealing with technical artefacts or social and 
cognitive transformations (all inextricably entangled), we can 
draw on a wealth of references from beyond familiar 
modern/post-modern western techniques and bodies of 
knowledge, as inspiration for radically ‘new’ work.   
  Terms employed by indigenous authors including Māori 
philosopher Carl Mika, testifying to the violence to which  
their philosophies are subject, resonate with those of us 
engaged in willfully non-normative, academically problematic 
performance practices: “While all walks of colonised life 
encourage concussion (a violent shaking)—in which the self is 
launched out from a ground of unity into one of disconnected 
illusion—the one we have to deal with most frequently as 
academics is the university. It is an interesting observation 
that, under the guise of objectivity, we often set out to 
‘dis-cuss’ (shake apart) things as academics.” [52, p48]. In 
asking whether the western tradition has the intellectual 
resources to overcome its philosophical blindness, Mika and 
Peters note a phenomenon that, “in the fashion of Barad, needs 
to be cut out and defined just momentarily as a ‘local 
resolution within… inherent ontological indeterminacy’. (...) 
this temporary encapsulation must occur, it seems, so that we 
do not fall victim to any perceived grandiosity (and hence 
unassailability) of Western philosophy.” [51, p1126].  
  Though the disciplinary—or anti-disciplinary—scope of our 
community inevitably harbours irreconcilable views, we could 
well heed Geoff Bowker’s take on biodiversity databases, 
evoking “the forging of a dynamic uncompromise between 
agonistic groups in the very creation and structuring of 
biodiversity databases. The databases being developed today do 
not impose a hegemonic solution: they unfurl within them, at the 
level of data structure and data processing algorithms, the 
contradictions folded into their creation.”[14, p751].   
   In a not dissimilar vein, Chantal Mouffe’s reflection on ways 
to deal with the tensions of democratic systems underpins 
“agonistic pluralism”, a strategy devised neither “to eliminate 
passions nor to relegate them to the private sphere in order to 
render rational consensus possible” [57, p755-756]. On the 
contrary, agonistic confrontation is the very condition of 
existence of democracy. Here, we choose to take the risk of 
being misconstrued as casual, noting that Mouffe’s defence of 
agonistic pluralism as a safeguard  for deeply  democratic 
functioning appears as important and as urgent for NIME itself, 
as for the wider world to which our community belongs.    
8. MANY CONCLUSIONS
 “Every system contains forces that are antagonistic to its own 
perpetuation”  Edgar Morin  [55]  
 
“It is good that  certain things do not exist, so that we have to 
create them; so that  if they are to exist, they are in need of us.” 
Etienne Souriau [64]  
How can a paper  which urges multiplicity, complexity, 
incompleteness, openness, failure,  and contradiction have a 
conclusion section? Why would such a paper do that to itself? 
But to conclude a paper is not to conclude a discussion. And to 
conclude is not to occlude. Rather, to provide an ending here, 
we intend  to open up what is possible and not obscure our 
workings. This conclusion is less a shorthand version of what 
has gone before  than an invitation for others to continue in the 
same spirit. This is our take-home to take home. 
   In keeping with our insistence on the diversity and multiplicity 
needed to optimise NIME’s unique entanglements, we are wary 
of singular  conclusions and the  deceptively knowing aura  of 
how-to manuals. Beyond troubleshooting rubrics, such manuals 
in their admirable efforts to smooth user paths and sooth user 
frustrations overlook the creative potential of failure,  errance, 
forgetfulness, and mis-use.  We conclude our Mis-User’s 
Manual with summary principles that are indicative of the 
philosophy developed in this paper and, importantly, have an 
open invitational quality.  
address openness to failure as a creative  strategy, find a place 
for dissent and variation, with faith in scientific replication and 
convergence not required 
broaden your concerns into  the ecologies and ecosystems your 
work is embedded  in, suggests, or takes for granted, explore 
‘interfacings’ as a new I for NIME 
find value in inefficient machines and risky performance, fear 
not the apparently superfluous or mis-targeted  
rescue performance from the demo, treat improvisatory action in 
a shared now as primary, where our sensitivities to when are 
most on display 
poke at the limits of inherited metaphors to undermine attempts 
to provide a fixed  orderliness, make many things with a light 
touch and tolerate the many interpretations that will emerge 
(re)frame topics to kickstart exchange on new fertile grounds for 
collaboration, ground these  grounds not in agreement but in 
vibrant uncompromise and festive dissent 
These invitation-principles are happy to exist amongst many 
others. And to continue their prospective character, we provide 
access to a zine at the conference, giving further illustrations of 
related work and deepening  our invitation  (zine archived at 
github https://github.com/JohnMBowers/MisUsersManualZine) 
9. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Our thanks to Kristina Andersen, Owen Green, Lauren Hayes, 
Bennett Hogg, Joel Ryan, Lucy  Suchman, Simon Waters and 
their/our communities. Apologies to Georges Perec. 
10. ETHICS STATEMENT
We have no conflicts  of interest  in carrying out this work 
(financial or non-financial).  Our work has no implications 
requiring a research  ethics review (e.g. the research does not 
involve participation of animal subjects, human or otherwise). 
11. REFERENCES
[1] P. Agre. 2002. The Market Logic of Information. In H.
Böhme, C. von Braun, M. Burckhardt, W. Coy, F. Kittler,
H. Ulrich Reck (eds.). Die Politik der Maschine. 275-283.
Hans-Bredow Institut.
[2] P. Agre. 1997. Toward a Critical Technical Practice:
Lessons Learned in Trying to Reform AI. In G. Bowker, L.
Gasser, L. Star, B. Turner (eds.). Bridging the Great
Divide: Social Science, Technical Systems, and
Cooperative Work. Erlbaum.
[3] K. Andersen, R. Wakkary. 2019. The magic machine
workshops: making personal design knowledge. In
Proceedings of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors
in computing systems. 1-13.
[4] J. Armitage, T. Magnusson, V . Shepardson, H. Ulfarsson.
2022. The Proto-Langspil: Launching an Icelandic NIME
Research Lab with the Help of a Marginalised Instrument,
Proc. NIME 2022.
[5] K. Barad. 2007. Meeting the Universe Halfway. Quantum
Physics and the Entanglement of Matter and Meaning.
Duke University Press.
[6] S. Beckett. 1983. Worstward Ho. John Calder.
[7] E.M. Bender, T. Gebru, A. McMillan-Major, S. Shmitchell.
2021. On the Dangers of Stochastic Parrots: Can Language
Models Be Too Big?, ACM FAccT’21.
[8] G. Born. 2010. For a Relational Musicology: Music and
Interdisciplinarity, Beyond the Practice Turn. The 2007
Dent Medal Address. Journal of the Royal Musical
Association. 135:2, 205-243.
[9] J. Bowers, T. Rodden. 1993. Exploding the interface:
experiences of a CSCW network. In Proceedings of the
INTERACT '93 and CHI '93 Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '93), 255–262.
[10] J. Bowers, T. Shaw, S. Bowen. 2016. Many Makings:
Entangling Publics, Participation and Things in a Complex
Collaborative Context. In Proceedings of Designing
Interactive Systems, DIS 2016, 1246-1257.
[11] J. Bowers, O. Green. 2018. All the Noises: Hijacking
Listening Machines for Performative Research. Proc
NIME 2018.
[12] J. Bowers, J. Richards, T. Shaw, J. Frieze, B. Freeth, S.
Topley, N. Spowage, S. Jones, A. Patel, Amit, L. Rui,
2016. One Knob To Rule Them All: Reductionist
Interfaces for Expansionist Research. Proc NIME 2016.
[13] J. Bowers, J. Richards, T. Shaw, R. Foster, A. Kubota.
2023. Raw Data, Rough Mix: Towards an Integrated
Practice of Making, Performance and Pedagogy. Proc
NIME 2023.
[14] G. Bowker. 2010. Mapping Biodiversity. International
Journal of Geographical Information Science, 739-754.
[15] L.P. Cadavid. 2020. Knotting the memory// Encoding the
khipu. Proc. NIME 2020.
[16] S. Card, T.P. Moran, A. Newell. 1983. The Psychology of
Human Computer Interaction. Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
[17] H. Collins. 1985. Changing Order: Replication and
Induction in Scientific Practice. Sage Publications.
[18] J. Derrida (1987). English version 1989.  Psyche:
Inventions of the other. Translated by C. Porter. In
L.Walters, W. Godzich, (eds.), Reading de Man reading,
25–65. University of Minnesota.
[19] U. Eco. 1977. Kant and the Platypus: Essays on Language
and Cognition. Harcourt Brace and Co.
[20] D. Edgerton. 2006. The Shock of the Old. Profile Books.
[21] A. Fiordelmondo, G. Zuccolo, S. Canazza, R. Masu. 2024.
Longevity in NIME research: a case study using
time-based media art preservation models. Proc NIME
2024.
[22] M. Fisher. 2017. The Weird and the Eerie. Watkins Media
Limited.
[23] C. Frauenberger. 2019. Entanglement HCI The Next
Wave? ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 27, 1:2.
[24] W.Gaver, J. Beaver, S.  Benford, 2003. Ambiguity as a
resource for design. Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on Human factors in computing systems,
233-240.
[25] W. Gaver, A. Boucher, N. Jarvis, D. Cameron, M.
Hauenstein, S. Pennington, J. Bowers, J. Pike and R.
Beitra. 2016. The Datacatcher: Batch Deployment and
Documentation of 130 Location-Aware, Mobile Devices
that Put Sociopolitically-Relevant Big Data in People's
Hands: Polyphonic Interpretation at Scale. Proceedings of
the 34th Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems.
[26] E. Geerts, I. van der Tuin. 2021. Diffraction & Reading
Diffractively. Matter, Journal of New Materialist Research,
Feb. 2021.
[27] O. Green. 2015. Practice-based research and new
interfaces for musical expression: The situation of
practice-led research around NIME, and two
methodological suggestions for improved communication.
Leonardo, 48(5).
[28] O. Green. 2020. Race to the Bottom. Proc NIME 2020.
[29] E. Grosz. 2002. Feminist Futures? Tulsa Studies in
Women's Literature, 21:1, 13-20.
[30] E. Grosz. 1998. Thinking the new: Of futures yet
unthought. symplokē, 6(1/2), 38-55.
[31] J. Grudin. 1990. The Computer Reaches Out: The
Historical Continuity of Interface Design. In Proceedings
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems: Empowering People. 261-268.
[32] D. Haraway. 1991. The Promises of Monsters: A
Regenerative Politics for Inappropriate/d Others. In L.C.
Grossberg, C. Nelson, P.A. Treichler (eds.). Cultural
Studies, 295-337, Routledge 1991.
[33] D. Haraway. 2016. Staying with the Trouble. Duke
University Press.
[34] L. Hayes, A. Marquez-Borbon. 2023. Addressing NIME’s
prevailing sociotechnical, political, and epistemological
exigencies. Computer Music Journal, 44[2/3], 24-38.
[35] I. Hodder. 2012. Entangled. An Archaeology of the
Relationships between Humans and Things. Wiley-
Blackwell.
[36] D. Kirsh, P. Maglio. 1994. On distinguishing epistemic
from pragmatic action. Cognitive Science 18, 513-549.
[37] M.L. Latash. 2012. The bliss (not the problem) of motor
abundance (not redundancy). Experimental Brain
Research, 217(1), 1–5.
[38] J. Law. 2011. Heterogeneous Engineering and Tinkering.
www.heterogeneities.net/publications/Law2011Heterogene
ousEngineeringAndTinkering.pdf
[39]  S.  Leigh  Starr,  J.R.  Greisemer.  1989.  Institutional  Ecology,  'Translations'  and  Boundary  Objects:  Amateurs  and   Professionals  in  Berkeley's  Museum  of  Vertebrate  Zoology,  1907-39.  Social  Studies  of  Science,  19:3,  387-420.  [40]  G.  Lepri,  J.  Bowers,  S.  Topley,  P.  Stapleton,  P.  Bennett,  K.   Andersen,  A.  McPherson.  2022.  The  10,000  Instruments  Workshop  -  (Im)practical  Research  for  Critical  Speculation.  Proc  NIME  2022.   [41]  M.  Lugones.  1994.  Purity,  Impurity  and  Separation,  Signs ,  19:2,  458-479.   [42]  M.  Lynch.  2013.  Ontography:  Investigating  the  production  of  things,  deflating  ontology.  Social  Studies  of  Science,  43:3,  444-462.   [43]  D.  MacKenzie.  1990.  Inventing  Accuracy:  A  Historical  Sociology  of  Nuclear  Missile  Guidance.  MIT  Press.   [44]  D.  MacKenzie,  G.  Spinardi.1995.  Tacit  Knowledge,  Weapons  Design,  and  the  Uninvention  of  Nuclear  Weapons.  American  Journal  of  Sociology,  July  1995.   [45]  L.  Malafouris.  2013.  How  Things  Shape  the  Mind.  A  Theory  of  Material  Engagement,  MIT  Press.   [46]  A.  Marquez-Borbon,  P.  Stapleton.  2017.  Fourteen  years  of  NIME:  The  value  and  meaning  of  ‘community’  in  interactive  music  research.  In  A  NIME  Reader ,  465–481,  Springer.   [47]  R.  Masu,  F.  Morreale,  A.  Refsum-Jensenius.  2023.  The  O  in  NIME:  Reflecting  on  the  Importance  of  Reusing  and  Repurposing  Old  Musical  Instruments,  Proc  NIME  2023.   [48]  H.  Maturana,  F.  Varela  (1972).  English  version  1980.   Autopoiesis  and  Cognition:  The  Realization  of  the  Living.  D.  Reidel.    [49]  C.  McAuley.  2025  (forthcoming).   Musical  Pathways:   Exploring  bodily  movement  and  the  context  of  others  in  improvised  drumming.  PhD  Dissertation.  SARC,  Queen’s  University  Belfast.   [50]  N.  Merendino,  M.  Bettega,  A.  P.  Melbye,  J.D.  Sullivan,  A.  Rodà,  R.  Masu.  2024.  Sustainable  digital  fabrication  in  NIME:  Nine  sustainability  strategies  for  DMI  production.   Proc  NIME  2024.   [51]  C.  Mika,  M.  Peters.  2015.  Blind,  or  Keenly  Self-regarding?  The  dilemma  of  Western  philosophy,  Educational  Philosophy  and  Theory,  47:11,  1125-1127.   [52]  C.  Mika.  2019.  Western  Fragility:  A  Māori  philosophical  diagnosis,  Social  Alternative s ,  38:4,  48-53.   [53]  M.  Moon,  I.  Murphy,  A.  Kapur,  D.  Carnegie.  2024.  Overview  of  NIME  Techniques  Applied  to  Traditional  Korean  Instruments.  Proc  NIME  2024.   [54]  I.  Monson.  1996.  Saying  something:  Jazz  improvisation  and  interaction.  Chicago  University  Press.   [55]  E.  Morin  (1982).  English  version  1992.  From  the  Concept  of  System  to  the  Paradigm  of  Complexity,  translated  by  S.  Kelly,  Journal  of  Social  and  Evolutionary  Systems,  15:4,  371-385.   [56]  F.  Morreale,  S.  Bin,  A.  McPherson,  P.  Stapleton,  M.  Wanderley,  2020.  A  NIME  of  the  times:  developing  an  outward-looking  political  agenda  for  this  community.  Proc  NIME  2020.   [57]  C.  Mouffe.  1999.  Deliberative  Democracy  or  Agonistic  Pluralism?  Social  Research,  66:3,  745-758.    [58]  S-J.  Norman.  2016.  Mothers  of  Invention:  An  Afterword.   Contemporary  Music  Review,  35:1,  150-160.   [59]  T.  Pelinski,  A.  McPherson,  R.  Fiebrink.  2025.  Ways  of  knowing,  ways  of  writing:  technical  practice  research  in  
new  musical  instrument  design.  Journal  of  New  Music  Research,  https://doi.org/10.1080/09298215.2024.2442348  [60]  J.  Rancière.  2010.   Dissensus:  On  Politics  and  Aesthetics.  S.  Corcoran  (ed.,  trans.).  Continuum.   [61]  M.  Rodger,  O.  Bonnie  Smith,  P.  Stapleton.  2024.  How  Do  Aesthetics  Get  into  Muscles  and  Muscles  into  Aesthetics?  Insights  from  Musical  Interactions  in  an  Experimental  Context.  Ecological  Psychology,  36:2,  95-110.   [62]  J.  Ryan.  2009.  Knowing  When,  Music  and  Machines  IX,  seminar  convened  by  B.  Hogg,  S-J.  Norman,  Culture  Lab,  Newcastle  University.  https://scsynth.org/t/joel-ryan-music-and-machines-aesthetics/9416 (accessed  05-02-25).  [63]  G.  Simondon  (1958).  English  version  2017.  On  the  Mode  of  Existence  of  Technical  Objects  (1958),  translated  by  C.  Malaspina,  J.  Cogrove,  Univocal  Publishing.  [64]  E.  Souriau  (1943).  English  version  2015.  The  Different  Modes  of  Existence.  Translated  by  E.  Beranek,  T.  Howles,  University  of  Minnesota  Press.   [65]  P.  Stapleton,  A.P.  Melbye,  J.  Bowers.  2022.  The  Virtual  is  Material:  Music  Improvisation  in  Post-Digital  Ecologies  (Film  Essay),  in  Body,  Space  &  Technology,  21(1).   [66]  D.  Sudnow.  1993.  Ways  of  the  Hand:  The  Organization  of  Improvised  Conduct.  Harvard  University  Press.   [67]  B.  Suits.  2005.  The  Grasshopper.  Games,  Life  and  Utopia,  Broadview  encore  editions.   [68]  N.  Thrift.  2007.  Non-Representational  Theory.  Space,  Politics,  Affect.  Routledge.   [69]  M.K.  Udén.  2018.  The  novel  feminist  diffraction  concept,  Research  Report,  Luleå  tekniska  universitet.   [70]  J.  Von  Neumann.  1966.  Theory  of  Self-Reproducing  Automata.  University  of  Illinois  Press.   [71]  M.  Waisvisz.  2006.  On  composing  the  now.  http://recherche.ircam/fr/equipes/temps-reel/nime06/proc/nime2006_423.pdf.  Proc  NIME  2006.   [72]  M.M.  Wanderley,  B.W.  Vines,  N.  Middleton,  N.C.  McKay,  W.  Hatch.  2005.  The  Musical  Significance  of  Clarinetists’  Ancillary  Gestures:  An  Exploration  of  the  Field.  Journal  of  New  Music  Research,  34:1,  97–113.   [73]  S.  Waters.  2000.  Beyond  the  acousmatic:  Hybrid  tendencies  in  electroacoustic  music.  In  S.  Emmerson  [ed.],  Music,  electronic  media  and  culture,  56-83.  Ashgate.   [74]  S.  Waters.  2021.  The  entanglements  which  make  instruments  musical:  Rediscovering  sociality.   Journal  of  New  Music  Research.  50:2,  133-146.                 
 
 