A Comparison of Sensor Strategies for Capturing
Percussive Gestures
Adam R. Tindale, Ajay Kapur, George Tzanetakis, Peter Dries sen, Andrew Schloss
University of Victoria, Canada
Music Intelligence & Sound T echnology Interdisciplinary C entre
(MISTIC)
[art, akapur, gtzan]@uvic.ca, peter@ece.uvic.ca, aschlo ss@ﬁnearts.uvic.ca
ABSTRACT
Drum controllers designed by researchers and commercial
companies use a variety of techniques for capturing percus-
sive gestures. It is challenging to obtain both quick respon se
times and low-level data (such as position) that contain ex-
pressive information. This research is a comprehensive stu dy
of current methods to evaluate the available strategies and
technologies. This study aims to demonstrate the beneﬁts
and detriments of the current state of percussion controllers
as well as yield tools for those who would wish to conduct
this type of study in the future.
Keywords
Percussion Controllers, Timbre-recognition based instru ments,
Electronic Percussion, Sensors for Interface Design
1. INTRODUCTION
Electronic percussion is one of the most well established
electronic music interfaces after the piano keyboard and
mixer-type devices; yet, these interfaces are often crude d e-
vices that merely capture the velocity of the striking imple -
ment at the moment of impact. Obviously, there are many
more factors present in a percussion strike.
What information besides strike velocity is important and
how can it be used to accurately translate the gestures of
an expert performer? Geometrically speaking, there is the
angle of incidence, velocity of the strike, the polar position
of the strike on the surface and the number of points of
contact.1 In order to capture these gestures and translate
them into data usable by a computer we must examine the
issue of latency versus information gain and the eﬀect upon
real-time performance.
A cost/beneﬁt analysis of controllers can be very complex.
This paper will give guidelines to be considered when dealin g
1Some playing techniques, such as the rimshot, require the
player to hit the drum in multiple places simultaneously.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of thi s work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided th at copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage an d that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To cop y otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, re quires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME05, V ancouver, BC, Canada
Copyright 2005 Copyright remains with the author(s).
with percussion interfaces as well as providing a thorough
survey of the diﬀerent models currently available and their
design decisions and consequences.
2. OVERVIEW OF CURRENT MODELS
There are many diﬀerent methods of capturing the gestu-
ral information of percussive strikes using a variety of sen -
sors. In this section a survey of the most common techniques
will be described from simple methods using piezo to more
modern sensor technology.
2.1 Piezo
Piezo sensors take advantage of the piezoelectric eﬀect in
which mechanical energy is converted to electrical. Electr i-
cal charge results from the deformation of polarized crysta ls
when pressure is applied [7].
These sensors are often found in older and cheaper com-
mercial percussion trigger pads. In order to be eﬀective the y
must be isolated from the vibrations of nearby impacts on
diﬀerent pads. This isolation is never perfect and is called
crosstalk.
An example of an interface which uses these sensor to
great advantage is the Jam-O-Drum [8]. This interface uses
an array of commercial piezo-based drum pads mounted into
a surface to provide a collaborative instrument/installation
for use with novice players.
The largest electronic percussion instrument, the Rhythm
Tree [16], uses piezos to detect impacts. The instrument is
comprised of 300 sensors that can detect a direct or indirect
hit. The sensors are embedded in a soft rubber pad that
can be lit up with an LED to provide visual feedback for
the performer.
2.2 Force Sensing Resistors
Force sensing resistors (FSR) use the electrical property
of resistance to measure the pressure exerted upon the sen-
sor. FSRs are used in experimental and commercial drum
controllers. The main advantage of an FSR for a drum con-
troller is that the sensors only pick up strikes which direct ly
strike the surface. This results in no crosstalk between the
sensors, which is a major problem with piezo based devices.
There are two types of FSRs: ones that measure the amount
of pressure and ones that measure the amount of pressure
along an axis, thereby yielding position.
The Drumkat 2 is an example of a popular and powerful
2http://www.alternatemode.com
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
200
commercial device that utilizes these sensors. The Hand-
sonic (HPD-15) 3 is another commercial device that uses
FSRs to emulate a hand drum interface. The Buchla Thun-
der4 is an alternate controller that has more than a dozen
pads that sense both pressure and position.
The javamug has FSRs placed ergonomically onto a coﬀee
mug that control the randomness of techno-latin drum loops
[1]. This device demonstrates a simple mapping that lever-
ages percussive techniques to control macro-level mapping s
in an interesting and simple manner.
The Electronic Tabla (ETabla) [4] is an interface designed
to model the traditional playing technique of the North In-
dian classical Tabla. It uses FSRs in strategically placed
areas of a custom built head to gather gestural imprints of
Tabla performance.
The Electronic Dholak (EDholak) [4] is a multi-player In-
dian drum controller which uses both piezo and FSRs for
gesture capturing events inspired by the Jam-O-Drum. The
piezos are used to trigger time critical events while FSRs
are used to control parameters which are less time critical,
but give more expressive notions than with just the piezos
alone.
2.3 Fiberoptic Sensing Pads
In this sensor technique a network of ﬁberoptic sensors
detect pressure as well as position. An original device usin g
this technique is the Tactex 5 Multi-Touch-Controller (MTC)
which contains a grid of 72 sensors that can distinguish mul-
tiple sources of pressure. The STC-1000 - a newer version
of the MTC pad - has been designed by the Mercurial In-
novations Group.6 This device is a Singe Touch Controller
that outputs MIDI. The Ski is an example of a Tactex pad
being used as an interface for musical expression [3].
2.4 Capacitance
The radio drum is one of the oldest electronic music con-
trollers [9]. Built by Bob Boie and improved by Max Math-
ews, it has undergone a great deal of improvement in accu-
racy of tracking, while the user interface has remained nearly
constant. There is an antenna at each of the four corners of
the drum. The drum is played with two sticks that operate
at diﬀerent frequencies. The radio tracking technique de-
pends on the electrical capacitance between the radio trans -
mission antenna in the end of each mallet and the array of
receiving antennas in the drum. The drum generates 6 sepa-
rate analog signals that represent the x, y, z position of each
stick versus time.
2.5 Microphone
A special mention must be made for the Korg Wavedrum.
Most owners of this controller claim that it is as ﬂexible
as an acoustic instrument [17]. The Wavedrum has three
contact microphones underneath the drumhead. The signals
from the drumhead are used to combine with the synthesis
engine of the drum to make sound. This results in the sound
changing as the excitation is moved around the drumhead.
These diﬀerent signals are either used to excite the synthes is
engine, are passed through the DSP chain, or are passed
3http://www.rolandus.com
4http://www.buchla.com
5http://www.tactex.com
6http://www.thinkmig.com/
directly to the output after completing one of the previous
tasks.
Timbre-recognition based instruments use timbre a con-
trol parameter. Work has been done by the authors towards
this implementation in a percussion controller [5]. The sys -
tem utilizes digital signal processing and machine learnin g
techniques to classify the timbre of the instrument. The
labels correspond to diﬀerent playing techniques and strik -
ing implements that have been identiﬁed to the system from
human labelled instances. Since diﬀerent playing techniqu es
produce diﬀerent timbres it is a matter of collecting traini ng
instances of the desired technique and retraining the class i-
ﬁer.
2.6 Accelerometer
The PhiSEM controllers are shaker-like interfaces that uti -
lize accelerometers to trigger physical models of shakers [ 1].
These interfaces demonstrate a simple use of percussive ges -
tures to control physical models of shakers.
A recent use of accelerometers in a percussive interface
has been developed by Dianna Young.[6] This interface used
2 two-axis accelerometers augmented with two single-axis
accelerometers. The sensors were placed inside of a pair of
bachi sticks by hollowing out the end of the sticks to relay
three axes of acceleration and the angular velocity of the
sticks. A Bluetooth r⃝ emitter was also placed inside of the
sticks so that the performer did not have any wires impeding
their gestures.
2.7 Electromagnetic Tracking
Electromagnetic sensors can relay their position in six di-
mensions; this makes them ideal for tracking stick motions.
The Vodhran [2] uses these sensors embedded into the stick
to track position and to use this information to drive phys-
ical models of a drum.
2.8 Infrared
The Buchla Lightning uses infrared light tracking in order
to track the position of the wireless sticks in two dimension s.
Each stick uses a diﬀerent frequency of light so that they
may be tracked independently. The lightning also include a
button on each stick that may be used to trigger events or
send metadata.
2.9 Camera Tracking
While there are very few controllers that have employed
video tracking for capturing percussive gestures there has
been some interesting research on these motions using video
capture. Soﬁa Dahl has done signiﬁcant amount of work
analyzing the motions of drummers and percussionists using
video capture in addition to motion capture via a Selspot
system.7 [10]
Motion capturing systems such as VICON 8, allow for more
precise collection of human movement. Experiments with
these type systems for musical gesture analysis is shown in
[12].
3. DESIGN EV ALUATION
By observing something you must change its state. This
is a consideration when designing any computer or sensor
7http://www.innovision-systems.com/
8http://www.vicon.com
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
201
based instrument. For percussion instruments there are
three main ways of augmenting the performance to capture
the gesture: placing sensors on the drum, placing sensors on
or in the stick, detecting the motion of the body.
Throughout this section we will reﬂect upon the interfaces
and sensors mentioned above and oﬀer methods and con-
siderations for evaluating a complete capture system. The
needs of any project have to be assessed before the informa-
tion provided here is to be of any real value. The end goal of
any system is to provide maximum control with minimal in-
hibitions without compromising the potential for advanced
techniques. Percussion instruments are excellent examples
of simple interfaces that retain the potential for virtuosi ty.
The bandwidth of a percussionist is a major considera-
tion. The world record for fastest single stroke roll is cur-
rently 1199 strokes per minute9 which translates into ap-
proximately 20 Hertz. This only represents a single stroke
roll; double stroke rolls have been recorded with up-wards
of 1400 strokes per minute. The percussive interface must
be able to capture these events with enough resolution to
extract the desired information, such as: position, veloci ty
and angle. The sampling rate must be high enough to re-
solve the complexities of the motion of stick between the
strokes.
3.1 Drum Surface
An augmented drum oﬀers many possibilities for freedom
but also many design problems. When embedding sensors
into or on the drum they must be protected from the impact
force of the striking implement. Many commercial products
achieve this by using rubber pads with the sensor embedded
inside or using a foam bed lying underneath the drumhead.
This does yield the possibility to use many diﬀerent imple-
ments, thus allowing the performer to use their preferred
traditional stick.
Wiring is a consideration in this case. In commercial de-
vices the analog signal from the sensor is transmitted to a
drum brain for processing. Another approach is to utilize
the space inside of the drum shell to hold the wiring and
circuitry and providing the processed data as output (the
eTABLA is an example of this technique).
By placing sensors on the drum you do alter the vibra-
tional properties of the instrument. When fabricating a
synthetic drum, not intended to make sound itself, this is
acceptable; but when extending a traditional drum with sen-
sors this can be a problem.
The piezo oﬀers a simple way of capturing percussive ges-
tures. They were the ﬁrst sensors used for this application
and have been widely used in many of the available commer-
cial interfaces. Using one piezo it is possible to capture the
timing of strike and a plausible indication of velocity. The
disadvantage of these sensors is that you cannot capture po-
sition with a single sensor. It is possible to ﬁnd position
using a network of four piezos, as has been shown [11].
FSRs give more precise pressure data than piezos and
some types also give a position parameter as well. Since
you must touch an FSR in order to trigger it, it is neces-
sary to have either a large sensor with a custom shape or
a small surface that accommodates the shape of the sensor.
Again, since it is triggered by pressure they greatly reduce
crosstalk.
9http://www.extremesportdrumming.com/
The main makers of the ﬁberoptic sensing pads are Tactex
and the Mercurial Group. These interfaces come only as a
prepackaged device. In order to incorporate them into new
instruments they must be disassembled, as in the The Ski.
These devices provide position in two dimensions as well
as pressure data. The MTC pad connects via serial to a
computer running Max/MSP. There is a custom object that
comes with the interface to connect directly to Max/MSP
thus allowing easy mapping from physical gesture to mes-
sages in the program. The main advantage of the MTC is
that it is capable of discerning diﬀerent touch points, allow-
ing for multiple simultaneous striking events. Besides bei ng
a prepackaged product, the main disadvantage for percus-
sion is the inherent latency of the sensors.
Capacitance oﬀers continuous data in three dimensions.
Having the continuous z parameter oﬀers a great deal of cre-
ative possibilities. There is a nonlinear response when usi ng
this technique that makes it diﬃcult to accurately track ab-
solute position. A major disadvantage is that both the drum
and the sticks have to be augmented in order to capture their
position relative to each other.
The Korg Wavedrum provides an interesting combination
of controller and eﬀects processor. The acoustic sound re-
ceived by the embedded microphones is used to excite physi-
cal models. The result is that the performer is not limited by
the data that the interface can capture. If the gesture makes
sound, which it should in order to produce music, then it
will be captured by the microphones and transformed into
an output signal.
A new approach to capturing gestural data is the timbre-
recognition based instrument. The main advantage is that
the overhead for setting up this system is minimal; it only
requires a microphone. Many current musical situations are
recorded and most musicians have become accustomed to
having their instruments captured by microphones. The
precision of this system is constantly being improved. The
main disadvantage is that it is yet be seriously tested in rea l
musical situations. While it performs well in a closed studi o
environment and reasonably well with the addition of noise,
the proper compensation for the interference of a musical
environment seriously complicates the situation.
3.2 Stick Augmentation
Embedding sensor systems within a stick allows perform-
ers to play any drum, traditional, modern, augmented, or
even thin air. However, the modiﬁed stick will never feel the
same as a traditional one, with added weight from the sensor
packaging. Transmitting data using wires obviously proves
to be cumbersome. Wireless transmission may be an im-
pressive laboratory stunt, but can result in loss of data and
non-reliable systems not usable for performance on stage.
Accelerometers on sticks can aid in capturing kinematic
performance gestures, though data will be noisy and cannot
be used to derive accurate position of strikes. Adding a gy-
roscope into the mix, as accomplished in AoBochi, provides
a reference in which to derive position, making for a more
informative and expressive system.
The use of magnetometers as seen in the Vodhran captures
orientation with respect to the north pole. These sensors
are usually surface mount sensors and require custom PCB
boards to built for experimentation, making them less easy
to use then sensors like FSRs and Piezos.
Infrared light tracking allows for an elegant solution to
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
202
wireless sticks. As the performer gets further away from the
receptor the ﬁeld of capture gets larger, the largest possib le
ﬁeld being 12 feet high by 20 feet wide. One disadvantage of
the Lightning is that when multiple instruments are put in
the same space a great deal of interference occurs and it is
very diﬃcult to control the system. The Lightning comes as
a prepackaged product that is easily adapted to other tasks
but is limited by its MIDI output.
3.3 Detecting Body Movement
Analyzing human body movements during performance
of drumming oﬀers another avenue of detecting a percussive
gesture. A traditional technique is to analyze video camera
footage which is completely unobtrusive requiring no sensors
attached to sticks or drums. However the frame rate of the
video camera along with time needed for post processing
does not allow for fast percussive interaction.
Using motion capture systems such as VICON, more pre-
cise gestures can be captured at high sample rates. A marker
is placed on each of the joints of the hand, and in key posi-
tions along the length of the arm. These points are captured
by six cameras at a high sample rate providing accurate
temporal and spatial data that is superior to most sensor
interfaces. However the system is quite expensive.
The major problem with both these methods is that cam-
era systems are diﬃcult to use on stage. Variable lighting,
camera orientation, calibration, are all issues which can end
up being a nightmare during sound check, and even worse,
during a live performance.
Building devices that embed sensor systems directly to
the skin or within clothing, as mentioned in Paradiso’s work
[13], are promising. For accurate percussive gestures how-
ever, they might prove useful only in conjunction with other
methods.
4. CONCLUSIONS
Clearly, there are many diﬀerent considerations when de-
veloping a percussion interface. This paper has given an
overview of diﬀerent sensor strategies currently employed , as
well as other strategies that are becoming possible through
the work of many researchers.
5. REFERENCES
[1] P. Cook. Principles for Designing Computer Music
Controllers. Proceedings of the Conference on New
Interfaces for Musical Expression , 2001.
[2] M. Marshall, M. Rath, and B. Moynihan. The Virtual
Bodhran - The Vodhran. Proceedings of the Conference
on New Interfaces for Musical Expression , 2002.
[3] R. Huott. An Interface for Precise Musical Control.
Proceedings of the Conference on New Interfaces for
Musical Expression , 2002.
[4] A. Kapur, P. Davidson, P. R. Cook, P. Driessen, and
A. Schloss. Digitizing north indian performance.
Proceedings of the International Computer Music
Conference, 2004.
[5] A. Tindale, A. Kapur, G. Tzanetakis, and I. Fujinaga.
Retrieval of percussion gestures using timbre
classiﬁcation techniques.International Symposium on
Music Information Retrieval , 2004.
[6] D. Young and I. Fujinaga. Aobachi: A new interface for
japanese drumming. Proceedings of the Conference on
New Interfaces for Musical Expression , 2004.
[7] W. Putnam and R. Knapp. Input/Data acquisition
system design for human computer interfacing.
Technical Report, CCRMA, 1996.
[8] T. Blaine T. Perkins. The Jam-O-Drum Interactive
Music System: A Study in Interaction Design. DIS2000
Conference Proceedings, 2000.
[9] M. Mathews, A. Schloss. The radio drum as a
synthesizer controller. Proceedings of the International
Computer Music Conference , 1989.
[10] S. Dahl. Playing the accent - comparing striking
velocity and timing in an ostinato rhythm performed
by four drummers. Acta Acustica united with Acustica
Vol. 90(4). 2004.
[11] J. Paradiso, C. Leo, N. Checka and K. Hsiao. Passive
Acoustic Sensing for Tracking Knocks Atop Large
Interactive Displays.Proceedings of the 2002 IEEE
International Conference on Sensors , 2002.
[12] M. Peinado, B. Herbelin, M. Wanderley, B. Le
Callennec, R. Boulic, D. Thalmann. Towards
Conﬁgurable Motion Capture with Prioritized Inverse
Kinematics. Proceedings of the Third International
Workshop on Virtual Rehabilitation , 2004.
[13] J. Paradiso. Wearable Wireless Sensing for Interactiv e
Media First International Workshop on Wearable &
Implantable Body Sensor Networks , 2004.
[14] R. Aimi and D. Young. A new beatbug: Revisions,
simpliﬁcations, and new directions. Proceedings of the
International Computer Music Conference , 2004.
[15] R. Aimi. New expressive percussion instruments. M.S.
Thesis. MIT. 2002.
[16] J. Paradiso. The Brain Opera Technology: New
Instruments and Gestural Sensors for Musical
Interaction and PerformanceJournal of New Music
Research Vol. 28(2). 1999.
[17] G. Rule. Keyboard reports: Korg wavedrum.
Keyboard, 21(3). 1995.
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
203