Proceedings of the 2002 Conference on New Instruments for Musical Expression (NIME-02), Dublin, Ireland, May 24-26, 2002  
 NIME02-01
 The Musical Box Garden 
Kieran Ferris / Liam Bannon 
Interaction Design Centre 
University of Limerick 
Ireland 
Kieran.ferris@ul.ie 
Liam.bannon@ul.ie 
 
 
Abstract 
The Cardboard Box Garden (CBG) originated from a 
dissatisfaction with current computer technology as it is 
presented to children. This paper shall briefly review the 
process involved in the creation of this installation, from 
motivation through to design and subsequent implemen-
tation and user experience with the CBG. Through the 
augmentation of an everyday artefact, namely the stan-
dard cardboard box, a simple yet powerful interactive 
environment was created that has achieved its goal of 
stirring childrens imagination - judging from the experi-
ence of our users. 
Keywords 
Education, play, augmented reality, pervasive comput-
ing, disappearing computer, assembly, cardboard box  
Introduction 
The CBG was created to explore the possibility of intro-
ducing an alternative form of computer interaction into 
the arena of primary education. First displayed at the 
Digital Arts Week Now (DAWN) exhibition held at the 
University of Limerick, Ireland in September 2001, the 
CBG was one of a number of projects that were  exhib-
ited from the Masters in Interactive Media course 
(2001)1. As the computer makes its presence felt within 
the area of education, more often than not, it is packaged 
into programmes about the technology, where the objec-
tive is that children must learn ‘about computers’ in or-
der to secure a job in the technologically-empowered 21st 
Century. Even where the computer is used more as a 
tool, its role is rarely stretched beyond being used to do 
word processing or find information on the Internet. Our 
goal is to fundamentally question this role of the com-
puter in our childrens educational environment.  In doing 
so, we wish to create a radically new form of computer 
interaction, one that may fit more comfortably into the 
learning environment of the child. For example, the per-
sonal computer in its current form is notoriously poor 
when it comes to bodily interaction [2]. Healy [1] notes: 
“Body movements, the ability to touch feel, manipulate, 
and build sensory awareness of relationships in the 
physical world” are crucial to childrens development.  
From an interactional point of view, the physical limita-
                                                                 
1 Students on this course are exposed to a variety of issues from augmented reality to the development of 
novel sensor technologies.  The course is strongly influenced by the research orientation of faculty within 
the University’s Interaction Design Centre who are the main instructors on the course (See 
http://www.idc.ul.ie). For the final nine months of the course students are encouraged to research and 
investigate the role of technology within an area of personal interest.  
tions of using a WIMP-type computer can become a bar-
rier to a more engaging experience. Thus our design 
brief was – “ how can we combine elements of computer 
technology to augment creative possibilities for children 
– to create a playful learning environment that allows for 
exploration, discovery, and for collaborative physical 
activity?” 
Design process 
Realising that the focus of activity should be moved 
away from the computer, back to the child, led us to in-
vestigate the attraction children have for simple play 
items - tin cans, sock puppets and cardboard boxes. In-
trigued by the cardboard box, we set about examining its 
natural characteristics, for example, questioning how 
people use cardboard boxes. We were attempting to 
ground our design ideas on the affordances of everyday 
objects, so as to create interfaces that would be experi-
enced by our users as ‘natural’ and ‘intuitive’. As Nor-
man [3] notes: “When affordances are taken advantage 
of, the user knows what to do just by looking”. Consider-
ing the possibility of making an interface out of real-
world objects, the best place to start is by understanding 
how these objects function. Observing and analysing 
child - box interactions led to the effective use of these 
affordances in the prototyping stage.  
Towards a box garden 
Once a repertoire of box interactions was developed the 
design process began to focus on how the scenarios 
could be developed and enriched with technology with-
out detracting from the boxes themselves. The role of the 
computer was seen as a facilitator of an activity. Allow-
ing the computer to become part of the action – reaction 
scenario meant that while the overall interface may be-
come much more sophisticated there is no need for the 
basic interactions to become any more intricate. Isolating 
a number of familiar box interactions, a decision was 
made to explore the creation of an interface which used 
the boxes as containers of sound. The design now moved 
into a phase where the notion of “assembly”  - of boxes, 
interaction sequences – became important, as our focus 
was on creating a “box garden” – for children to explore. 
The Cardboard Box Garden 
The final CBG prototype is a sound installation piece 
made-up of fifteen boxes, varying in shape and size. (See 
Figures 1 & 2). The fifteen boxes are split into four dif-
ferent groups with each group supporting a specific sonic 
task. In turn each of the box clusters work collectively 
within MAX. The ‘Record group’ contains three boxes. 
 
 NIME02-02
When opened, each of the boxes records a separate audio 
sample. Analysing the amplitude and frequency, the in-
put sound is converted into one of three musical instru-
ments, a piano, xylophone or percussion. As each ‘Re-
cord’ and ‘Play’ box functions as a pair, opening the 
corresponding ‘Play’ box will cause the sound - which 
was initially generated by the child -   play back as a 
predetermined instrument. Once the desired musical 
sounds are playing, the children can also alter the volume 
and tempo by stacking and pushing other specific card-
board boxes. Building upon the natural characteristics of 
a cardboard box, children are able to create and alter 
their own music in a playful manner, without being dis-
tracted by the ‘computer’.  
Audience Experiences. 
The DAWN exhibition hosted by the University of Lim-
erick (Sept. 24-28th, 2001) provided an ideal opportunity 
to test the CBG. Over a four-day period, the CBG was 
used by people of all ages. After the initial novelty factor 
subsided, people began to use the boxes to create and 
manipulate sounds. Building upon the natural affor-
dances of cardboard boxes has proved successful. For 
example, the boxes were seen as containers of sounds, 
which, when opened,  released their sounds. Children 
who used the interface made the most creative use of the 
boxes. Two young sisters, one aged seven and the other 
nine, were introduced to the interface. Together, the sis-
ters slowly began to explore the boxes. After a few min-
utes they understood what each of the boxes could do 
and so began to play with the sounds they had created. 
As they became more confident, the pace of interaction 
speeded up, to the point that they were both running 
around the space, pushing and pulling the boxes with 
great enthusiasm. The robustness of the CBG was cer-
tainly put to the test.  
 
  
Figures 1+2. The U.L and Ennis exhibitions. 
The Box Garden was one of four interactive media ex-
hibits selected for presentation at the Ennis October Arts 
Festival (Oct. 13-20th, 2001). The space in which the 
CBG was exhibited was much larger than the earlier ex-
hibit space, allowing the boxes to spread over a wider 
area, and giving more of a garden ‘feel’ to the setting. As 
a result of our simple interactive design the children be-
gan to think more about the sounds they were able to 
create, from singing and clapping to recording and dis-
torting their mobile phone ring tones. Allowing the chil-
dren to create their own music meant that when the 
sound was played back they were able to fragment it, and 
in doing so they realised how specific parts were created. 
Through the use of physical objects an increased aware-
ness of tempo and volume was created.  Control over the 
sounds was moved away from the computer onto the 
physical actions of the children. 
Conclusion   
Our design ideas have been influenced by several core 
themes that we have attempted to incorporate in our de-
sign thinking. Listing them briefly here, these are: 
• Human Activity - as a fundamental aspect of human 
being in the world 
• Materiality of Objects - the central role of material 
artefacts in children’s play 
• Engagement - the need to excite, motivate, enhance 
the user experience 
• Interaction - human play with objects being seen as 
a narrative activity, not simple action-reaction  
(mouse event - action) pairs 
• Multimodality - incorporating several sensory mo-
dalities - visual, tactual, kinaesthetic, sonic, auditory 
• Sociality - creating artefacts or assemblies of arte-
facts that allow for collaborative activity 
• Computer as an augmentation tool, not a substitute 
for existing practices 
• Objects as Assemblies- designing an object world, 
allowing for object juxtaposition, linking, stacking, 
etc.  Creating emergent behaviours as a result of hu-
man actions  
 In sum, we have been encouraged by the audience reac-
tion to our small demonstration system, and hope that it 
will embolden others to explore the way in which 
computational devices can add value to existing objects 
and human activities, while being sensitive to, and build-
ing on, everyday practices in the "real" world.  
Further research 
Currently a number of simple refinements to the Garden 
are being explored. We aim to allow the user to have 
more control over both the environment and the music. 
Ideas that are being investigated include:   
• Creating more control over individual musical in-
struments, e.g. increasing the pitch or tempo of each 
box separately.  
• Allowing the users to specify the length of a re-
cording.  
• Making the boxes wireless, to allow the user to have 
complete control of environment.  
• Allowing the users to choose the instrument, for 
example placing the lid of a box on in a particular 
way selects the instrument.  
An mpeg of the Boxes in action can be found at 
http://richie.idc.ul.ie/~kieran/vid/ 
 
 
 NIME02-03
Acknowledgements 
We acknowledge the financial support of the EU FET 
SHAPE Disappearing Computer project, the support of 
UL IDC members, and our enthusiastic “users”. 
References 
[1] Healy, J. M., 1999, Failure to Connect, How com-
puters affect our children’s minds – and what you can do 
about it, Touchstone. 
[2] Ishii, H., and Ullmer, B. 1997, Tangible Bits: To-
wards seamless interfaces between people, bits and at-
oms, in Proceedings of CHI ’97 ACM Press, 234-241. 
[3] Norman, D.A., 1988, The Psychology of Everyday 
Things, New York, Basic Books, 