Can Haptics make New Music? - Fader and Plank Demos
Bill Verplank
CCRMA - Stanford University
660 Lomita Dr.
Stanford, CA 94305
verplank@ccrma.stanford.edu
Francesco Georg
CCRMA - Stanford University
660 Lomita Dr.
Stanford, CA 94305
fgeorg@stanford.edu
ABSTRACT
Haptic interfaces using active force-feedback have mostly been 
used for emulating existing instruments and making 
conventional music.  With the right speed, force, precision and 
software they can also be used to make new sounds and 
perhaps new music.
 The requirements are local microprocessors (for low-latency 
and high update rates), strategic sensors (for force as well as 
position), and non-linear dynamics (that make for rich 
overtones and chaotic music).
Keywords
NIME, Haptics, Music Controllers, Microprocessors.
1.  INTRODUCTION
For more than fifteen years, we have been exploring the use of 
haptics (active force feedback) in music controllers.  Recently, 
an experienced composer spent a morning exploring the latest 
“Plank”.  He was surprised: “the instrument is not only 
responsive, it’ s also assertive; and I don’t know of another 
situation like that.”  What are the qualities that excited this 
composer?  What was required?
2.  EARLY HAPTICS FOR MUSIC
Our most common experience of  haptics is in mobile phones - 
early pagers had vibration for a silent alert.  Video games have 
“rumble packs” for excitement.  An inexpensive motor simply 
spins an eccentric weight.  These “tactors” have also been used 
as simple musical feedback for controlling performance [1].  
Beyond vibration, d-c motors can provide constant forces - call 
it “active force-feedback”.
We have attempted to make electronic instruments feel like 
their physical ancestors.  For example, springs and weights 
were added to electric keyboards - i.e. “passive haptics”.  
Active force-feedback keyboards have been attempted by 
Cadoz [2] and Gillespie [3].  A four-degree-of-freedom  haptic 
violin was built by Charles Nichols  in 2000 [4].  None of these 
have made it into musical performance.
Two recent examples are notable because with inexpensive 
components, and modern electronics they achieve surprising 
results.  They are “high-performance haptics”. 
3. HIGH PERFORMANCE HAPTICS
3.1  Haptic Drum
When you hit Ed Berdahl’s haptic drum[5] with a stick, it kicks 
back using a speaker coil (woofer). Depending on which target 
you hit with the stick, the drum will make a different sound. By 
varying the way you hold the stick, the Haptic Drum  enables 
you to play drum  rolls that would otherwise be difficult or 
impossible. For instance, drum rolls can be played at speeds of 
up to 70Hz.  It’s superhuman but still a drum.
3.2  Cellomobo
In Collin Oldham’s Cellomobo [6], the “bow” is a wooden 
dowel, the “string” is the blade of a painter’s palette knife with 
a piezo pickup attached. The signal goes via Arduino to Pd 
where it is delayed by an amount determined by his left hand 
on a “string” sensor acting as a linear potentiometer. Finally, 
the delayed signal is amplified and a shaker vibrates the palette 
knife orthogonal to the motion of the bow, making it stick and 
slip.  This is a (surprising) emulation of an ancient instument.
4 NEW MUSIC
4.1  FM Fader Synth
At Stanford’s CCRMA, in Music 250A Wendy Ju and Ed 
Berdahl attached an Arduino to a BeagleBoard [7]  As a student 
exercise, Francesco Georg programmed a haptic landscape in 
Pd.  With the fader, he “throws” the fader knob as it “bounces” 
over a landscape of FM synthesis parameters.
When people tried it, there were a variety of surprised 
expressions: “It’s fighting me” or “we’re dancing”. A German 
offered the word “widerspenstig” which has something to do 
with a spirit working against you. A rough translation is 
“unruly” or “assertive”.
Figure 1. Francesco Georg “throwing” a motorized fader.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of  this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee  provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for  profit or  commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
NIME’11, 30 May–1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
539
4.2  Granular synthesis with the PLANK.
“The PLANK” [8] is made from  an old hard-disk drive by 
removing the disks and using the head-positioning voice-coil 
actuator to move a cylindrical surface.  A force-sensitive 
resistor senses the force of the user’s fingers on the surface.  
With a simple program  on the A VR controller, if  you push 
“into” the surface, it “sides down” a virtual profile - e.g. the 
envelope of a wave or sample.
In a recent workshop [9] with Bill Verplank and David 
Zicarelli, Roger Reynolds used the PLANK with Hans 
Tutschku’s granular synthesis (running in MAX/MSP).  As 
Roger bounced the PLANK around the envelope of the sample, 
he remarked that “it’s’ a situation in which the instrument is not 
only responsive, it’s also assertive”.
Figure 2. The PLANK with Arduino and Motorboard
Figure 3 shows the display in MaxMSP of the sample which 
is granularized, the computed envelope and the “slope” 
smoothed and stored on the Arduino for force feedback.
5.  SUMMARY
The combination of  inexpensive actuators (motorized fader, 
disk head-positioner), high-performance hardware, and open 
software make “high-performance haptics” accessible to 
musicians. Rather than emulating traditional instruments, we 
can explore new forms of expressive and lively music.
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to Chris Chafe, Max Mathews, Michael Gurevich, 
Wendy Ju, Ed Berdahl and the students of  “Physical Interaction 
Design for Music”.
7. REFERENCES  
[1] Birnbaum, D., Musical vibrotactile feedback. MA Thesis, 
McGill, 2007.
[2] Cadoz, C., Lisowski, L., & Florens, J. (1990). "A modular 
feedback keyboard design". Computer Music Journal, 14 
(2): 47-51. 
[3] Gillespie, B. The Touchback Keyboard, Internaional 
Computer Music Conference, 1992. 
[4] Nichols, C. “The vBow: Development of a Virtual Violin 
Bow Haptic Human-Computer Interface.” NIME-02: 
Proceedings of the Conference on New Interfaces for 
Musical Expression, ACM Press (2002).
[5] Berdahl, E., Steiner, H-C, Oldham, C. Practical Hardware 
and Algorithms for Creating Haptic Musical Instruments, 
Proceedings of the 2008 conference on New interfaces for 
Musical Expression. ACM Press (2008).
[6] Oldham, C. Cellomobo. <http://homepage.mac.com/
coldham/klang/cellomobo.html
[7] Berdahl, E., Ju, W., https://ccrma.stanford.edu/~eberdahl/
Satellite/ 
[8] Verplank, B., Gurevich, M. and Mathews, M.  The 
PLANK: designing a simple haptic controller. NIME ’02: 
Proceedings of the Conference on New Interfaces for 
Musical Expression, ACM Press (2002).
[9] Incubator 2010: Beyond the instrument metaphor: new 
paradigms for interactive media. Arizona State University, 
February 19-21, 2010. <http://ame.asu.edu/events/
incubator/>..
Figure 3.  MaxMSP display of “landscape” for granular synthesis with the Plank.
wave:
envelope:
“landscape”
slope:
(smoothed)
grain size:
The slope of the envelope is calculated at 800 positions and stored on Arduino as 10-bit values for PWM. 
Positive slopes push left and negative values push right; more slope means more force.
grain position is determined by PLANK position
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
540