Proceedings of the 2002 Conference on New Instruments for Musical Expression (NIME-02), Dublin, Ireland, May 24-26, 2002 
 NIME02-01
JAM-O-WORLD: Evolution of the Jam-O-Drum  
Multi-player Musical Controller  
into the Jam-O-Whirl Gaming Interface 
Tina Blaine and Clifton Forlines 
Entertainment Technology Center 
Carnegie Mellon University 
5000 Forbes Ave, 4301 Doherty Hall,  
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
{blaine, forlines}@cs.cmu.edu, sabean2@earthlink.net 
 
ABSTRACT  
This paper discusses the Jam -O-Drum multi-player musical 
controller and its adaptation into a gaming controller inte r-
face known as the Jam -O-Whirl. The Jam -O-World project 
positioned these two controller devices in a dedicated pr o-
jection environment that enabled novice players to partic i-
pate in immersive musical gaming experiences. Players' 
actions, detected via embedded sensors in an integrated 
tabletop surface, control game play, real-time co mputer 
graphics and musical interaction. Jam -O-World r equires 
physical and social interaction as well as collabor ation 
among players.  
 
KEYWORDS 
Collaboration, computer graphics, embedded sensors, ga m-
ing controller, immersive musical gaming experi ences, mu-
sical controller, multi-player, novice, social interaction. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The Jam -O-World project was designed to bring people 
together to participate in collaborative musical gaming e x-
periences in an immersive 3D environment. The exper i-
ences are multi-player interactive games that encourage 
team building and cooperation. A custom t able known as 
the Jam-O-Whirl was devised as a next -generation Jam-O-
Drum to project computer graphics on an integrated su rface 
with four player stations to control visual and aural elements 
of the games. Each station has a custom -built turntable d e-
vice with an embedded electronic drum pad that together 
provide pla yers with two methods of input. Each station is 
also equipped with a built -in directional speaker for audio 
feedback. The immersive aspects of the games are accent u-
ated by 3D computer graphics that are infl uenced by the 
players' collective a ctions. These graphics are projected 
onto the tabletop and the walls of the exhibit space.  
 
BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION 
The creation of musical controllers to facilitate group inte r-
action and encourage spontaneous behavior has been a f o-
cus of Blaine's work for many years. Inspired by global tr a-
ditions, new technology and communal m usic making in 
non-Western countries, Blaine co -founded the multimedia 
ensemble D'CüCKOO. This group built custom MIDI co n-
trollers and intera ctive "show -toy" devices that integrated 
music and computer graphics to create opportunities for 
audience interaction in live pe rformance venues [1]. This 
work led Blaine to assemble a creative team at Interval R e-
search in 1998 for the development of an interactive ele c-
tronic drumming table known as the Jam -O-Drum [2]. In i-
tially conceived with Tim Perkis, this device was d esigned 
to give people opportunities for sha red audiovisual exper i-
ences by integrating interactive music elements with real -
time computer projections in a collaborative, ensemble se t-
ting. Rather than designing an immersive musical env iron-
ment with proje ctions displayed on a vertical surface, the 
team invented a seven-foot diameter circular projection su r-
face with embedded drum triggers that pe ople could gather 
around and play as a shared instrument. By info rmally 
changing the context of making music to a ca sual group 
experience integrating rhythmical  music and grap hics, the 
community drum circle [3] emerged as a metaphor to guide 
the form and content of the team’s work. A Jam -O-Drum 
that scales to accommodate six to twelve players is on per-
manent exhibit at the Experience Music Project in Sea ttle, 
WA. 
 
JAM-O-DRUM INTERACTION DESIGNS 
Although many interaction methods were explored over the 
Jam-O-Drum's development cycle at Interval Research, only 
a few examples will be discussed herein. (See [2] for more 
detailed information).  
 
Freeform Improvisation 
Using BlissPaint's color animated drawing program, the 
team explored a freeform approach to collaborative i m-
provisation. Players caused color, hue saturation and brigh t-
ness changes in a kaleidoscopic atmosphere [4]. Greg Ja l-
bert cu stomized the BlissPaint cod e to respond to a set of 
scripted MIDI commands that launched graphic events. 
Individual sounds were layered over a pre -composed back-
ing track intended to provide an atmospheric and rhyt hmic 
musical reference. Due to the high level of visual intrigue, 
people were generally less attentive to the act of playing 
 
 NIME02-02
music together. While this scheme provided the opport unity 
for spontaneous musical intera ction, the overall sonic blend 
quickly degenerated into chaos for players more f ocused on 
their individual solo efforts than the group's musical output. 
Offering players this level of freedom proved to be a trade -
off; despite the lack of musical direction, the BlissPaint 
schemes were perceived as the most visually impressive 
prototypes and held user interest for e xtended periods of 
time.  
 
Call and Response 
The Call and Response interaction pattern was developed to 
create an orchestrated approach for novice interplay as an 
ensemble. The interface used a pulsing graphic image with 
audio accompaniment in the center of the table to represent 
a "virtual caller". The “caller” co nducts a four-minute MIDI 
score of rhythmic patterns and alternating response cues, 
with each call pattern followed by space for players to r e-
peat the pattern or perform their own form of rhythmic i m-
provisation. "Your Turn" indicators directed everyone at the 
table to play altogether, to split into su bgroups, or play as a 
soloist (See Figure 1).  
 
 
Figure 1: Call and Response Interaction Scheme 
 
Although the call and response rhythmic patterns prese nt a 
sociable method of phrase recognition and imitation particu-
larly geared toward novice interaction, pla yers are not 
"locked" into a predetermined cycle of events. Once the 
players caught on to the alternating play and listen modes, 
opportunities would emerge for more experienced players to 
improvise within the compositional form. While some pla y-
ers found the rhythmic learning experience too stru ctured to 
be entertaining, others enjoyed the game -like "Simon Says" 
aspect of this prototype. Several videoga mes with a similar 
interaction technique have recently proved commercially 
successful, including Konami’s Dance Dance Revolution 
[5] and 989 Studios’ Parappa the Rapper [6]. Ult imately, 
the team found that these highly directed call and response 
patterns with short learning curves were the most successful 
in bringing novice and expert players t ogether for musical 
collaboration. These findings fit with Jan Borcher's work 
designing and building the World Beat Interactive Music 
Exhibit at Ars Electronica [7]. Near the end of the Jam -O-
Drum project cycle, a number of card game prototypes were 
developed that rei nforced the team's belief that goal -
oriented game experiences would be successful on this pla t-
form. 
 
HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION 
The seven-foot diameter Jam -O-Drum table was built with 
10” drum pads mounted directly onto the steel frame and 
speakers positioned in front of each station. The entire t a-
bletop was covered with foam padding and encased with a 
custom-fitted cover to feel like a drumhead. While the cover 
provided one seamless surface for projections, pla yers were 
at times unsure which areas of the table were "a ctive" when 
testing different interaction prototypes. In itially, the Jam-O-
Drum's basic system architecture consisted of two Maci n-
tosh computers that received MIDI messages from the e m-
bedded drum pads (See Figure 2). An LCD video projector 
projected images from the graphic Macintosh onto the table. 
In the final phase of the project, the Call and Response m u-
sic and graphics software were streamlined  to run on a si n-
gle computer for the Experience Music Project Exhibit.  
 
 
Figure 2: Jam-O-Drum System Design Overview 
 
SOFTWARE ENVIRONMENT 
Over the Jam -O-Drum's seven -month development cycle, 
many different interaction schemes were explored with a 
variety of software packages. In early schemes designed to 
enhance the musical responses of unskilled players, O p-
code’s MAX was used to process real -time MIDI inform a-
tion from the drum pads, control playback of backing 
tracks, and forward co ntrol information to the graphical 
subsystem [2]. Emagic Logic was used to play back scripted 
MIDI sequences that initiated audio and graphic events. 
Metrowerks CodeWarrior was used for C develo pment and 
Opcode's OMS developers kit was integrated for the call 
 
 NIME02-03
and response and BlissPaint prototypes. Bias Peak, 
Steinberg’s ReCycle and ReBirth were used to edit the cu s-
tom library of samples. 
 
FACILITATING GROUP INTERACTION  
Future Potential of the Jam-O-Drum 
Observations of novice musical behavior on the Jam -O-
Drum led to the foll owing conclusions about promising a r-
eas of future research toward facilitating group intera ction 
in a public environment: 
•  To introduce more game-like interaction  
•  To create goal-oriented or directed activities that would 
encourage more communication and so cial interaction 
between the players  
•  To develop a basic software framework to support the 
rapid development of new prototypes. 
•  To explore an orchestrated approach to the music and 
visuals in order to avoid chaotic interaction 
•  To integrate controllers/inpu t devices that might disa s-
sociate player's expectations regarding responsiveness. 
•  To make the active areas/input devices on the table 
more discrete. 
•  To design interactions with direct relationship to 
player's actions. 
Most of these findings would be put in to effect in the next 
iterative phase of development for the controller device that 
would become known as the Jam-O-Whirl.  
 
JAM-O-WORLD 
Building a 3D Musical Gaming Environment 
An invitation to develop an exhibit for Zeum, a Youth Art 
and Technology museu m in San Francisco, offered the o p-
portunity to create two site -specific musical gaming exper i-
ences. The installation would be in a ded icated conical 
shaped exhibit space a pproximately thirty feet in diameter 
with thirty-foot high ceilings. A series of balc onies around 
the perimeter of the cone provided sc enic overlooks for by -
standers and also placed constraints on the size and dime n-
sion of the room’s wall projections. The games deve loped 
for this environment would have to be visually and aurally 
appealing, accessible to players of varying ages and abil i-
ties, and support extended replay value in a public space.  
 
Jam-O-Drum's Redesign into Jam-O-Whirl 
The authors, in collaboration with a team of graduate st u-
dents from the Entertainment Technology Center at C arne-
gie Mellon University, set out to augment the Jam -O-Drum 
controller device with new inputs and implement a set of 
musically enhanced games. The Jam -O-Drum's original 
hardware design was enhanced by integrating two input 
devices: a MIDI drum pad embe dded inside a turntable 
disk. Integrating both the drum pad and turntable as inputs 
enabled additional control of projections and sound via the 
movement of the turntable. Another important element of 
the Jam-O-Drum's redesign included making the four player 
stations more di stinctive and conducive for team interplay. 
The desire to clarify the interaction areas was in part i n-
spired by Toshio Iwai and his Composition on the Table [8] 
mixed reality installations. In Iwai’s exhibit, which shared 
many of the same goals as Jam-O-World, players controlled 
the visual and aural aspects  of the experience with trac k-
balls, mice, dials, or switches: input mechanisms that pla y-
ers immediately knew how to interact with and instinctively 
gravitated toward. A trio of lazy -Susan disks used to prot o-
type the Ci rcleMaze game i nspired the Jam -O-Whirl’s 
crossover into a combination gaming interface and musical 
controller.  
 
GAME DESIGN FOR THE JAM-O-WHIRL 
CircleMaze 
Forlines conceived of the CircleMaze game as an example 
of a control dev ice mapping position and movement of a 
circular disk to a corresponding circular ring projected on 
the tabletop. Each one of four color -coded turntables co n-
trols one of four matc hing colored virtual rings. Players 
work together to align the rings' pathways , allowing vi rtual 
balls to travel from the outer ring into the center of the co n-
centric maze (See Figure 3). The game starts with one ball 
and sixty seconds for the players to devise a group strategy. 
Once players get the first ball into the ce nter, they advance 
to the next level of game play, the number of balls i ncreases 
exponentially and a new set of musical backing tracks and 
sound e ffects are introduced. Zeum visitors of all ages 
quickly learn that progressing to higher levels of the game 
cannot be achieved without communication and teamwork.  
 
CircleMaze employs a consistent user interface: the same 
actions at every level of game play produce the same r e-
sults. This "unity of design" principle makes for an intu itive 
and easy -to-learn game. By not requi ring the players to 
memorize a series of actions and establishing an obvious 
correlation between simple disk mov ement and its impact 
on the table's projections, CircleMaze promotes a state ps y-
chologist Donald Norman refers to as "knowledge in the 
world" [9]. Essentially, players have two options, to hit the 
drum pad or turn the disk. Inexperienced players can 
quickly examine all possible options and even if other pla y-
ers don't assist them, the worst possible ou tcome is that the 
game resets at the same level . Over time, their e xperiences 
will result in "knowledge in the head"[9] as u sing the co n-
trols becomes second nature. Players are then free to co n-
centrate on more efficient game play (i.e. a dvanced strate-
gies, and self-imposed goals), and social interaction. 
 
Mapping Sound 
The implementation of a device that could be used in a pu b-
lic i nstallation for gaming and expressive musical co ntrol 
with a turntable disk and drum pad posed a series of pote n-
tially conflicting d esign challenges. First and for emost, the 
 
 NIME02-04
Jam-O-Whirl's graph ical user interface would be the most 
obvious focal point of the exhibit. D esigning a simple, easy 
to use interface would be necessary to present a low ba rrier 
to access the game, particularly for young people. As a r e-
sult of this focus, the music -making aspect of the ens uing 
games became lesser in importance. Ult imately, the trade -
off of providing greater musical expressivity and functional-
ity was forfeited in favor of providing overall sonic coh e-
siveness as an integral element of gam eplay. Most impo r-
tantly, the Jam -O-Whirl's disks and drum pads had to be 
designed for maximum durability to wit hstand hundreds of 
young visitors' turning and hitting them each day. 
 
Figure 3: CircleMaze on the Jam-O-Whirl 
 
Mapping the audio to create a direct  correlation between 
player's actions and still provide driving musical accomp a-
niment in an overall sonic blend, also proved challenging 
due to the fast rate at which the disks were turned. The u n-
derlying compositional method for this level of interaction 
ended up being somewhat comparable to the modular co m-
position approach that Gideon D'Arcangelo used in his 
"Currents of Creativity" soun dtrack for the Pope John Paul 
II Cultural Center [10]. In this regard, the team faced a simi-
lar design challenge as D'Ar cangelo; the need to create a 
framework for visitors that would trigger musical loops that 
would be perceived as an integrated whole regardless of 
their initiation point, but with synchron ization between 
tracks.  
 
Minimizing Chaos with Modular Composition 
In an effort to avoid total chaos, one method that proved 
fairly successful in terms of sonic cohesiveness and vari a-
tion was to compose four different audio tracks for each 
individual station at all five levels of game play. Unlike 
D'Arcangelo's infinite c ollage approach [10], CircleMaze’s 
musical elements exist in two and four bar phrases d esigned 
to be recombinant in 256 interlocking configurations. Pla y-
ers turning their disks in 90 -degree rotations would set one 
of four tracks per station in motion at th e next incidence of 
the downbeat. The collective positio ning of all the players' 
disks at any given time would determine the overall sele c-
tion of m usical backing tracks during each level of the 
game, thus giving players control of subtle changes in the 
collage of musical accompaniment. Auxiliary samples tri g-
gered by hitting the drum pads provided players with i mme-
diate audio feedback and clear identification of their m usi-
cal contrib ution. Generally, visitors were more attuned to 
their audio co ntributions fr om the drum pads and not as 
aware of their impact on the musical accompaniment once 
the backing tracks were engaged. Because the drum pads 
mainly provide complementary sonic contributions and are 
not as integrated into gameplay as the disks, it sometimes 
took awhile for visitors to di scover that they could play the 
drum pads to launch sound effects and individual percussion 
sounds. As with earlier findings user -testing the BlissPaint 
prototype, the visual impact on aural perce ption was signifi-
cant. The drum  pads also served as the pr ojection surface 
for an egg timer -like clock displaying the time remaining in 
a diminishing circle. 
 
Immersion Methods 
Three dimensional computer graphics projected on the walls 
of the exhibit space accentuate the immersive a spects of the 
game and are collectively influenced by the players' actions. 
The wall projections surrounding the Jam -O-World env i-
ronment each represent a different camera angle in a 3D 
world, creating the illusion of being the ball in the maze 
suspended in spa ce. Between levels, the rings of the maze 
animate and extend off the table, rise up the walls of the 
exhibit space, then land back down onto the table with the 
appropriate number of balls for the next level of game play. 
After five levels of su ccessful int eraction, a unique three -
dimensional animation appears on the table and the walls of 
the cone accompanied by ten seconds of sound effects. The 
team was well aware that high quality sound would be crit i-
cal to the game's success and necessary to enhance the play-
ers’ sense of immersion. Four directional NHT cei ling 
speakers were installed into the t abletop, a subwoofer 
placed below, and additional sound reinforcement was pr o-
vided by a surround sound system with six distributed 
speakers mounted in the cei ling a nd walls of the exhibit 
space. 
 
Hip Hop 
Another musical game experience developed for the Jam-O-
Whirl device was Hip Hop. Designed to be a pattern matc h-
ing game for young people, Hip Hop is facilitated by a 3D 
robotic rabbit known as "Tokli". Tokli's chara cter promotes 
interaction by e xplaining the rules of the game in rhymed 
verse and encouraging players to work t ogether. With a 
scripted "rap" narrative d esigned to facilitate flow -through 
in a museum environment, Tokli's animations are acco mpa-
nied by verba l r esponses based on participants' collective 
input at different levels of the game. If the pla yers do not 
assist each other in matching the virtually shu ffled cards 
successfully, Tokli goes into a "flop" animation accomp a-
nied by robotic sound effects and his "rap" suggests the 
players try again. Hip Hop was partially inspired by Dance 
Dance Revolution (DDR) [5], a game in which players issue 
and perform dance commands through pattern matc hing. 
 
 NIME02-05
Unlike DDR, Hip Hop encourages collaboration i nstead of 
competition; players are only rewarded with Tokli’s dance 
if they collectively succeed. If the players are su ccessful in 
their game interaction by correctly matching all the card 
images, a combination of Salsa backing tracks are initiated 
to accompany Tokli's dancing animations and ev eryone is 
congratulated. Each player controls four diffe rent musical 
tracks that include keyboard, horns, bass and pe rcussion, 
that were designed to mix together in 256 po ssible configu-
rations. Players also trigger percussion sa mples by hitting 
their drum pads and have the opportunity to "jam" along 
with backing tracks during the transitional period b etween 
rounds. One of the interaction design cha llenges the team 
explored was alternating the f ocus of game play from the 
tabletop surfac e to the dancing animations on the walls. 
This intentional shift of the players’ attention was deve l-
oped to make extensive use of the exhibit space, create o p-
portunities for improvisational musical interaction and e n-
hance the feeling of immersion.  
Tokli's dance and flop animations are observed from three 
different camera angles; each designed with special ligh ting 
and point of view attributes to give visitors the perspe ctive 
of being at a concert venue. The darkened environment of 
the exhibit encourages a high level of spontaneous b ehavior 
and physicality between the players; even young boys were 
observed dancing and jumping around. Although the Hip 
Hop game was designed primarily for young people 8 -12 
years old, teena gers have also been discovered making u p 
their own games and choreography from the balconies 
above. The goal of integrating this ubiquitous approach to 
interface design with elements of animated motion, music 
and light was intended make visitors to the Jam -O-World 
environment more aware of thei r social su rroundings and 
encourage group interaction with each other and Tokli's 
character. The desire to encourage full body participation 
was in part inspired by MIT’s interactive computer vision 
project PingPongPlus [11]. While this project was not f o-
cused on collaborative music making, the authors reco g-
nized their use of sensors, sound, and projection technol o-
gies as powerful techniques to e ncourage full body motion 
during game play. 
Software Redesign 
One of the primary objectives of the Jam -O-Whirl's design 
phase was to create a software library that could support 
extensibility and standardize the implementation of new 
interaction schemes. To minimize development time, the 
team built a simple API that abstracted the hardware inte r-
face, allowing all of the Jam-O-World experiences to share 
a single code base for handling user input and sound output  
(See Figure 4). CircleMaze and Hip Hop were impl emented 
using Alice2, an interactive 3D authoring tool for rapid a p-
plication development and interactive exper imentation. A 
JNI wrapper pr ovided communication with DirectX for 3D 
graphics and surround sound output. 3D St udio Max and 
DeepPaint were used to generate 3D models, and Pr oTools, 
Emagic Logic, MetaSynth, and ReBirth were used for sound 
design, digital editing and original music composition. 
 
Figure 4: Jam-O-World Software Overview 
 
Hardware Redesign 
The Jam-O-Whirl device incorporated a combination of two 
input devices; a MIDI drum pad mounted inside a tur ntable 
ring. As the ring  turns, an optical encoder relays its rot a-
tional position and speed to the computer. The Jam -O-
World includes a Windows-based PC with a 1 GHz Pentium 
III processor, four NVIDIA GeForce2 video cards, and two 
Audigy and SoundBlaster Live! sound cards. As one  might 
expect, generating four screens of interactive 3D images and 
outputting six channels of audio put a huge demand on the 
system. This burden caused an unacceptable state of insta-
bility for a museum environment, where exhibits need to run 
unattended fo r hours at a time. Eventually migrating the 
software and hardware to a dual processor machine helped 
with the overall stability of the system, but created  MIDI 
incompatibility issues with the sound cards.  
 
OBSERVATIONS & FUTURE WORK 
In both the Jam-O-Drum and Jam-O-Whirl installations, one 
of the most rewarding aspects of this work is the high level 
of social interaction and engagement among players. Gat h-
ering around a shared surface creates a co ntext for bringing 
people together to play games and cr eate m usic. Through 
the design of the aforementioned musical gaming exper i-
ences for public spaces, one of the most important elements 
appears to be the creation of goal -oriented stru ctures that 
are counterbalanced by opportunities for free form play and 
improvisation. Regardless of differing objectives towards 
gaming or music making, both of these install ations have 
demonstrated that goal -oriented intera ction makes it easier 
to communicate and engage with strangers in a public se t-
ting. People who might not ordina rily participate in music 
making activities approach the Jam -O-Whirl because of its 
game-like attraction and appea rance, and also find no musi-
cal knowledge is necessary. Not su rprisingly, parents often 
 
 NIME02-06
had more difficulty acces sing the games than their children 
did. Integration of a surround sound system coupled with 
speakers in the table and a darkened enviro nment created a 
relaxed club -like atmo sphere that inspired physical mov e-
ment and fostered spontaneous interaction b etween the visi-
tors. Having the Jam -O-Whirl installation in a fully ded i-
cated space with large -scale wall proje ctions and effective 
sound levels gave vis itors a feeling of audi ovisual immer-
sion.  
As with earlier research on the Jam -O-Drum, time co n-
straints in the development of Jam -O-Whirl restri cted the 
opportunities to more fully realize the musical capabil ities 
of this system. Although the turntable disks proved to be a 
highly engaging and intu itive interface for the circular 
graphic projections, the audio mappings int egrated with 
these continuous controllers were not as obvious to vis itors 
and could be improved. With a d evelopment cycle of only 
four months to complete the hardware and sof tware for the 
Jam-O-Whirl and projections for the Jam -O-World env i-
ronment, there were many areas of research  and develo p-
ment that could not feasibly be undertaken to investigate 
opportunities for more expressive musical control. Neve r-
theless, the modular approach described herein t oward the 
creation of a pre -composed library of audio tracks in co m-
bination with individual sounds provided visitors with var y-
ing levels of musical interaction. Implementation of this 
interaction method with two inputs for musical control and 
expression based on the player's a ctions was an inte ntional 
compromise derived to maintain a co hesiveness to the over-
all musical arrangement, but still provide visitors the pe r-
ception of individual control and impact on the sy stem. Per-
fecting the a ppropriate levels of musical interaction versus 
the perceived affordance of musical interaction and co m-
plementing sound design, is an area ripe for further research 
with this deve lopment platform. Ultimately, the Jam -O-
Whirl platform can be used to develop a new ge neration of 
multi-player games with or without the additional projection 
capabilities in an im mersive exhibit space. B ecause the 
players' attention has been pr imarily centered on the visual 
elements of game play, the music making aspect of the 
games became a secondary focus. In the future, d esigning a 
musical game that specifically leverages the ph ysical char-
acteristics of the disks and spinning, as in a DJ game, would 
be an engaging area of research.  
 
CONCLUSIONS 
The development of the Jam -O-Whirl device was an obv i-
ous extension of research and conclusions derived from user 
testing and experimentat ion with the Jam -O-Drum. With 
slight modifications to the original design and inte ntions of 
the Jam-O-Drum, a crossover gaming device emerged along 
with several new approaches to facilitate group interaction 
in a public environment. The goal -oriented and d irected 
musical game-like activities developed for these platforms 
enhanced communication and sociability between the pla y-
ers and helped avoid chaotic interaction. Developing a basic 
software framework to support the rapid develo pment of 
new game prototypes for multiple audiences was invaluable. 
Finally, regardless of the focus on music or games, impl e-
menting an easy to use, intuitive interface is one of the most 
important design elements of any interactive experience that 
invites novices to explore and learn. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors would like to thank  our colleagues and  all the 
team members on both of these projects at Interval Research 
and the Entertainment Technology Center for their contribu-
tions. We would also like to thank NHT and our co lleagues 
at Interval Research, Zeum and Carnegie Mellon University, 
particularly, Don Marinelli, Randy Pausch and Dan Siewi o-
rek, for their continued feedback and support.  
 
REFERENCES 
1. D'CüCKOO. Available at 
http://home.earthlink.net/~sabean2. 
2. Blaine, T., Perkis, T., The Jam -O-Drum Interactive 
Music System: A study in Interaction Design. 
DIS2000 Confe rence Proceedings . New York, 
NY, August 2000, pp. 165-173. 
3. Hull, A., Facilitating Human Potential through 
Rhythm, Drum Circle Spirit , White Cliffs M edia 
Tempe, AZ, USA, 1998, pp.17-42. 
4. Jalbert, G., BlissPaint. Available at 
http://www.imaja.com.  
5. Konami, Dance Dance Revolution. Available at 
http://www.konami.com/arcade/Music/Ddr/ 
6. 989 Studios, Parappa the Rapper. Available at 
http://www.scea.com/games/categories/stratpuzzle/
parappa/gameplay.html 
7. Borchers, Jan O., A Pattern Approach to Intera c-
tion Design. DIS2000 Conference Procee dings. 
New York, NY, August 2000, p.369-378. 
8. Toshio Iwai, Composition on the Table. Available 
at http://www.ntticc.or.jp/newschool/+-
/iwai_e.html. 
9. Norman, D.A., The Psychology of Everyday 
Things. Basic Books, New York, 1988 pp.79-80. 
10. D'Arcangelo, G., Creating Contexts of Creativity: 
Musical Composition with Modular Co mponents. 
NIME 2001 Conference Proceedings , Seattle, WA. 
Available at: 
http://www.csl.sony.co.jp/person/poup/research/chi
2000wshp/# 
11. Ishii, H., Wisneski, C.,Orbanes, J. Chun, B., and Pa ra-
diso, J., PingPongPlus: Design of an At hletic-Tangible 
Interface for Computer -Supported Coo perative Play. 
Proceedings of CHI ’99 (Pitt sburgh, PA USA, May 
1999), ACM Press 1999, 394-401. 