Decay in Collaborative Music Making
N. B ry an-Kinns
Inter action, Media, and C ommunicati on Group
Depar tment of C omputer Sc ience
Queen Mary, Uni versity of London
Mile End, London. E1 4NS. UK
nickbk@dcs.qmul.ac.uk
P. G. T. Healey
Inter action, Media, and C ommunicati on Group
Depar tment of C omputer Sc ience
Queen Mary, Uni versity of London
Mile End, London. E1 4NS. UK
ph @dc s. qmu l . a c . u k
ABSTRACT
This paper reports on ongoing studies of the design and use of
support for remo te group music mak ing. In this paper we
outline the initial findings of a recent study focusing on the
function of decay  of contributions in collaborative music
making. Findings indicate that persistent contributions lend
themselves to individual musical composition and learning
novel interfaces, whilst contributions that quickly decay
engender a more focused musical interaction in experienced
participants.
Keywords
Music improvisation, creativity, group interaction, design.
1. INTRODUCTION
Music making is inherently a social activity, yet a vast
majority of our musical instruments are designed to be used
by individuals. Such instruments rely on physical proximity
to foster group music making i.e. being in the same space as
others. Whilst we have embraced new form s of group verbal
communication such as text messaging on mobile phones, for
many of us informal and pervasive group music making has
lost its place as an everyday form of social interaction [6].
Reviews of support for music collaboration [1] indicate that
remote group music making is a field ripe for explor ation yet
there is little work inves tigating support for remote group
making, let alone exploring what it might mean to engage in
such activities.
We believe that we can start to design richer and more
satisfying musical experiences by understanding what
encourages and supports mutual engagement  between people
as they interact with each other. We characterize mutual
engagement as points at which participants start to play with,
and explore their interaction with others over and above the
mediating devices involved. At these points participants start
to rely on their shared beliefs and understandings of what is
going on, what might happen, and who might do what in the
interaction. Such points are crucial in group music making
which relies heavily on both shared expectation and
experimentation. Indeed, group music making is a pertinent
example of a basic form of group creativity which has many
parallels to normal verbal conversation including being
multimodal and co-present.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: First the design
of a novel group music making tool is ou tlined, then a study
of the effect of persistence of contribution has on mutual
engagement is detailed followed by discussion of the
emergent patterns of use. Finally the paper is concluded with
some discussion about implications for the design of group
music making tools.
2. DESIGN
Daisyphone is an on going design project [2, 3] whose aim is
to support remote group music making. By remote music
making  we refer to the form of musical interaction which is
somewhere between improvisation and compos ition;
participants can jam together and yet the resultant music is
persistent and editable. In previous work we identified fou r
design features which we believ e contribute to the support o f
mutually engaging collaborations and which we employed in
the design of Daisyphone: Localization  within the artifac t
being co-produced; Mutual awareness  of actions; Shared and
consistent  representations; Mutual modifiability  o f
contributions.
The Daisyphone user interface is illustrated in figure 1. Notes
are lower in pitch towards the edge of the circle. As the grey
arm rotates clockwise, the notes underneath are played, so each
of the spokes represents notes played at the same time. Hues o f
notes indicate who contributed them (this provides mutua l
awareness  of actions), and intensity of color represents the
volume of the note. Different shapes represent differen t
instruments including piano (circle), and percussion
(diamond). Volume and instrument are modally controlled
from the four central spokes.
In Daisyphone’s current form up to 10 remote par ticipants can
create and edit a s hort shared l oop of music s emi-
synchronously – typically updates take under one second to
be shared. This provides support for a form of remote group
music making whilst requiring little network bandwidth. As
with other remote group making tools such as WebDrum [4],
Daisyphone works by clients sharing ind ications of musical
contributions via  a central server through the internet so
providing a shared and consistent  representation of musical
loops being constructed. There is no ownership in Dais yphone
– people can edit each others’ notes and play the same
instruments supporting mutual modifiability . As well as
sharing musical contributions, Daisyphone also shares
graphical annotations on and around the music composition
space; drawing occurs whenever the mouse button is presse d
which results in a ‘mess y’ form of inter action. This a nnotation
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Nime’06, June 4-8, 2006, Paris, France.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
114
is intended to support both localization  within the
composition, and social and discursive exchanges
Previous studies [2, 3] have identified several design issues
with Daisyphone and its support for group creativity. In this
paper we explore the nature of persistence in contributions. In
pervious versions of Daisyphone all contributions were
persistent. It quickly became clear through studies that
participants did not clear up after themselves and the mus ical
space quickly became saturated with notes which created a
cacophonous noise. The ability to move to new, clean,
sessions was one of the first design developments and resulted
in the circular session selector illustrated in the top left of
figure 1. However, further studies showed that this s till was
not sufficient to promote flowing and engaging musical
interaction – participants simply got bogged down in a sea of
contributed notes. In order to investigate the effect of
persistence of musical contribution, a new version of
Daisyphone in which notes disappear was developed (referred
to as the decay  version). Only the notes are transient, there fore
the graphical annotation created when the notes are
contributed remain providing some visual cues to the
contributions (a form of history of contri bition). The r ate of
decay of the notes is critical to the design – too quick and
coherent sharing of music will not occur given the semi-
synchronous nature of the infrastructure; too slow and the
musical space will continue to became overcrowded. For the
studies here, decay is created by halving the volume of notes
every time the arm passes over them. This typically gives 3
plays of a loud note before it disappears which appears from
initial studies to be sufficient for co-ordination.
Figure 1: Daisyphone interface
3. STUDY
The aims of this study are twofold: 1) To investig ate the effect
decay of contributions has on remote group creativity in
music; 2) To further explore the nature of re mote group music
making in general.
3.1 Format
Ten post graduate students studying Advanced Methods in
Computer Science at the authors’ institution were set a piece of
coursework in which they were asked to:
•  Use both the persistent and decay versions of Dais yphone
to remotely create music together over three weeks.
•  Perform their piece of music for the rest of the group.
•  Analyze and report on the in teraction that  took place in
Daisyphone in both versions.
The students grouped themselves into 3 groups. They had a
wide range of musical ability from novice to proficient
musicians playing in bands. None had ever used a tool like
Daisyphone before.
Participants were asked to report on whether, and how, they
experienced flow as a group [7]. We also asked the par ticipants
to identify points of attunement  between each other on a three
point scale: Acknowledgement  –they were aware of the
contributions of another; Mirroring  – they mirrored, or
reflected, others’ contributions; Transformation  – they
transformed others’ contributions (indicating a high level of
mutual engagement). These reports and ensuing discussions
are used in the rest of this paper to help make sense of the
observed behavior. Flow was categorized in terms of: Chance
of completing the activity; Ability to concentrate on what
they’re doing as a group due to c lear goals and adequate
feedback; Deep, effortless involvement with a reduction in
concern for external factors; Sense of control over actions;
Transformation of time.
Additionally, logs of all actions in Daisyphone were stored for
later re-play and analysis.
4. PATTERNS OF USE
This section outlines the patterns of use and behavior that
took place in the study with the persistent and decay versions
of Daisyphone. Initial analysis of logs are presented here –
detailed analysis is currently being undertaken. An average of
8 sessions with the persistent version and 3 sessions with the
decay version were recorded for each group. Each session
lasted on average 16 minutes for the persistent version and 12
minutes for the decay version.
Participants reported being fairly relaxed about deleting other
participants notes and making modifications to their
contributions. This is in contrast to previous studies and
ongoing public use where reluctance to edit others’
contributions is evident. We suggest that this is due to the
nature of the exercise set (‘you must create a piece of music
together for performance later’) and the social situation (they
all knew each other quite well and had possibly worked
together before).
4.1 Patterns of Use with Persistent Version
As with ongoing analysis of the use of Daisyphone, in both
versions the participants tended to spend the first parts of
their sessions exploring Daisyphone on their own. Typically
in the shared environment this meant working in a par ticular
quadrant of the loop of music. Once participants were able to
understand Daisyphone’s interface they then moved on to
working in other areas to develop longer tunes or contribute to
other participants’ work.
Interestingly, an informal role assignment developed when
using the persistent version with participants tending to s tick
to one instrument. Moreover, a ‘leader’ tended to emerge
during the sessions. This person typically constructed the
main melody which was then supplemented by others in the
group. Daisyphone has no explicit mechanis ms or guidance
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
115
for how to divide the collaborative effort, so we believe that we
are starting to see here some emerging behavior which could
give us insight into how to develop more engaging
collaborations in the future. We suggest that role assignment
emerges naturally and does not need to be explicitly built in
to the interface i.e. in this case there was no need for ownership
control of instruments as participants negotiated it
themselves.
In pervious studies we noted that participants tend to write
their name on Daisyphone. Given the ongoing nature of
Daisyphone public trials, and the informal nature of other
trials, we suggested that this name writing was a form of
stating ownership - saying ‘This is mine’. From post study
discussion it became clear that participants were using their
names as presence and authorshi p indicators – saying ‘This is
me’. Furthermore, as the study progressed, participants started
to use shorter and shorter tags – starting from more explicit
versions such as ‘Hi, its me, Nick’, to abbreviated versions
such as ‘Nick’. Daisyphone was designed to provide mutual
awareness of actions through shared and consistent
representations of: the current state of the shared loop,
different hues for each participant, and a flicker on the session
selector when activity occurs in that session. We suggest that
the emergent and conventionalized behavior of writing one’s
name on entry to a session indicates that the messy nature of
the interface additionally supports the informal evolution of
expressions of identity. To this end we do not believe that the
introduction of explicit identity into the interface is necessary
or worthwhile. Interface feature s such as pictures, textual
names, etc.  add an unnecessary layer of interaction (setup,
login, and so on) which we seek to avoid in the development
of informal, ad-hoc , serendipitous musical interfaces.
4.2 Patterns of Use with the Decay Version
The use of Daisyphone with decaying contributions was not as
engaging we had as anticipated. Participants complained that
they could not keep up with the required contributions and
that sessions tended to become unstructured and
uncoordinated. Experience with Daisyphone as a musical
instrument was a key factor in engagement with the decay
version – the more experience participants had, the easier they
found the decay version to handle.
When looking back over the logs of the inter actions it is clear
that in the version with decay participants tended to make
musical ‘gestures’ rather than placing individual notes as they
had on the persistent version. This is illustrated by the amount
of annotation in figure 3 which reflects the creation of music
through gesture rather than placing of notes as in figure 2.
These gestures tended to be quickly drawn lines which could
easily be replicated to keep the tune going. Perhaps providing
an even more fluid form of inter action where gestures are
interpreted around the Daisyphone would provide easier ways
to create musical motifs in real time. It was also clear that the
decay version required more focus on the music, and much less
discussion of pieces, with participants having to keep musical
motifs in their head in order to keep a tune going. In some
ways this makes the decay version more akin to conventional
group musical im provisation where typically the music and
gestures provide  for commun ication between participants as
opposed to speech (or text in Daisyphone).
Anecdotally, there were more reports of experimentation with
compositions with the decay version as the space did not
require cleaning up. However, the persistence of annotation
which provides some history of contributions did not prove as
useful as anticipated as the proliferation of contributions
meant that there were a lot of indications of old notes as
illustrated by the mess of graphical lines in figure 3. Perhaps
the sequence of contributions also needs to be indicated in
some way.
    
Figure 2: Persistence Figure 3: Decay
Also, interestingly there was anecdotally more convergence of
tunes between participants with the decay version i.e.  they
started to attune  to each other and make similar tunes within a
group more quickly than they did with the persistent version.
This indicates that decay may encourage quicker convergence
of musical patterns after a period of experimentati on. However,
participants felt that they experienced flow as a group far less
when the notes decayed as they felt anxious about making
enough contributions, and felt that they had lost some control
of the situation. So, it seems that whilst they mirrored each
other more quickly, they did not transform each others’
contributions as they disappeared too quickly.
In terms of organization, participants found that with the
decay of notes the division of labor was more egalitarian. That
is, there was no longer the typical emergent leader of the piece,
instead participants contributed what they could, with the
tendency to converge quickly on a musical theme (if one could
quickly be established).
Unexpectedly, participants tended to make non-overlapping
contributions as with the persistent version. We had exp ected
that when notes decay participants would start to make more
contributions at the same time (as with conventional music
playing). This may be a feature of the way music is made with
Daisyphone rather than an indication of mutual engagement.
Finally, from analyzing the l ogs it is clear that par ticipants
contributed notes more frequently with the decay version ( e.g.
one group made approximately tw ice as many contributions
per minute with decay versus  persistence). This is clearly
because of the amount of contributions that are needed to keep
a tune going when the notes disappear. Figures 4 and 5
illustrate overviews of Daisyphone generated by the log tool.
In these diagrams time is represented horizontally from left to
right, and points in the timeline indicate a contribution of
some sort with each column representing one second of
interaction. Thus the amount of activity is indicated by how
tall the columns are. As with Daisyphone itself, colors
represent users – in figure 4 there are two users represented by
green and blue, whereas in figure 5 the users are represented by
purple and pink. Note that there are multiple saturations of the
same color as saturation represents the volume of the
contribution. Yellow points indicate the removal of notes in
Daisyphone. In figure 5 we see the timeline for the example
session shown in figure 3 lasting 13 minutes where
contributions decay over time. There are several peaks
throughout the interaction, and the total number of
contributions 4230. In contrast, figure 4 illustrates the
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
116
interaction in the persistent version over 11 minutes with
fewer peaks (in this case these peaks are actually points at
which writing takes place in the interaction whereas in the
decay version they are musical contributions) and
approximately half the number of contributions.
Figure 4: Example Persistence timeline
Figure 5: Example Decay timeline
5. Discussion
The key implication with respect to the decay of contributions
is that contributions should only start disappearing once
people have learnt how to usefully make them. We had
expected the converse to be true – that when contributions
decay it would be easier to learn the effects of the interaction
through experimentation. So, we suggest that in order for
creative musical experiences to become more engaging
people’s contributions should become more transient as they
become more experienced, whilst support for the logistics of
collaboration remain constant e.g. mutual awareness of actions
should not change. We can usefully r elate this to
Csikszentmihalyi’s analysis of flow and its relation to sk ills
and challenges [5] as illustrated in figure 6. From this point of
view, in order to experience flow one should have an
appropriate match between the skills that people have and the
challenges they are encounter ing – high levels of skill with
low challenge leads to boredom, whereas high challenge with
low skill leads to anxiety. As people become more skillful in
relation to the activity they need to encounter gr eater
challenges to remain in a flow experience.
Figure 6: Flow, skills, and challenges, adapted from [5]
In the case of Daisyphone we believe that with persistence
people became bored of the interaction as the challenge was no
longer sufficient for their skills, whereas with decay
participants were initially anxious, but some did increase their
skills enough to experience flow as illustrated in figure 6. We
suggest that as people become more skilled with the interface
the rate of decay should gradually increase so that the
challenge is sufficient for a flow experience, as illustrated by
the desired interaction in figure 6. This could either be done
automatically as time passed, or under user control as they felt
boredom approaching. Doing so would provide people with an
experience of music in which their initial low skills are
supported by persistence of contribution, so not being too
anxiety provoking, whilst boredom is abated by increasing the
challenge (decay). Moreover, we suggest that by keeping the
collaboration support constant the participants will become
more engaged with each other as well as the product at hand.
We would expect to see more convergence of music, and
hopefully more reliance on others’ contributions in the joint
production. Furthermore, we believe that the decay of
contributions by skilled users could be usefully employed to
engender mutual engagement in other group creative tools
such as brainstorming, problem solving, and so on.
6. Conclusion
This paper presents observations on the use of a novel group
music making tool in two versions: one where musical
contributions persist, and one where they decay. We suggest
that allowing variable amounts of decay in an interface will
allow the challenge of an interface to change to reflect the
skills of participants and so hopefully more flow experiences
will occur. Moreover, it will support increased engagement
between people as indicated by more convergence and
borrowing of other people’s ideas. These are useful features for
group music interfaces as well as other creative applications.
Additionally, we feel that the ‘messy’ nature of Dais yphone
provides a useful interaction metaphor which informally
supports many aspects of the logistics of collaboration
including identity, awareness, history, localization, and the
development of communicative conventions. We argue that
the introduction of explicit support for these features of group
interaction is unnecessary and instead suggest that more
messy support will encourage people to intu itively develop
their own conventions.
The key issue we are going to pursue next is how to flexibly
manipulate the decay of contri butions both graphically and
musically without disturbing the participant, whilst still
keeping the challenge, engagement, and flow to the forefront
of their experience.
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was s upported by Queen Ma ry, University of
London and EPSRC grant GR/S81414/01.
8. REFERENCES
1. Blaine, T., and Fels, S. Contexts of Collaborative Musical
Experiences. In Proceedings of NIME-03  (Montreal, Canada,
2003), 129-134.
2. Bryan-Kinns, N. Daisyphone: Support for Remote Music
Collaboration. In Proc. NIME 2004 ,
3. Bryan-Kinns, N. Daisyphone: The Design and Impact of a
Novel Environment for Remote Group Music Improvisation.
In Proc. of DIS 2004, ACM Press (2004), 135-144.
4. Burk, P. Jammin' on the Web - a new Client/Server
Architecture for Multi-User Musical Performance. Presented
at ICMC 2000.
5. Csikszentmihalyi, M. Flow: The Psychology of Optimal
Experience. Harper Collins. 1991.
6. Leeuwen, T. Speech, Music, Sound . MacMillan. 1999.
7. Sawyer, R. K. Group Creativity: Music, Theater,
Collaboration . Lawrence Erlbaum Ass. 2003
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
117