Sinkapater – An Untethered Beat Sequencer
Jiffer Harriman
CCRMA Stanford
Stanford University
jiffer8@ccrma.stanford.edu
ABSTRACT
This  paper  provides  an  overview  of  a  new  method  for  
approaching beat sequencing.  As we have come to know them  
drum machines provide means to loop rhythmic patterns over a  
certain interval.  Usually with the option to specify different  
beat divisions.  What I developed and propose for consideration 
is a rethinking of the traditional drum machine confines.  The  
Sinkapater  is  an  untethered  beat  sequencer  in  that  the  beat  
division, and the loop length can be arbitrarily modified for  
each  track.   The  result  is  the  capability  to  create  complex  
syncopated patterns which evolve over time as different tracks  
follow their own loop rate.  To keep cohesion all channels can  
be locked to a master channel forcing a loop to be an integer  
number  of  "Master  Beats".   Further  a  visualization  mode  
enables  exploring  the  patterns  in  another  new  way.   Using  
synchronized OpenGL a 3-Dimensional environment visualizes  
the beats as droplets falling from faucets of varying heights  
determined by the loop length.  Waves form in the bottom as  
beats splash into the virtual "sink".  By combining compelling  
visuals  and  a  new  approach  to  sequencing  a  new  way  of  
exploring beats and experiencing music has been created.
Keywords
NIME, proceedings, drum machine, sequencer, visualization
INTRODUCTION
The concept of creating loops has been explored extensively in  
computer  music.   Today  there  are  a  multitude  of  different  
software drum machine-like interfaces.  [ what is the canonical  
drum machine? ] Nearly all have the same basic interface, a  
row of buttons, usually sixteen, across the bottom with lights to  
indicate if the particular beat is active.  Additionally there is  
often an interface to specify the number of beats to loop over.  
This  interface  allows  for mostly straightforward beats  to be  
created on it which loop reliably and serve certain styles of  
music well.  What the typical drum machine interface doesn't  
allow  for  is  the  creation  of  complex  patterns  with  highly  
syncopated  rhythms  and  variability.  The  reliability  of  a  
computer for time keeping makes it possible to program highly  
complex polyrhythmic beats which are very difficult for even  
the most skilled musicians to play [1].  This was the initial  
motivation for developing the Sinkapater. 
Features
As with typical drum machines, with the Sinkapater a given  
beat can be enabled or disabled.  The global tempo can be  
altered and the beat division can be changed.  What makes it  
unique is that each track can be changed independent of others.  
Tick marks on the screen show a visual representation of where  
the Master Channel's beats fall so that for any arbitrary beat  
division  one  can  easily  visualize  where  a  given  beat  falls  
relative to the Master Channel.  The channels are laid out in a  
vertical fashion with height relative to the loop length and each  
beat's on/off indicator “button” similarly appears in the space  
relative to where they fall in time compared to the rest.
Master and Slave Channel Relationship
The  Master  Channel  determines  several  parameters  for  the  
remaining channels.  Within this channel a number of beats is  
specified  as  well  as  a  loop  length.   A beat  of  the  Master  
Channel is used to determine tempo in Beats Per Minute.  The  
Master  Channel's  beats  (which  become  important  for  the  
remained of channels) are divided equally over the specified  
loop length.  Thus, the tempo is set for the given loop length  
and number of beats.  The loop length of the Master Channel  
can be chosen arbitrarily as can the number of beats.  The Slave  
Channels  on  the  other  hand  must  loop  over  some  integer  
number of Master Beats.  When the loop length of a Slave  
Channel is altered it is automatically quantized to a time frame 
Figure 1 – GUI with Slave Channels shown
which is integer number of Master Beats.  Similarly, when the  
number  of  beats  in  the  Master  Channel  changes  the  Slave  
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for  
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are  
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage  and that  
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy  
otherwise, to republish, to post  on servers  or to redistribute  to lists,  
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
NIME’11, May 21-23, 2011, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Copyright remains with the author(s).

Channels  will  change  their  loop  length,  retaining  the  same  
integer number of Master Beats over which they loop.  Finally,  
when the Master Channel changes loop length, the remaining  
Slave Channels all change in unison, taking on the new length  
for their given loop rate, always determined by the number of  
Master Beats they are specified to loop over.
The  resulting  interface  allows  for  complex  rhythms  which  
evolve over long periods of time.  Even with only a handful of  
tracks with a short Master Channel loop rate a varying rhythm  
can be created which won't repeat until the lowest common  
denominator of beats is reached.  For instance, a master track  
looping over 4 beats and a slave which repeats over 7 of those  
Master Beats, won't repeat for 28 beats.
Synchronization between the channels is retained by forcing  
each Slave channel to respond directly to a signal indicating a  
Master Channel Beat has occurred.  Slave channels then keep  
track of how many Master Beats have occurred and ensure all  
counters start fresh after the prescribed number of beats.
Interaction
The interaction for the Sinkapater is keyboard and mouse based  
although an early version used included OSC support which  
could  allow  quicker  access  to  parameters  via  a  dedicated  
controller.  To lengthen or shorten a channels loop rate, click on 
the  top and  drag it  up or  down respectively.  To enable or  
disable a beat simply click on the circle representing the given  
beat.  When a beat is enabled the circle will change from grey  
to blue providing visual feedback.  A channel can be muted by  
clicking on the left edge of the channel's GUI, it will turn red to  
indicate it's muted state.  Click again to un-mute.
Channels  are  grouped  into  ranks,  this  can  be  divided  into  
instrument groups or any other categories.  To access different  
ranks number keys are used.  The space bar is used to start and  
stop the sequencer.  The “T” key toggles to visualization mode  
(described below) where left and right arrow keys change the  
view [2].
In  addition  to  the  aforementioned  tick  marks  on  the  Slave  
Tracks, additional and valuable feedback is given below each  
track indicating how many beats are currently in the loop, how  
many beats occur per Master Beat, the loop length (in units of  
Master Beats) and the loop length in seconds.  While for the  
Master track the feedback is the number of beats in the loop,  
the loop rate in seconds and the number of beats per minute  
(BPM).
Figure 2 – Visualization Mode
Sounds
Sound  samples  as  well  as  sound  synthesis  are  used.   This  
allows  for  a  wide  variety  of  instrumentation.   From  
experimentation I found it useful to organize a bank of sound  
around a particular instrument, for instance, bank 2 as a drum  
set, bank 3 utilizes piano samples, etc.  Bank 1 is sounds from a  
sink, of course.
Visualization
Leveraging the power of a computer and available screen, there  
is a visualization mode which provides a unique view of the  
beats  being  created.   When  in  visualization  mode  virtual  
droplets of water fall from suspended faucets, each at a height  
relative to the corresponding channels loop rate.  When a given  
beat is active it produces a water droplet, when not active no  
such droplet appears.  They land in the bottom of the virtual  
sink in synchrony with the sound being created.  This is a 3-
Dimensional environment which can be explored, taking in the  
scene from different angles.  By visualizing the patterns in this  
way it gives one an intuitive sense of how the different loops  
interact  with  each  other  by  providing  a  means  to  see  the  
patterns as they “splash” into the basin.
Technology
The Sinkapater uses C++ and a number of open source libraries  
which  are  cross  platform  including  STK,  LibSnd,  OpenGL,  
GLU and GLUT.  A technique known as picking is used in  
OpenGL to determine which objects are being interacted with.
Future Work
It has been shown that timing variations among other subtle  
modifications  including  volume  and  timbre  contribute  to  
making a drum machine more expressive [3].  Incorporating  
some  of  these  features  will  make  the  Sinkapater  more  well 
rounded.  Additionally, to make this a more complete system it  
seems  necessary  to  provide  an  interface  to  allow  dynamic  
loading  of  samples.   Further,  to  allow  the  most  flexible  
configurations of beats a sequencer should allow arbitrary beat  
divisions within specified beat.  That is any given beat should  
be allowed to be divided into 2 (eighth notes), 3 (triplets), 5 (5-
tuplet), etc.  And further divided within these new divisions.  
Only then will the full potential of polyrhythms and all manners 
of syncopation, as facilitated by computers be fully accessible  
in a beat sequencer.
Summary
While the Sinkapater is not a fully realized drum machine, it  
introduces new concepts to this storied interface.  By allowing  
each channel to divide the beat in different ways and to loop  
over different intervals complex, syncopated and polyrhythmic  
patterns are easily accessible.  By forcing the Slave Tracks to  
lock to an integer number of Master beats complex patterns  
remain in synchrony with a sense of cohesion.
REFERENCES
[1]  Summers, J., Kennedy, T., Strategies in the Production of a 
5 : 3 Polyrhythm, Human Movement Science, 1992
[2]  Harriman, J., The Sinkapater, Stanford MUS 256a Final 
Project 
https://ccrma.stanford.edu/~jiffer8/256/sinkapater/download.ht
ml
[3] Bilmes, J., Techniques to Foster Drum Machine Expresivity
