WIJAM: A Mobile Collaborative Improvisation Platform
under Master-players Paradigm
Jun-qi Deng
The University of Hong Kong
jqdeng@eee.hku.hk
Francis Chi Moon Lau
The University of Hong Kong
fcmlau@cs.hku.hk
Ho-Cheung Ng
The University of Hong Kong
hcng@eee.hku.hk
Yu-Kwong Kwok
The University of Hong Kong
ykwok@eee.hku.hk
Hung-Kwan Chen
The University of Hong Kong
chk3e@eee.hku.hk
Yu-heng Liu
New Weekly
greenlamb@163.com
ABSTRACT
Music jamming is an extremely diﬃcult task for musical
novices. Trying to extend this meaningful and highly enjoy-
able activity to a larger recipient group, we present WIJAM,
a mobile application for an ad-hoc group of musical novices
to perform improvisation along with a music master. In this
“master-players” paradigm, the master oﬀers a music back-
ing, orchestrates the musical ﬂow, and gives feedbacks to
the players; the players improvise by tapping and sketching
on their smartphones. We argue that this paradigm can be
a signiﬁcant contribution to the possibility of music playing
by a group of novices with no instrumental training leading
to decent musical results.
Keywords
social improvisation, music collaboration, mobile music mak-
ing
1. INTRODUCTION
Music jamming is a kind of music improvisation perfor-
mance usually given by a band of music virtuosos who feel
natural and comfortable to express musical feelings using
their instruments. Musical novices seldom touch this type
of performance because their musical knowledge is insuﬃ-
cient to handle the complex musical context built up dur-
ing the jamming. Trying to bridge this gap between the
virtuosos and novices, so as to lowering the barrier of en-
joying the pleasure of music jamming, we design WIJAM,
an impromptu mobile application for a group of musical
novices(friends or strangers) to jam along with a music mas-
ter. The master provides backings, directs the musical ﬂow
and gives feedbacks to the players. The players improvise
along freely while listening to the backing music. This is
similar to any staged jam session, except that WIJAM has
an explicit “bandleader” and the “band” is composed of an
ad-hocgroup of people.
WIJAM, according to Weinberg[1], is a “small-scale lo-
cal system”, which can be characterized as “collaborative
musical network ... that support three to ten players in
close proximity, which allows for detailed and subtle inter-
personal interactions”. Under the “theoretical framework
of musical interconnectivity”[1], WIJAM can be considered
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’14,June 30 – July 03, 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
structure-centered and process-centered, where “structure”
is manifested in the absolute musical arrangement control of
WIJAM master, and“process”is done when WIJAM players
express intuitively their musical feelings within the bounds
as deﬁned by the WIJAM master. In terms of organization
and architecture, WIJAM is a“synchronous centralized net-
work” with a “ﬂower topology”, where music is being gen-
erated in real-time with a central hub, and the degrees of
freedom in terms of the nodes’ expression are limited to a
level such that the musical outcomes are at least musically
harmonious.
2. DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
WIJAM’s design follows [2]:
The underlying premise of most collaborative in-
terface design is that with various design con-
straints, playing music can be made accessible
to non-musicians ... at the expense of limiting
the musical range and possible gestures associ-
ated with sound in a collective space.
But as pointed out in the same paper, such a guideline has
its drawback:
... many of the simple-to-use computer inter-
faces proposed for musical control seem, after
even a brief period of use, to have a toy-like
character and do not invite continued musical
evolution.
Although the authors go on to argue that this is only true for
expert musicians, “balancing this trade-oﬀ is a key concern
for designers”, as pointed out in [3]. This point is echoed in
many other papers, such as [4], it mentions “provide novices
with essential goals and experts with additional goals”. Try-
ing to strike this very balance, WIJAM equips the players
with an easy to learn and easy to play keyboard, while at
the same time providing “a knowledgeable person to stand
by and assist the players” [2]—the master. The players’
performance bound is imposed upon by the master, which
should give a large enough space for the players to show oﬀ
their virtuosity.
2.1 Big Picture - Entities and Flow Chart
Figure 1 shows the big picture of WIJAM. There are two
kinds of active entities: the master, who initiates and or-
chestrates the jamming, and the players who participate in
the jamming. There is also a passive entity: a loudspeaker
system, which is connected to the master.
Figure 2 is the ﬂowchart of the whole jam session process.
At the beginning, the master hosts a MIDINetworkSession
as a jam session service to be discovered and connected to.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
407
Figure 1: The big picture of WIJAM. The music
collaboration is achieved under the“master-players”
paradigm.
Then the players join the session. After that the master
sends an “assignment” package to each player. The package
contains an instrument ID, a musical key (or “root” to be
precise) and a musical scale. The master signals the start
of the jam by switching on the backing music. When the
players start to jam, they send MIDI performance contents
to the master via coreMIDI. The master monitors all the
performance, renders the notes in the chosen instrument
sounds and mixes them with the backing into one output
stream. While jamming, the master orchestrates everything
to ﬁt to the backing music by instantly changing the assign-
ment or providing performance cue feedbacks to the players
such as “good”, “solo”, “fast”, “calm”, etc. When they ﬁn-
ished jamming a song, the master gives an overall score as
well as an individual score to the players to indicate how
well they have done.
Figure 2: The ﬂowchart of WIJAM.
2.2 Details - Master Machine
The internal structure and layering of the master machine
is shown in the middle part of Figure 4. The core modules
Figure 3: Master Interface
are detailed below:
Master Interface — The master interface is shown in Fig-
ure 3. In the top left corner there is a backing selector
which allows the “user” to initiate the backing music. Mov-
ing downwards one ﬁnds the chord and the scale panels.
They are particularly important for orchestrating the musi-
cal ﬂow. At the bottom we can see six consoles, from A to
F, each for an individual player. They are needed for pro-
viding performance feedback to the players as well as music
output level balancing.
Arranger — This allows the master to manipulate chords,
scales, instruments, and provide performance cues and scores
as feedbacks. These messages are sent via MIDI sysEx mes-
sages.
Virtual Instruments — It stores a library of digital musical
instruments in the form of samplers. The audio samples are
managed using AUPreset and AUSampler technologies[5].
The AUPreset ﬁles are used to map audio samples directly
to MIDI numbers and velocity ranges.
Jam Session Host— It hosts a service which can be easily
discovered and connected to by the player machines. We use
MIDINetworkSession within the CoreMIDI framework to
enable a Bonjour service. It is to be discovered by the player
machines’ Bonjour service browsers, and to be connected to
by the player machines’ MIDINetworkSessions.
2.3 Details - Player Machine
The player machine’s layering is described on the right hand
side of Figure 4, and its interface on Figure 5 with the jam
console on the left and the keyboard on the right. 1The jam
console is designed to discover and connect to the master
machine, while the keyboard is dedicated to musical expres-
sion. The keyboard appears after the jam session has been
established. The following items summarize the working
mechanism of the keyboard:
• The y position determines the pitch, where higher po-
sition yields higher pitch. A screen has 22 pitches.
• At any time the keyboard is ﬁlled with the assigned
chord-scale given by the master machine. The chord-
scale consists of a root and a scale, such as A-Ionian,
which is played under the presence of a chord like A
major, or a chord progression with a common scale,
such as A-F#m-D-E and their substitutions.
1The source code of WIJAM is now available at
github: https://github.com/tangkk/MasterMachine.git
and https://github.com/tangkk/PlayerMachine.git
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
408
Figure 4: The internal layering and structure of WIJAM. The data ﬂows from the master machine (middle)
to the player machine (right) through the bidirectional communication channel, and vice versa.
F
igure 5: Player Interface
• The x position determines the note velocity. A larger
x position value gives higher velocity.
• When sketching, a note is generated when the it starts
or when the curve comes to a stationary point.
This keyboard is intuitive for the novice players since it
abstracts away much of the complicated musical context. It
also frees the players’ imagination since it oﬀers a space as
large as the entire screen without any grid. This allows the
players to do a relatively high-level melody improvisation.
3. DEMO
There are two demos of WIJAM available 2. The WIJAM
demo shows how WIJAM works, and provides tips for using
the master machine and the player machine. The audio
track is an unmodiﬁed recording of the original playback.
Before the jam starts, the players are told to follow their
“musical feelings” based on the backing. As can be heard
in the video, the music outcome is quite pleasing, even at
the critical “key modulation” points: 2:30 and 2:43. Note
that as the jam goes on, because the players have little idea
about what the exact notes they are playing, the “avoid
note”, the most dissonant note within the chord-scale, may
be played on downbeat. This may happen, but with a very
small chance.
The “trombone” player and the two “guitar” players are
with zero training in musical instruments. The “piano”
2WI
JAM demo: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=Y0PnKBrgzgw and WIJAM advanced demo:
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=16dWj5G9UKw
player has some limited experience with piano before. Even
so, the piano player is able to inject a very beautiful solo
during the jam. The “piano” player apparently plays the
best music in this jam session. This somewhat justiﬁes the
“balance” problem in the “Introduction” section of this pa-
per, in that WIJAM actually allows advanced players to
show oﬀ their virtuosity while also enabling an acceptable
level of performance for the novice players.
The WIJAM advanced demo is a bonus track featuring
the designer of WIJAM playing and overdubbing a whole
jam session. It shows some advanced features of the Play-
erMachine. The audio track is an overdubbing of each in-
strument track plus the backing track.
4. BACKGROUND REVIEW
Apple GarageBand’s“Jam session”[6] probably has the most
similarity to WIJAM. It allows real-time jamming and multi-
track recording at the same time. The players choose in-
struments from Garageband’s instrument library, and then
one of them creates a jam session that everyone else can
join in and jam. However, it is obviously not a “master-
players” paradigm, even though the jam session has a “ban-
dleader”[7]. The “bandleader” does not seem to have much
control over the jam compared with WIJAM master who
can dominate the key, scale, backing, performance feedback,
output volume, etc. in real-time. Therefore Garageband
requires its players to be relatively musically talented in or-
der to complete a successful and comfortable jam session.
Also its player interfaces are replicas of real instruments’
layouts, which are relatively diﬃcult for a musical novice
to handle. One should be able to easily tell the essential
diﬀerences between the two applications, which lie in their
target scenarios. Garageband is suitable for a group of mu-
sical talented peers to intentionally record their jam, while
WIJAM targets at an ad-hoc group of people who happen
to come together in a common place and want to have fun.
ZOOZbeat[8] is also a music jamming application focus-
ing on musical novice’s experience. It supports multiple
notes input gestures, such as shaking, tilting, tapping and
tossing. It provides individual play mode or group play
mode. We notice however that in its group play mode,
there is neither a centralized control nor a common goal
among the players; it is designed more for the situation
where the players are actually a group of friends following
a pre-composed work or with a clear objective, and less for
group ad-lib. In comparison to ZOOZbeat, the most signiﬁ-
cant advantage of WIJAM is the“master-players”paradigm,
where the players can follow someone’s musical arrangement
and performance cues in real-time. Most importantly, they
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
409
have a shared goal which is to try to achieve a good score
by the master at the end of the jam.
Ocarina [9] is a famous application that can oﬀer a great
user experience by emulating perfectly a real ocarina. Al-
though this is not a music jamming application, it includes
a “world-stage” [10] engine to let users perform or compose
for other people, or to observe and judge the performance
by anyone else in the world. WIJAM borrows some of this
idea, but limits the performance to a “common-area-stage”,
and every participant in the jam, including the master, is a
performer, a composer, a listener and a judger at the same
time. WIJAM is diﬀerent from Ocarina in the composing
process and performing process, as they can happen at the
same time. That means every player is actually an impro-
viser under the assistance of the master. This is interesting
because in WIJAM the master does not compose everything
for the players, he/she just applies some very relaxed con-
straints on what the players’ playing, whereas in Ocarina,
the players are only playing what they see on the screen in
order to get their score.
Some academic literature have also suggested various ap-
proaches and paradigms for network collaborated perfor-
mance. Reference [11], one of the seminal papers in the
ﬁeld of mobile music making, describes a system target-
ing collaborative performance over wireless ad-hoc network.
The collaboration paradigm is based on a social metaphor
of friendship. Thus it’s basically a “playing together” peer-
to-peer approach. It stresses on real-time music creation,
collaborative composing and proactive listening. WIJAM
diﬀers from this in that it is based on the “master-players”
paradigm; hence it aims at a relatively serious kind of jam-
ming rather than simply “playing together”. Reference [12]
suggests an audience-participation music making approach,
by using a master server to collect the audience generated
materials, reprocess them and present them back to the au-
dience. This is similar to the master-players approach, but
its ﬁnal output can be expected to be somewhat experimen-
tal, since, unlike WIJAM, it does not take much of tradi-
tionally “musical” materials into consideration. Reference
[13] also suggests a master-players performance approach.
Master controls the tempo and time signature of the per-
formance via sending players MIDI-clock signal, while the
players contribute to the performance by sending audio con-
tents to the master who performs real-time post processing
before the ﬁnal output. This kind of collaboration is quite
similar to WIJAM’s except that WIJAM master puts more
stress on the arrangement and orchestration rather than
simply the tempo.
5. CONCLUSIONS
Our discussion stresses repeatedly on the “master-players”
collaborative performance paradigm, by which the powerful
master machine and intuitive player machines together can
achieve some meaningful collaboration. We describe two
demos of WIJAM, showing that the musical outcomes of
WIJAM can be quite acceptable. Finally, we contrast the
uniqueness and novelty of WIJAM with existing applica-
tions or ideas from the academia. Based on discussions, we
can safely draw a conclusion that WIJAM, with its “master-
players”paradigm, provides a brand new perspective on how
social music collaboration could be done.
There is ongoing work following the current WIJAM im-
plementation. For example, in order to have social music
making independent of the existence of a real musician, i.e.
the WIJAM master, an auto-assignment module is being
developed to “look ahead” or “pre-analyse” the backing and
assign the correct chord-scale to the players at the appro-
priate time. Besides auto-assignment, an auto-arrangement
and auto-mixing module will be needed if the real musi-
cian is to be eliminated eventually. This means that the
musical burden, from arrangement to mixing, will be mi-
grated to the computer. Furthermore, there are some other
related topics such as crowd-sourcing composition and algo-
rithmic composition. Crowd-sourcing composition involves
automating the music outcome evaluation process, while al-
gorithmic composition is about automating low-level musi-
cal processes on players’ side in order to let them improvise
at a much higher level. We hope WIJAM will eventually be-
come a “musical-automated” social improvisation platform
that can involve anyone interested in playing music.
6. REFERENCES
[1] Gil Weinberg. Interconnected Musical Networks:
Toward a Theoretical Framework. Computer Music
Journal, 29(2):23–39, 2005.
[2] Tina Blaine and Sidney S. Fels. Contexts of
Collaborative Musical Experiences. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on New Interfaces for
Musical Expression, pages 129–134, 2003.
[3] Tina Blaine and Sidney Fels. Collaborative Musical
Experiences for Novices. Journal of New Music
Research, 32(4):411–428, 2003.
[4] Anna Xamb´ o, Robin Laney, Chris Dobbyn, and Sergi
Jord` a. Multi-touch Interaction Principles for
Collaborative Real-time Music Activities: Towards a
Pattern Language. In Proceedings of the International
Computer Music Conference, 2011.
[5] Apple Inc. AUSampler - Loading Instruments.
https://developer.apple.com/library/ios/
technotes/tn2283/_index.html. Accessed:
2014-01-5.
[6] GarageBand for iOS.
http://www.apple.com/ios/garageband/. Accessed:
2014-01-8.
[7] iPad tutorial: Recording multiple GarageBand tracks
with Jam Session.
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eoAHORlEDhk.
Accessed: 2014-01-5.
[8] Gil Weinberg, Andrew Beck, and Mark Godfrey.
ZooZBeat : a Gesture-based Mobile Music Studio. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on New
Interfaces for Musical Expression, pages 312–315,
2009.
[9] Ge Wang. Designing Smule’s Ocarina : The iPhone’s
Magic Flute. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression,
pages 303–307, 2009.
[10] Ge Wang, Jieun Oh, Spencer Salazar, and Robert
Hamilton. World Stage: A Crowd-sourcing Paradigm
for Interactive Social. InProceedings of the
International Computer Music Conference, pages
408–414, 2011.
[11] Atau Tanaka. Mobile Music Making. In Proceedings of
the 2004 conference on New interfaces for musical
expression, pages 154–156, 2004.
[12] Jieun Oh and Ge Wang. Audience-participation
Techniques Based on Social Mobile Computing. In
Proceedings of the International Computer Music
Conference, pages 665–672, 2011.
[13] Robin Renwick. Sourcenode: a Network Sourced
Approach to Network Music Performance(NMP). In
Proceedings of the International Computer Music
Conference, pages 301–308, 2012.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
410