Style and Constraint in Electronic Musical Instruments
Michael Gurevich, Paul Stapleton, Adnan Marquez-Borbon
Sonic Arts Research Centre
Queen’s University Belfast
BT7 1NN. UK
{m.gurevich, p.stapleton, amarquezborbon01}@qub.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
A qualitative study to investigate the development of style
in performance with a highly constrained musical instru-
ment is described. A new one-button instrument was de-
signed, with which several musicians were each asked to
practice and develop a solo performance. Observations of
trends in attributes of these performances are detailed in re-
lation to participants’ statements in structured interviews.
Participants were observed to develop stylistic variations
both within the domain of activities suggested by the con-
straint, and by discovering non-obvious techniques through
a variety of strategies. Data suggest that stylistic variations
occurred in spite of perceived constraint, but also because
of perceived constraint. Furthermore, participants tended
to draw on unique experiences, approaches and perspectives
that shaped individual performances.
Keywords
design, interaction, performance, persuasive technology
1. INTRODUCTION
This paper builds on previous work in the area of de-
signing for style in new musical interactions. Drawing on
the work of Brand and Hertzmann [1], Gurevich, Stapleton
and Bennett [7] drew a distinction between style and struc-
ture. They deﬁne structure as a set of qualitative states
and transitions between states that compose an interac-
tion. Pitching a baseball for example could be described
as a progression through states of grip, windup, leg kick,
push-oﬀ and release. Style in this case describes the quan-
titative realization of that structure for a speciﬁc instance of
a pitch. Variations in style will be inﬂuenced by the choice
of activity within the structure – a curveball might look
diﬀerent than a slider – and by the particular attributes of
the pitcher. They deﬁne personal style to be a pattern of
similarities across diﬀerent realizations that are attributable
to an individual; a pitcher’s style will appear to be some-
how consistent from one pitch to the next, regardless of the
particular pitch selection.
Gurevich, Stapleton and Bennett [7] argue that within
the NIME discourse, this concept of style is more useful
than the traditional discussion of expression, as it disentan-
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME2010, 15-18th June 2010Sydney, Australia
Copyright 2010, Copyright remains with the author(s).
gles behaviour and action (and the perception thereof) from
confounding phenomena like emotion and the construction
of meaning that are implied by the term expression. The
frequently stated desire for virtuosity in NIME [3] can then
be considered in terms of style; a virtuosic performer can
not only realize diﬃcult or complex structures, but can do
so with a style deemed desirable. Therefore, a NIME spec-
tator should be able to distinguish between structure and
style, between what the performer is doing and how they
are doing it.
1.1 Constraint
Constraint was observed to play an important role in dis-
cerning structure and style [7]. An extremely constrained
interaction would make structure quite apparent to the spec-
tator, but may limit the degree of stylistic variation. Con-
versely, a loosely constrained interaction might lead to a
great diversity of styles but also to a diﬃculty in recog-
nizing the structure underpinning a particular realization.
Gurevich, Stapleton and Bennett [7] conclude by positing
that designing for style can be framed in terms of identi-
fying a level of constraint which balances these competing
concerns, but without a clear indication of what constraint
is or how it is achieved.
Redstrom [10] and others [2] have argued that truly “neu-
tral” designs cannot exist; all designs steer users toward
particular behaviours. In this context, constraint can be
taken to mean a limitation of the variety of behaviours sug-
gested by the design. It is important to note that we do not
deﬁne constraint in terms of the number of possible actions
oﬀered by the design; this would more closely be related to
the number aﬀordances [9]. In terms of actual aﬀordances,
one can actually accomplish a great diversity of activities
with a “keyed” connector, for example. What makes a de-
sign constrained is the strong indication it gives the user
of a singular method of use. In other words, constraint is
deﬁned by both the inherent physical and perceived limita-
tions of an interface.
Additionally, we distinguish between the externally im-
posed constraints in an interaction and the constraints per-
ceived by a user to be inherent in a novel design. Externally
imposed constraints limit the number of interactions of a de-
vice that under normal circumstances would suggest a diver-
sity of behaviours. For example, given a 101-key computer
keyboard, which suggests a wide variety of behaviours, one
could easily constrain the interaction of a user by telling
them to “press the ‘f’ key.” We are concerned with the be-
haviours that result spontaneously from the inherent design
constraints in the absence of signiﬁcant external constraint.
In relation to style one would of course expect that as the
number of actual aﬀordances or possible actions an inter-
face enables increases, so would the diversity of observed
behaviours, given a suﬃciently large sample size. To be
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
106
clear, this is not the purpose of the present study. Rather,
in considering constraint as a limitation on suggested be-
haviours and stylistic variation as related to the diversity of
actual behaviours, we are interested in investigating the re-
lationship between constraint and style, between suggested
and actual behaviours.
In particular, this study looks at a case of extreme con-
straint: When a design attempts to steer users toward a
very limited set of behaviours, what kinds of variations ac-
tually emerge, and why? This can be framed as an example
of persuasive technology [4, 8], but where that ﬁeld gener-
ally tries to optimize a design’s ability to elicit a limited
range of desired behaviours from users, we are interested in
facilitating a diversity of behaviours.
To this aim, a new instrument was designed for this study,
in order to ensure that there was no established performance
practice or other normative convention that would act as
an externally imposed constraint that might steer all or se-
lected participants toward a distinct pattern of behaviour.
Overall conditions were controlled to try to minimize ex-
plicit externally imposed constraints; the focus was primar-
ily on constraints inherent in the design. Where external
constraints were necessary in order to structure the activity
assigned to the participants, we attempted to apply them
uniformly.
This study is exploratory in nature. Given the previously
observed relationship between style and constraint, the aim
was to unpack that relationship by observing how design
and human factors contribute to the development of style in
performances with a highly constrained electronic musical
instrument. It should be noted that this is not meant to
be a case-study of an instrument design; the purpose is
not to evaluate this particular device’s value as a musical
instrument. Rather, we use it as a means to investigate
the relationship between constraint and style in a musical
context.
2. METHOD
The idea of the study was to give a number of perform-
ers each an identical copy of a novel constrained electronic
instrument. Participants created a short solo performance
with the instrument and were subsequently interviewed in
order to identify aspects of their relationship with the de-
vice, or other cognitive, social, or experiential factors that
may have contributed to the development of style. The per-
formances and interviews were videotaped and analyzed in
order to compare features that contributed to stylistic vari-
ations between participants. The analysis of the qualitative
data was based on a Grounded Theory [6] approach.
2.1 Instrument Design
A simple electronic musical instrument was designed specif-
ically for the study. An obvious way to constrain a device is
to limit both the number of controls and the outcomes that
are mapped to those controls. We therefore tried to create
a device with a minimum number of physical controls and
sonic parameters, and a one-to-one mapping between them.
The instrument that was created consists of an unadorned
project box (10.8 x 19.0 x 3.4 cm) with a single momentary
pushbutton on its top surface whose only control is the du-
ration of a single tone. A tone of ﬁxed pitch and amplitude
sounds from a speaker embedded in the box for long as the
button is pressed. Holes drilled into the box allow the sound
to project from the box. The tone is generated by a simple
555 timer oscillator circuit.
We attempted to tune each copy of the instrument to
the same frequency, however the nature of the 555 circuit
caused the pitch vary with the charge level of the battery,
thus making it impossible to set the frequency to be exactly
the same in each. At the time of performance, they were all
within a two octave range centered around approximately
1kHz.1 An LED on the box would illuminate while the but-
ton was pressed as a way to give visual feedback. Battery
drain was an issue in a prototype version of the instrument.
Compensating for this would have required signiﬁcantly in-
creasing the complexity of the circuit, and so a power switch
was added to the side of box as a compromise.
2.2 Procedure
Participants consisted of 9 volunteer undergraduate and
postgraduate music students. Each participant received one
copy of the instrument and was instructed to practice with
it over the period of one week. Each was told that at the
end of this time, they would be asked to give a solo per-
formance with the instrument lasting no more than two
minutes. Participants were informed that they would be
interviewed subsequent to the performance. No further in-
structions or information regarding the instrument’s design
or purpose were given at the time.
The performance sessions were conducted in vacant pri-
vate oﬃces in the authors’ department. Apart from the
performer, only the interviewer was present in the room,
although the performers were aware that the sessions were
being video- and audio-taped. Performers were given no
directions as to their physical comportment, and all were
presented the opportunity to sit, stand, or use a table sur-
face according to their preference. The performances began
once the participants felt ready to do so, and they were
not instructed to stop by the interviewer; the decision to
end a performance was left to the performer. The struc-
tured interview followed the conclusion of the performance.
After the performance sessions, a background information
questionnaire was distributed via email in order to assess
the level and diversity of experience and expertise in music,
improvisation and performance of each participant.
2.3 Analysis
Videos of the performances and interviews were analyzed
in order to extract data based on both direct observation
of the performances and participants’ interview accounts.
Expecting that at least some stylistic variations would be
observed, the purpose of the interview was to shed light on
what might have led participants to generate their partic-
ular performance realizations and to trace the diﬀerences
in motivations, impressions and approaches across partic-
ipants. Although speciﬁc lines of questioning were devel-
oped in order to elicit data in these categories, most of
the participants volunteered a signiﬁcant amount of the de-
sired information in response to the initial question, which
prompted them to describe their approach to what they had
just played.
The interview addressed the following areas of interest:
1. Variations in musical content – personal performance
approach taken during the improvisation, the range of ma-
terial played;
2. Impressions of the instrument – initial reactions, un-
derstanding of the interface, expectations, perceived limita-
tions or problems and previous experience with other simi-
lar instruments;
3. Variations in physical interaction – range of playing
styles and physical posture;
4. Learning process – approach to practicing and level of
engagement with the instrument;
1In interviews, only one participant commented on the high pitch of the instru-
ment. There were no observable differences between performances that corre-
lated to the pitch height of their instrument.
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
107
Figure 1: Note-silence durations
5. Development of skill – perceived improvement through
practice and skill self-assessment;
6. Suggestions for further development of the instrument.
The video from each performance was manually inspected
in an eﬀort to identify similarities, diﬀerences and emergent
themes that are present across performances. The general
approach was to deﬁne a series of categories that catalogued
diﬀerent aspects of performance. Within each category, a
set of codes classiﬁed behaviours or activities; each perfor-
mance was assigned one or more codes in each category
based on the presence or absence, and in some cases fre-
quency, of the associated activity. In most categories, codes
were not predetermined; that is, new observed activities
would generate new codes as the analysis progressed. There
were subsequently reﬁned to consolidate similar or redun-
dant codes. Nineteen categories were used, among which
six generated the data discussed in this paper. These are:
note durations, silence durations, posture, ways of holding
the instrument, ways of playing the instrument and musi-
cal variations. Categories are explained below as the per-
tinent observations are introduced. Interview transcripts
were coded using freely assigned tags. Subsequently, these
where analyzed for semantic and thematic similarities, and
a reﬁned set of codes was developed. Coded transcript sec-
tions were then correlated against each other, and against
performance observations in order to identify patterns and
relationships across participants’ behaviours and comments.
3. OBSERV ATIONS
The following section describes observations of perfor-
mance and interview data and relates these onto the con-
cepts of style and constraint as deﬁned above. The two
kinds of data are presented side-by-side in order to exam-
ine how participants’ accounts of their experiences with the
instrument may relate to how they played.
3.1 Style within the Constraints of the Instru-
ment
In the narrowest view of the interactions enabled by the
instrument, the performer can control onset and oﬀset du-
rations by pressing and releasing the button. We can there-
fore consider the musical results in terms of two parameters:
note durations and silence durations. The diversity of note
and silence durations is one way to consider stylistic varia-
tion between performers; a performer that plays exclusively
short notes with long silences in between has a diﬀerent
style as one who plays only long notes interspersed with
very short silences. Based on observed trends in the perfor-
mances, we classiﬁed both note and silence durations into
three categories:Short (<1 s), Medium (1-3 s), and Long
(>3 s). Performances were then classiﬁed based on the pres-
ence or absence of notes and silences of each duration class.
For each of note durations and silence durations there are
therefore 7 diﬀerent possible permutations. Of these, only
3 were observed for both note and silence durations among
the 9 performances.
Note durations: SM, SL, SML
Silence durations: S, SM, SML
We can therefore classify each performance in terms of
the pair {Note,Silence}, where each element represents the
set of note and silence durations observed in that perfor-
mance. This leads to a total of 49 possible pairs that could
characterize each performance. As Figure 1a shows, among
the 9 performances, 7 unique {Note,Silence} pairs were ob-
served, indicating a high degree of stylistic diversity be-
tween the performers. However, Figure 1b indicates that
these performances were concentrated into a narrow region
of the overall set of possibilities. There is a deﬁnite ten-
dency toward both short note and silence durations and a
clear avoidance of exclusively long and medium/long notes
and silences. The avoidance of long notes is evident also in
the interview data; when asked their initial impressions of
the instrument, 4 participants described the sound of the
instrument as monotonous or static, one indicated that it
was excessively loud. According to another,“let’s say that
if you play it for too long, well... it’s not very pleasant.”
While the presence of long silences was low – only two
made use of them during their performance – one performer
described the deliberate use of silence as a stylistic choice
that creates more musical possibilities:“You’ve been play-
ing a lot and then all of sudden you drop out or you’ve been
playing something rhythmic and then you drop out. Then
you’re setting up this situation where’s there a lot of room
to play around.”We suspect that for most participants, the
externally imposed constraint of the performance context
had signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the trend toward short silences.
The context of the experiment likely led participants to fo-
cus on playing the device, rather than not playing it; they
were instructed to conﬁne performances to within 2 min-
utes, and hence the lack of long silences.
Three signiﬁcant trends therefore emerged from the anal-
ysis of note and silence durations. First, the limited dis-
tribution of{Note,Silence} pairs and speciﬁcally the ten-
dency away from long notes, indicates that an extremely
constrained design can steer users toward a normative style
of use, as is to be expected. However, within this region,
we observed very little overlap in styles, suggesting that in-
dividual performers’ contributions based on their particular
experience, motivations and choices led to individualized re-
alizations. Finally, we expect that however minimal, exter-
nally imposed constraints on the structure of the interaction
(in this case the duration and context of the performance)
also contribute to trends in user behaviour.
3.2 Diversity of Behaviour
A normative style of use can further be seen if we look at
attributes of the performances beyond note and silence du-
rations. Four other categories of variation were annotated
and coded:postures, ways of holding the instrument, ways
of playing the instrument and musical variations . Pos-
ture was coded in terms of spine angle, foot position, arm
position, elbow position and choice of sitting or standing.
Among these, 2 variations were observed in each class for a
total of 10 codes. Although no participants elected to stand
during their performance, it was available as an option and
therefore we include it in the analysis. Ways of holding
the instrument referred to the position of the instrument
in the hands and around the body. Here, 7 variations were
observed, as indicated in Table 1.
Ways of playingthe instrument describe physical en-
gagements that directly led to sound production or modi-
ﬁcation. Most of the codes in this category, also listed in
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
108
Table 1: Categories and codes
Postur
e Ways
of holding Ways
of playing Music
al variations
Sitting
down Bo
x on table Button
press with ﬁnger Rh
ythmic beeping
Straigh
t back Bo
x on lap Button
press with thumb Arrh
ythmic beeping
Leaning
forward One-handed Finger
tap on box Rh
ythmic tapping
Arms
to side Tw
o-handed Th
umb tap on box Arh
ythmic tapping
Arms
projected Held
by length Hand
tap on box Sound
ﬁltering
Elb
ows free Held
by width Man
ual ﬁltering Mec
hanical noise
Elb
ows resting on lap Bo
x rotated on any axis Spatialization Sim
ultaneous events
Both
feet ﬂat on ﬂoor - Use
of power switch -
Legs
crossed - Comp
ound gestures -
Standing
up - - -
Table 1, are self-explanatory. Compound gesturesrefers
to the use of more than one simultaneous way of playing.
This code is only assigned when one or more technique is
used at the same time, in order to diﬀerentiate this practice
from the sequential employment of diﬀerent ways of playing.
Musical variationsdescribe the diversity of sonic results
achieved in terms other than note and silence durations,
including exploitation of mechanical noise of the button,
rhythmic elements and manually ﬁltering the sound ema-
nating from the speaker with one hand.Rhythmic play-
ing was ascribed when sound events were organized with an
audible pulse; arrhythmic playingwas ascribed when no
pulse could be detected. Simultaneous eventsrefers to
multiple musical variations occurring at the same time, for
example tapping the box while playing beeps with the but-
ton. Musical variationsare distinct from ways of playing
in that some variations can be achieved through multiple
ways of playing. Similarly, some ways of playing can lead
to diﬀerent musical results. As explained previously, codes
were assigned when the associated activity was present at
least once during the performance; multiple codes could be
assigned to each performance.
Figure 2 shows the frequency distributions for posture,
ways of holding, ways of playing and musical variation, with
the x-axis ordered from most-to-least frequent behaviours.
All four resemble a roughly exponential decay, indicating
that there is a tendency toward a normative overall playing
approach characterized by two or three frequent behaviours,
with divergent styles appearing less frequently. We expect
that as the sample size increases, the tails would grow longer
as more performers introduced personal variations, but that
we would also see further consolidation in the region of “nor-
mal” activity.
In comparing these other performance attributes to note-
silence durations, some interesting correlations emerged.
The activity of manual ﬁltering occurred in 5 performances.
All of these performances were among the 7 that included
long note durations. That is, in all but two performance
with long notes, the performers manually attenuated or ﬁl-
tered the sound of the instrument. Among these, 4 variously
described the sound of the instrument as“monotonous,”
“static,” “loud,” or having “limited... musical dynamics”.
The 5th performer who employed this technique speciﬁ-
cally mentioned manual ﬁltering as a method of introduc-
ing variation to the static sound of longer notes:“...at ﬁrst
I only sustained the tone, left it pressed and after awhile
tried to vary it in some way. And the way I did that was
to dampen the speaker.” Of the 2 participants who played
long notes but did not manually dampen the sound during
performance, one described discovering the technique dur-
ing rehearsal but rejecting it before his performance:“And
then with... doing like muﬄing it just to see, you know... it
just sort of went ‘wah wah wah.’”
The observed correlation between notes of long duration
and manual ﬁltering suggests that some users can ﬁnd “hid-
den aﬀordances” [5] to overcome a perceived constraint of
the interface. In the case of one participant quoted above,
manual ﬁltering (described as “dampening”) was discovered
as a way of realizing the desire to introduce variation to the
static sound. Another participant who used manual ﬁltering
had a similar reaction, but to the overall simplicity of the
interface rather than any limitation in particular. This par-
ticipant quite literally thought the instrument had hidden
aﬀordances:“Its simplicity made me think that there was
something I was missing. So it made me, you know, won-
der what I was missing. And then I realised there wasn’t.”
He reiterated this idea later in the interview, this time sug-
gesting the monotony was a source of limitation:“I kind of
knew that it had only one sound, but I thought that there
was something else to it that I was kind of missing...”
Some of these non-obvious aﬀordances were a result of
mechanical noise in the button, as reﬂected in the ways of
playing and musical variations listed in Table 1. When the
button was partly depressed, this noise caused a chaotic
sound from the oscillator circuit. Other timbral eﬀects
could be achieved by turning on and oﬀ the power switch
with the button depressed. Several participants explored
the conditions under which these sounds could be achieved,
exploiting and incorporating them into their practice; oth-
ers acknowledged the possibility but stayed within the bounds
of the perceived constraint during their performances.
3.3 Approaches to Practice
Participants tended to describe their approach to per-
formance in terms of their evolving relationship with the
instrument through practice. Most participants were ini-
tially struck by a sense of limitation of possibilities, indi-
cating that the intended constraint of the design eﬀectively
steered them toward a limited set of behaviours. A diver-
sity of strategies emerged through which some performers
overcame the apparent constraint.
The sense of “something missing” expressed previously is
also described by nearly half of the performers. This group
of participants commented that when they ﬁrst received
the instrument they believed it would do “more complex
things.” The expectation these performers had about the
instrument was unfulﬁlled; during their practice with the
device, they began noticing the limitations of the interface.
Some participants eﬀectively stopped exploring the instru-
ment at this stage and elected to operate entirely within
the immediately apparent constraint. One participant said,
“It just has that one sound it makes and the one way to
trigger it.”The limitations of the instrument discouraged
these performers from further exploration.
Other participants approached the constraints in terms of
speciﬁc aims or problems to be solved. The aforementioned
techniques of manual ﬁltering and spatialization were re-
alized when the performers encountered a particular prob-
lem, “running out of patterns,” or “I discovered the envelope
thing [manual ﬁltering] because I tried to make the volume
softer. At ﬁrst the volume seemed too loud to me and then
I covered it to make it less loud. I mean, I realized that
it could be another musical parameter.” In a similar fash-
ion, several participants mentioned that by moving the in-
strument in space, they attempted to achieve another type
of variation in sound:“And then practicing another, like
another type that with that limitation can achieve another
sound. Either not having the sound directed towards me, but
trying to vary it, covering it, moving it [moves box around]
basically.”A second case involves a similar type of explo-
ration: “I tried rotating it to get diﬀerent sounds across my
face... And rotating it came from running out of patterns.
And so I thought ‘I need to do something diﬀerent.’”This
group of performers saw the limitations of the instrument
as problems to be solved which in turn led them into alter-
native ways of interacting with the instrument.
Some participants discovered ways of operating the in-
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
109
Figure 2: Code frequency distributions
strument outside of initially perceived constraints, but viewed
these as an insuﬃcient means to achieve satisfying results.
This opinion is exempliﬁed by one participant’s comment:
“I tried changing – trying to close it to change the volume
or something like that – trying to dampen it like this [puts
hand over speaker] to see if it could do anything else. But
it seemed that it didn’t – it didn’t do much. It’s like a very
pure tone, so it wasn’t possible to do much – much change.”
He continued,“It seems to me like it does [have limitations],
of course. Because it does not have any height [in pitch],
nor dynamics, nor any other sort of variation.”
Despite the fact that many performers ascribed a sense of
simplicity and/or limitation to the instrument, a select few
were undeterred and expressed that they were able to ﬁnd
valuable musical potential. Unlike the previous group of
participants, their explorations weren’t bounded by speciﬁc
goals or problems. The instrument became a rich platform
for exploration and the discovery of diverse musical and in-
teraction possibilities. As noted by one, “I ﬁnd limitations
being a good thing. And you know the idea is you could sort
of make something musical out of anything, it’s an attrac-
tive aesthetic I guess... It’s deﬁnitely a rich environment...
I was sort of sceptical initially, but... right away, I was
actually ‘you could do this, you could do that.’” Among
them, two distinct approaches emerged from the observa-
tional data. We describe them in terms of a vertical versus
horizontal approach.
In the vertical approach, participants described identi-
fying a new technique and attempting to exhaust all of
its musical potential, until something else emerged. One
performer commented,“I like to explore during the perfor-
mance... and so starting to just do something rhythmic and
then I noticed there’s this kind of ﬂaw or something like
that [plays instruments]... so I thought ‘that’s something
to exploit.’ So the instrument sort of led me to the next
[musical event].”When unexpected aﬀordances arose, they
were capitalized upon and further incorporated into prac-
tice, but these participants described no intentional search
for new possibilities:“It just sort of revealed itself. The
ﬁrst thing... well when you look ‘oh, that’s a button,’ so
just means I have to do something pulsed. Then I noticed,
and I don’t know if it was intentional or not, but those little
ﬂaws and stuﬀ, that noisiness that helped a lot. So I can
actually change timbre a little bit.”
In the horizontal approach, participants attempted to
enumerate all the possibilities or aﬀordances of the instru-
ment. Performers exhibiting this behaviour described ex-
ploring as many diﬀerent ways of physical interaction and
musical content possible. This approach is embodied by
one performer who said,“... it no longer goes ‘beep’ ...
Table 2: Total ways of playing/musical variations
ID T
otal ways of playing T
otal musical variations
1* 7 5
2 5 4
3 5 4
4 4 3
5 4 3
6 3 5
7 3 3
8 3 1
9* 1 3
let’s hit it, bite it, or let’s throw it around. I was like ‘what
to do, what to do?’ Afterwards I said, ‘How is it that I can’t
get anything else from it!? Well, today I will not play beep
but I will only hit it.’”Once a new way of interacting with
the instrument was discovered, there was a need to pursue
another one. This participant seemed to conceptually sepa-
rate activities that were “by design” from unintended ones,
although all were fair game in performance:“I discovered
that there were small things that were not part of that sound
and that maybe were not the same... they’re not of the same
principle of the box. I’m talking about its purpose [plays and
sings the pitch]. Well, before doing that there where some
other sounds that are not perceived... and you would listen
to a ‘crick, crack, crick’ and that I think can be exploited.”
The two participants whose previous comments exempli-
ﬁed the vertical and horizontal explorative approaches also
stand out clearly in their performance data, speciﬁcally in
the numbers of ways of playing and musical variations. As
seen in Table 2, these individuals represent the two extremes
of the set in terms of the total number of ways of playing.
Participant ID 1 had the most diﬀerent ways of play-
ing, as well as the highest number of total musical varia-
tions of all participants. Several changes of posture and of
ways of holding the instrument were apparent during the
performance as well. This is the participant quoted above
with regard to the horizontal approach. In contrast, partic-
ipant ID 9 exempliﬁed the vertical approach in describing
his practice. While this is the only participant who per-
formed with just a single way of playing, his total number
of musical variations is close to the average (3.44). This
participant similarly showed no changes in posture or in
the ways of holding the instrument during the performance.
He described “mastery” as a priority, and appeared to only
discover some techniques that were common among other
participants during the interview:“Or if I wanted to mas-
ter this sort of spatialization technique... that you could do
with a violin or a clarinet and you experiment with it. You
know, let’s see, oh I never ooh! [dampens speaker] I never
really tried the vibrato.”
Although these performers had radically diﬀerent
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
110
approaches, they were uniﬁed by their distinctly exploratory
attitude. This would seem to be corroborated by their self
assessments of skill; they assigned themselves the two low-
est ratings of the group, scores of 1 and 2 on a scale of 1-5.
Participant ID 1’s explanations for this rating reﬂected a
need for further exploration and discovery in order to im-
prove:“2... Because to be an expert I would need more
time, perhaps... because you can always do something else,
something diﬀerent.” Participant ID 9 similarly commented
on time investment but suggested that technical mastery is
not the only component to skill. He gave himself a score of
“1 for sure. A complete beginner. I think there’s a level of
competency I think you can develop [but] the rest is more a
matter of musicality.”
Both of these participants were clearly undeterred by the
constraint of the interface. When presented with an in-
strument with very few controls that was expected to steer
them toward a single mode of operation, neither thought
that they had exhausted its potential even after a week of
practice. This is a stark contrast to the sole performer who
gave himself the highest skill rating, saying,“If a master is a
person who can turn this on and press it, then, let’s say [I’m
a] 5.”Participants 1 and 9 furthermore reﬂected radically
diﬀerent styles in performance: one focusing on a single
activity, the other on a diversity of techniques. This fur-
ther reinforces a personal contribution to style; what these
performers brought to the interaction was as signiﬁcant, if
not more so, than the instrument itself in determining their
playing styles. However, we propose that the very fact that
the instrument was so constrained helped to make space for
this personal element to emerge.
Other participants described additional ways in which
their personal experience or attitude inﬂuenced their ap-
proach, and ultimately their particular style. The transfer
of skill from other instruments was one such factor. One
described that his approach to dealing with constraint was
primarily inﬂuenced by the way in which he plays his pri-
mary instrument:“The one sound, I saw as a limitation.
It’s not the end of the world, especially for a drummer. You
don’t need those melodies too much. ”
3.4 Explicit Assessments of Constraint
At the very end of the interview, participants were asked
to describe how they would change the instrument. Most
responses were either framed in terms of sound (variation
of frequency, timbre and volume) or control (add more but-
tons, introduce sliders). Surprisingly, several performers
expressed an appreciation of the simplicity of the interface.
Because of this they did not want to drastically change the
instrument and commented that a minor change or addi-
tion, such as volume or frequency control, would suﬃce to
substantially increase the musical possibilities of the instru-
ment. One participant said, “I like the simplicity of it. I
think it would be neat if it had some sort of velocity sensitiv-
ity or something like that... I like the idea of the one-button
thing... I would make it something in the touch... If touch
controlled timbre... but just with that one button.”
4. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We have observed that performers were able to achieve a
signiﬁcant degree of stylistic diversity with a constrained
musical instrument. In analysis of patterns of variation
across a number of performance attributes, a normative
style emerged with the distribution of variations appear-
ing to decay roughly exponentially. Stylistic variation was
manifested within the constraints of the instrument, by de-
veloping variations using the immediately apparent aﬀor-
dances of the instrument. A diﬀerent kind of variation
emerged through exploration of “non-obvious” aﬀordances.
This emerged in some participants as an explicit response
to perceived problems presented by the constraint. Others
sought to explore all the possibilities the instrument made
available. To this end, participants used diverse approaches
and achieved signiﬁcantly varied results. This suggests that
the individual approaches and attitudes of performers con-
tribute signiﬁcantly to the development of style. With a
constrained instrument, we have observed that performers
developed stylistic variations both in spite of and because
of the constrained design.
The implication that the performer’s contribution to the
interaction is an important factor in style should not be
surprising, but it provides an opportunity to reﬂect back
on the concept of virtuosity. There has been a tendency to
describe the potential for virtuosity in terms of properties
of the device [11], but our data shows that some perform-
ers see enormous potential in “simple-to-use” devices. One
participant even stated, “there are always people that can
achieve a greater level of virtuosity with a given instrument,
simple or complex as it might be.” Other participants cer-
tainly did reﬂect on exhausting the musical potential of the
instrument, and therefore while stylistic diversity was de-
veloped with the instrument in this study, it may not prove
to be meaningful for spectators in a musical context. How-
ever, the participants tended to suggest that it would only
take a very small amount of increased complexity in order
to eﬀect a signiﬁcant increase in the diversity of activities
and musical potential.
This study examined the relationship between constraint
and style on the part of performers, but did not look at the
eﬀects on spectators’ ability to recognize style or structure.
A follow-on study will therefore elicit spectator perceptions
of style and structure when watching performances with a
constrained interface. Future experiments will also look at
the development of style with less constrained instruments.
5. REFERENCES
[1] M. Brand and A. Hertzmann. Style machines. In Proc.
SIGGRAPH, pages 183–192, 2000.
[2] R. Buchanan. Declaration by design: Rhetoric, argument,
and demonstration in design practice. Design Issues,
2(1):4–22, 1985.
[3] C. Dobrian and D. Koppelman. The ’E’ in NIME: musical
expression with new computer interfaces. In Proc. of the
Conf. on New Instruments for Musical Expression
(NIME), pages 277–282, 2006.
[4] B. J. Fogg. Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to
Change What We Think and Do. Morgan Kaufmann, 2003.
[5] W. W. Gaver. Technology aﬀordances. In Proc. CHI, pages
79–84, New Orleans, Louisiana, United States, 1991.
[6] B. Glaser and A. Strauss. The Discovery of Grounded
Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research. Aldine, 1967.
[7] M. Gurevich, P. Stapleton, and P. Bennett. Design for
style in new musical interactions. In Proc. of the Conf. on
New Instruments for Musical Expression (NIME), pages
213–217, 2009.
[8] D. Lockton, D. Harrison, and N. Stanton. Design with
intent: Persuasive technology in a wider context. In Proc.
of the 3rd International Conf. on Persuasive Technology,
pages 274–278, 2008.
[9] D. Norman. The Design of Everyday Things. Doubleday,
1990.
[10] J. Redstrom. Persuasive design: Fringes and foundations.
Lecture notes in Computer Science, 3962:112, 2006.
[11] D. Wessel and M. Wright. Problems and prospects for
intimate musical control of computers. Computer Music
Journal, 26(3):11–22, 2002.
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
111