Proceedings of the 2002 Conference on New Instruments for Musical Expression (NIME-02), Dublin, Ireland, May 24-26, 2002 
 NIME02-01
Multi-instrument virtual keyboard – The MIKEY project
Roberto Oboe 
University of Padova,   
Department of Electronics and Informatics,              
via Gradenigo 6/a, 35131 Padova, Italy 
e-mail: oboe@dei.unipd.it  
Giovanni De Poli 
University of Padova,   
Department of Electronics and Informatics,              
via Gradenigo 6/a, 35131 Padova, Italy 
e-mail: Giovanni.DePoli @dei.unipd.it 
 
Abstract 
The design of a virtual keyboard, capable of reproducing 
the tactile feedback of several musical instruments is 
reported. The key is driven by a direct drive motor, 
which allows friction free operations. The force to be 
generated by the motor is calculated in real time by a 
dynamic simulator, which contains the model of 
mechanisms’ components and constraints. Each model is 
tuned on the basis of measurements performed on the 
real system. So far, grand piano action, harpsichord and 
Hammond organ have been implemented successfully on 
the system presented here. 
Keywords 
Virtual mechanisms, dynamic simulation 
INTRODUCTION 
When playing a musical instrument, a player perceives 
not only the sound generated, but also the haptic 
interaction arising during the contact between player and 
instrument. Such haptic interaction with the instrument 
stimulates several senses in the player: tactile, 
kinesthetic, proprioceptive etc. It constitutes a bi -
directional communication channel between player and 
instrument. In fact, the player manipulates (by hand or 
mouth) the instrument, and the force exerted on it 
correspond to a motion of the manipulated part and, in 
turn, to a specific generated sound. On the other hand, 
the instrument reacts with a force to a particular motion, 
and this reaction contains useful information on the 
instrument behavior. For instance, by paying attention to 
the interaction force that arises during key descent, the 
piano player can detect the escapement re-triggering and, 
in turn, vary the key motion in order to obtain the fastest 
repetition of the note. Roughly speaking, the haptic 
information allows the player to perceive the “state” of 
the mechanism being manipulated through the key. By 
using this knowledge on the state of the mechanism and 
correlating it with the sound generated, the player learns 
a strategy to obtain the desired tones. This tight 
correspondence between acoustic response and touch 
response, however, is lost in electronic instruments, like 
synthesizers, in which the sound generation is related 
only to the speed of the key. In this type of synthetic 
instrument, the touch feedback is independent from the 
instrument being simulated. For instance, the interaction 
with different instruments like harpsichord, piano or pipe 
organ give to the player the same haptic information. 
This constitutes a severe limitation for the musician, who 
looses expressive con trol on the instrument and, in turn, 
on the generated sound. 
The above consideration sparked several research 
activities, aimed at the realization of an active keyboard, 
in which actuators connected to the keys are driven in 
such a way that the haptic interaction experienced is the 
same as if the player were interacting with the keyboard 
of the real instrument being emulated by the synthesizer 
[1] [2] [3] [5] [6] [7]. Such kind of system falls in the 
category of “virtual mechanisms”, i.e. haptic displays 
devoted to the reproduction of the touch feedback that a 
user would experience when interacting with a 
mechanism constituted by several parts, interacting one 
another and with constraints. In this field, relevant 
results have been obtained by Cadoz and his g roup [2] 
[3], who have developed a high performance force 
feedback interface, suitable for the realization of virtual 
instruments. 
Among all the possible keyboard -operated instruments, 
the grand piano has by far the most complicated 
mechanism [8]. The gran d piano action, in fact, is 
composed of dozens of components and this has 
impeded the realization of a real -time dynamic simulator 
for it. A remarkable work from Gillespie shows in [7] 
how it is possible to implement a very detailed model of 
the piano action and tune it by matching simulation and 
experimental results, the latter obtained by accurately 
measuring all dynamic and kinematic variables on a 
piano mechanism. However, the obtained model, even if 
it results in good agreement with experimental data, can 
run only off -line. Given the difficulty of having a 
complete real time dynamic simulation, several 
researchers have focused their work on the reproduction 
of only one or few specific behaviours of the 
mechanism. For instance, Baker in [1] proposes the 
simulation of user programmable inertial and viscous 
characteristics, in order to adapt the keyboard to the 
player’s taste. Gillespie, instead, has studied in [5] and 
[6] the modelling of a simplified piano action, composed 
of only two bodies, namely the key and the hammer. 
Even with this very simple model, it is possible to 
reproduce part of the hammer motion, composed 
essentially of three different phases: contact with the 
key, fly and return on the key. This model, however, 
does not take into account the impact of the hammer 
with the string and the effect of escapement, and such 
characteristics are very useful in order to re -gain the 
previously mentioned correspondence between acoustic 
response and touch response.  
 
 NIME02-02
In this paper, we present the prelimina ry results obtained 
within the MIKEY (Multi -Instrument active KEYboard) 
project, aimed at the realization of a multi -instrument 
active keyboard, with realistic touch feedback. In 
particular, the instruments to be emulated are the grand 
piano, the harpsichord and the Hammond organ. Given 
the previous consideration, it is clear that some trade -off 
between model accuracy and real-time operability had to 
be made at the beginning of the project, especially for 
the grand piano. In our case, we started from the wo rk of 
Gillespie and we added some additional feature, namely 
the hammer -string impact, various state -dependent 
hammer-key impacts and the escapement effect. Also, in 
order to improve the quality of the haptic feedback, 
direct-drive, ultra -low friction moto r have been used. 
Finally, particular attention has been paid to the cost of 
the overall system, by using inexpensive devices for 
sensing, actuation and real-time computation.  
 
MECHANISMS MODELLING 
The realization of a realistic haptic interaction with an  
active keyboard requires the use of a model of the 
mechanism to be emulated. We will describe in the 
following three different mechanisms emulated by the 
MIKEY system, pointing out the simplification done on 
the complete model, in order to have a dynamic 
simulation that runs in real time. The three models 
considered are the grand piano, the harpsichord and the 
Hammond organ. 
 
Grand piano action 
The grand piano action is shown in Fig.1. As mentioned 
in the previous section, this is a mechanism composed of 
several parts, which characteristics are not always easily 
attained. This is the case, for instance, of the “soft” parts, 
like felts, characterized by high energy dissipation and 
non-linear stiffness. We mention here the main parts 
composing the mechanism. In Fig.1 we can see the 
hammer, free to rotate around the pivot P1, and resting 
on a soft damper D1. The hammer swings up under the 
action of the jack and the escapement lever, both 
pushing against the rubber-covered knuckle. When the 
key is pressed, the whippen goes up and the jack stays in 
its position, thanks to the action of a spring. When the 
key is pressed further, the repetition lever is stopped 
against the regulator WR and only the jack remains in 
contact with the hammer. Finally, also the jack is 
stopped by the regulator JR at one end and starts to 
rotate clockwise around the pivot P2, loosing contact 
with the hammer. If the key motion is fast enough, the 
hammer starts its flight toward the string. The impact 
with the string has a quite complicated dynamics, but it 
can be summarized as a finite time impact with loss of 
energy. Literature in this field says that the impact time 
is roughly one eighth of the period of the note, while 
about 20% of the hammer energy is lost during impact 
[4]. The hammer, then, bounces back and may have 
different impacts  with the whippen, according to the key 
position. If the key is still fully pressed, the hammer tails 
impacts the back -check and dissipates all its energy, 
without touching the whippen (no haptic feedback i s 
generated by this impact). Should the key a little bit 
raised (enough to have the jack back in its position and 
ready for repetition), the hammer hits the whippen, and, 
according to the mutual velocity, may or may not bounce 
back toward the string. The haptic feedback in this phase 
is the same as when a ball hits a pad, rebounds and hits 
again. Due to the dissipation of energy, only one 
rebound usually occurs. Finally, should the key be in rest 
position, the hammer hits both the whippen and a rest 
felt D1. The hammer rebounds and, since a reduced 
force is acting on the whippen, this moves upward and a 
little downward motion of the key can be observed at the 
player’s side. 
Figure 1. Grand piano action 
 
This qualitative description of the piano action behavi or 
has, of course, an analytical counterpart. So far, 
Gillespie has developed the most accurate dynamic 
model of the piano action [7]. However, due to 
limitation in computational power, the equation of his 
model can be integrated only off-line. Real time 
experiments performed by the same author [5] used a 
simplified model of the piano key, constituted only by 
the key and the hammer. The model, reported in Fig.2, 
considers a hammer swinging around a pivot and 
interacting with the key through a spring-like contact. 
 
l 4 
l 1 l 2 
l 3 
k 
M h 
s 
q 
Fig.2 - Simplified model of the piano action 
 
The model is fully described by contact stiffness k, key 
lengths l1 and l 2, hammer mass Mh, inertia Ih=Mhl4
2, 
length l4 and distance between hammer pivot and contact 
point l3. è and s are the angular displacements of the 
hammer and the key, respectively. As a further 
BACK CHECK 
JACK 
KNUCKLE 
KEY WHIPPEN 
HAMMER REPETITION LEVER 
P2 
P1 
D1 JR 
WR 
 
 NIME02-03
simplification, all rotational motions are approximated as 
linear, so that the force exchanged between key and 
hammer results: 
)( 32 qlslkf h
−=                (1) 
The dynamic simulator accounts for two sub -models, 
corresponding to the conditions of contact and non -
contact between hammer and key, respectively. During 
contact, hammer motion is described by the following 
equation: 
glMlslklI hh 4323 )( −−= qq&&     (2) 
while during free fly, only gravity acts on the hammer: 
glMI hh 4−=q&&      (3) 
The switch between the models is driven by the sign of 
the force transmitted by the spring k. In fact, a negative 
force cannot be applied by the spring and when the 
dynamic simulator, during integration of Eq.(2) detects 
the following condition: 
0)( 32
<− qlsl      (4) 
this means that the hammer is no longer in contact with 
the key, i.e. it is flying toward the string and Eq.(3) is 
integrated from then on, until Eq.(4) become false again, 
revealing a new contact between hammer and key. As for 
the haptic feedback, the force to be generated by an 
actuator replacing the hammer should be equal to Eq.(1).  
It is worth noticing that this model does not include 
neither escapement nor hammer-string impact modeling, 
and this results in a unrealistic haptic interaction. Also, 
no friction is considered in the model, resulting a an 
overestimated hammer speed. It can be expected that 
computational power limitation will be  partially 
removed by technological improvements, but high cost 
of the devices needed is still a major limitation to the 
realization of a commercial product, in which all the 
characteristics of the piano action are incorporated in the 
real-time dynamic simulator.  
Given the above consideration, it is clear that the design 
of a low -cost active keyboard with realistic haptic 
feedback must consider some trade -offs. In MIKEY 
project we wanted to have a system in which the hammer 
angular position and velocity could be accurately 
computed, in order to provide an input to a sound 
synthesizer. In addition, we wanted to have the most 
important haptic effects to be reproduced at the player’s 
hand, namely the escapement, the hammer rebounds on 
the key, the key weight and the variable inertia of the 
system (both reduced when the hammer is flying toward 
the string). The solution adopted to satisfy both requests 
has been the use of a simplified hammer-key model for 
the dynamic simulation as described above, in which the 
hammer-string impact is added, while the haptic 
feedback is generated by summing the output of a 
simplified dynamic model to a set of position -dependant 
events, like impacts, rebounds and escapement. In 
particular, the dynamic simulator must calculate the 
coordinate of the hammer according to Eq. (2) and (3) 
and, during the free fly phase, consider the occurrence of 
hammer-string impact, when the hammer bounces back 
with 80% the velocity it had before the impact. The 
impact duration, as mentioned before, is about 20 % of 
the note period. In addition to this, the simulator must 
signal the occurrence of hammer -key impacts. The 
interaction force to be generated by the motor depends 
on the actual mechanism to be replaced by the virtual 
one. In MIKEY project, only the key is left and the force 
generated by the motor is applied at its rear end, i.e. in 
the original point of interaction between whippen and 
key, as it will be shown in the next Section. The force to 
be generated by the motor can be described by the 
following equation: 
)()()()()()()( tXtGttBttIti +++= qq &&&   (5) 
where I and B represent the time -varying overall inertia 
and friction of the virtual action at the contact point 
between key and whippen, G represents gravity effects 
and X accounts for extra terms like impacts, escapem ent 
etc. The value of each coefficient in Eq.(5) depends on 
the state of key -hammer assembly. If the hammer is in 
contact with the key, the inertial, viscous and gravity 
terms are higher than those to be used when the hammer 
is flying toward the string. As for the extra term, as 
described at the beginning of the paragraph, three 
different types of hammer-key impacts may occur. When 
the key is completely pressed, the hammer’s rear end is 
stopped by the back check and no haptic feedback must 
be generated. If the key is completely up, the impact is 
between the hammer link and the rest damper. This is a 
dissipative event, in which the energy remaining after the 
impact is a small part of the original one. Also, to avoid 
multiple rebounds, when hammer’s velocity goes below 
a certain threshold, its value is set to zero at the impact. 
When the key is in any other position, the hammer -key 
impact occurs at the contact point, which can be 
modeled as a spring -damper element. Moreover, the 
force impulse exchanged between hammer and key 
depends on the relative velocity of hammer and key. 
Finally, X contains a position -dependant term, which 
accounts for the escapement. This is essentially a non -
linear spring, which intervenes when the key reaches the 
position corresponding t o the contact of the whippen 
with the regulator. After the contact, the player perceives 
an increased resistance of the key, which suddenly drops 
when the second regulator forces the jack to slide under 
the knuckle. A simplified model of this sequence has 
been incorporated in the escapement model used in 
MIKEY system and it is shown in Fig. 3. 
When the key reaches the position x 1, the force applied 
by the actuator linearly increases until it reaches x 2. At 
this point, the force is linearly decreases, until it reaches 
zero in x 3. On the way back to the origin, the force is 
kept to zero, since the jack re -load is an event that does 
not generate haptic feedback. A problem arises when the 
key goes up (i.e. it inverts its motion) during 
 
 NIME02-04
escapement. A solution pro posed here is to consider the 
trajectories shown in Fig.4. 
Figure 3. Simplified model of escapement – Force vs. 
position 
Figure 4. Management of inversions during 
escapement phase 
 
If the inversion occurs between x 1 and x2, the force goes 
down with the pos ition. Once the escapement peak is 
passed, if an inversion in motion occurs (e.g. at the point 
xM in Fig.4), the force is kept constant, at the value it had 
at moment of inversion, until the key gets at the position 
xm in which the force of the positive  s lope is equal to 
such constant. Then, should the position decrease 
further, the force goes down with it. If during the motion 
from xM to xm another inversion occurs, the force is kept 
constant until the key position gets again to xM. With this 
simple model , the force perceived during escapement 
first increases and then rapidly decreases, as a trigger 
were pushed. Furthermore, the sliding of the jack under 
the knuckle during re-loading of the escapement is 
modeled as a constant force, which allows to handle in a 
simple way the possible inversion of motion in this 
phase. 
The simple model of the escapement is of course linked 
to the dynamic simulator, which is informed on the state 
of the jack and, in turn, may alter the value of the 
mechanical advantage between key’s and hammer’s 
motion accordingly.  
Experimental results reported in the next section and test 
with performers confirm that the haptic feedback 
obtained by summing the above described contribution is 
quite realistic. 
 
Harpsichord 
Harpsichord mechanism is shown in Fig.6. When the key 
is pressed, one or more jacks are raised. The number of 
jacks to raise can be usually selected by properly 
positioning a set of stop rails. Using such rails, the key 
can be “programmed” to raise more than one jack, each 
of them plucking a different string. When the key goes 
down, the string is pushed against an elastic plectrum 
and the force perceived increases as the key goes down, 
until the plectrum plucks the string. After this event, the 
force goes at a very low value. Then, the key is raised 
and the plectrum easily slides aside, under the action of 
the string, so that the mechanism is ready to pluck the 
string again. The haptic feedback for harpsichord is very 
similar to the escapement in grand piano, with a 
position-dependant increasing force that rapidly 
decreases when a certain threshold is reached. For this 
reason the force to be generated by the actuator in the 
MIKEY system when emulating the harpsichord is 
obtained by a model as in Fig.4, where thresholds and 
forces have been set at proper values. As for multi -
plectrum systems, they have been obtained by simply 
putting together several plectrum simulations, each of 
them with non-overlapping thresholds, as shown in 
Fig.6. 
Figure 5. Harpsichord mechanism 
Figure 6. Multi-plectrum harpsichord – force to be 
generated vs. position 
In addition to the position -dependant force, a viscous 
term can be added to the motor’s command, in order to 
simulate the friction of the real key. 
 
Hammond organ 
The last keyboard -operated i nstrument considered in 
MIKEY project is the Hammond organ. This instrument 
has been conceived with the target of giving to the player 
the same haptic feedback ad in pipe organs with electric 
command. In such instruments, electrically actuated 
pneumatic valves are turned on by a small switch placed 
under each key. The perceived force is the same as a 
spring were placed under the key, with a very small 
inertia and weight for the key itself. This means that the 
force to be generated by the actuator in the virtual 
keyboard has to be proportional to key’s position. 
Furthermore, to make the key lighter, a negative, 
constant term can be added, so that the force becomes: 
 consttkti
−= )()( q     (6) 
As in the harpsichord, a viscous term can be added to 
Eq.6, in order to take account of friction that is usually 
present in the real keyboard. 
x1 x3 x2 
Key goes down 
Key goes up 
 
0 1 
x1 x3 x2 xM xm 
Key goes down 
Key goes up 
0 
x1 x3 x2 xM xm 
Key goes down 
Key goes up 

 
 NIME02-05
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 
The electro-mechanical system for the active keyboard is 
shown in Fig.7. Three keys are connected to rotational 
voice coils motors through rigid links and lo w friction 
ball bearings. The motors have a very low friction and 
inertia, so that the force applied to the key can be 
considered directly proportional to the current applied to 
the motor, thus avoiding the use of expensive force 
sensors. The torque constant is about 0.007 Nm/A. 
Key’s position is measured by using a low-cost reflective 
sensor, placed under the key, on the player’s side. Its 
output is pretty linear and its range is normalized 
between 0 and 1 by an automated tuning procedure. It is 
worth noticing that from this measurement both key 
velocity and acceleration are obtained, by using multi -
sample filtered differentiation. Also, key’s position is 
filtered by a low -pass Butterworth filter to reduce the 
noise.  
According to the block diagram of Fig.8 , each sensor’s 
output is sampled by a 16 bit, 44.1 kHz A/D converter, 
which sends the digital data to a DSP board, built around 
a Motorola 56000 chip. The force to be generated by the 
motor is computed in real-time by the DSP and sent to a 
16 bit, 44.1 kHz D/A converter. Its output constitutes the 
input of a transconductance amplifier, capable of forcing  
a current up to 2 A into the voice coil motor, with a 
bandwidth of 40 kHz.  
It can be noticed in Fig.7 that weights have been added 
to the original key’s structure. This solution is required 
in order to limit the request of force to be generated by 
the motor. For instance, it is useless and power 
consuming to give the motor the duty to generate the 
gravitational effect originally due to the whippen, since 
this constant term can be easily replaced by a properly 
placed weight. Finally, key regulators have been added 
in order to provide a mechanical stop to the key that 
otherwise could pop off the keyboard in case of 
fortissimo action, since the “natural” stop provided by 
the whippen has been removed. 
Figure 7. MIKEY keyboard 
It is worth noticing that the system consists of low -cost, 
mass-production components. In particular, the voice 
coil motor has been detached from a hard disk drive and 
it can be produced at very low cost. The A/D -D/A 
converters have been realized with a low-cost single chip 
device, usually adopted in PC sound boards. The 
transconductance amplifier is also derived from hard 
disk current drivers. Finally, the DSP is a low-end 
device. As a re sult, the hardware for each key has a cost 
below 10 USD. 
D/A, 16 bits
44.1 kHz
VCM
Key
A/D, 16 bits
44.1 kHz Position sensor
DSP board
Transcond.
Amplifier
Figure 8. Key control unit – Block diagram 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
An active keyboard is designed to generate an active 
feedback as close as possible to that of a real keyboard. 
Then, it is difficult to present quantitative results on a 
system designed to stimulate the haptic senses of the 
performer. It is possible, anyway, to show that the 
designed system properly generates the force command 
to the motors. We present in the following the current 
references generated by the DSP program only when 
simulating the grand piano and the harpsichord, since the 
Hammond organ is trivially obtained by generating a 
force proportional to key’s position. In addition, only for 
the grand piano, we present the hammer’s position 
evaluated in real-time by the dynamic simulator.  
 
Grand piano 
When the key is pressed slowly, the hammer does not 
loose contact with the key, then its position, computed 
by the dynamic simulator, follows closely that of the key. 
(top of fig.9). When the velocity is a little bit higher, the 
hammer flies toward the string. If the velocity of the key 
is not high enough, the hammer goes back to the key, 
with a parabolic trajectory (fig.9, center). If the key is 
still down, the hammer stops at key’s position, without 
rebounds. Should key’s speed be higher, the hammer 
impacts the string (fig.9, bottom). In this case, impact 
time has been set to one sample.  
Figure 9. Hammer’s motion – No fly, fly without 
impact and fly with impact against string 
Sensors array 
Voice coil motors 
Weights  
Key regulators 

 
 NIME02-06
As for the force generated by the motor, it is the sum of 
several components, which in turn depend on the state of 
the key, its escapement etc. In Fig.10 we show the 
profile of the force generated by the motor when the key 
is completely down when the hammer bounces back 
from the string. In t1, the key descent starts and the force 
generated is relative to the viscous term. After a while, 
the escapement phase starts, the force rises and then goes 
rapidly to zero in t2, when the key stops. The key 
remains down till t3, when it is released by the 
performer. When going up, the key is under the action of 
a viscous force. When it gets at the final rest position, 
the hammer rebounds on the rest felt in t4, and a small 
key rebound is observed.  
Figure 10. Full key’s dip and release – generated 
force 
Harpsichord 
The force to be generated by the motor in the virtual 
harpsichord is reported in Fig. 11, where a single jack 
harpsichord is considered. The key descent starts in t1 
and the force applied to the key emulates a viscous 
friction. In t2, the plectrum engages with the string and 
plucks it. This event ends in t3. In t4, the key is 
completely down and stops. In t5, the key is raised and a 
viscous effect is generated, until the key gets back to rest 
position in t6. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The realization of a multi -instrument active keyboard 
may require the design of a complex dynamic simulator, 
in which all the parts composing the real mechanism are 
included. This approach, however, is very expensive in 
terms of computation and may be unsuitable for real -
time operation. In MIKEY project we demonstrated that 
it is possible to have a realistic feedback and good 
accuracy in dynamic simulation (e.g. in evaluating the 
hammer’s position in grand piano), by using a simplified 
dynamic simulator, which generates a set of events 
(impacts, states). In turn such events generate a set of 
haptic feedbacks. As a result, the MIKEY system is 
capable of generating the haptic feedback for three 
different keyboard-operated instruments.  Experimental 
results confirm such feedback contains many of the 
characteristics of the real instrument. Moreover, the 
system has been realized by using low -cost electronics, 
demonstrating that a mass production of an active 
keyboard is now possible with the proposed approach. 
Figure 11. Single plectrum harpsichord – generated force 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The author wish to thank Generalmusic s.p.a. for 
providing support to this research and Dr.Federica 
Andriollo, Dr. Stefano Piovan and Dr. Federico 
Marcassa for the assistance in experimental activities. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Baker, “Active Touch Keyboard,” United States 
Patent No. 4,899,631., 1988. 
[2] C. Cadoz, L. Lisowski, and J -L. Florens, “Modular 
Feedback Keyboard,” Proceedings of the ICMC, pp. 
379-382, Glasgow, 1990.  
[3] C. Cadoz, A. Luciani, J -L. Florens.”CORDIS-
ANIMA: A modeling and simulation system for 
sound and image synthesis the general formalism, 
Computer Music Journal, Vol 17, No. 1, Spring 
1993, pp.19-29. 
[4] N.H.Fletcher, T.D.Rossing, “The physics of musical 
instruments”, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1991 
[5] B. Gillespie. "The Virtual Piano Action: Design and 
Implementation," Proceedings of the International 
Computer Music Conference, Aahus, Denmark, 
Sept 12-17, 1994. pp. 167-170.  
[6] B. Gillespie. "The Touchback Keyboard,"  
Proceedings of the International Computer Music 
Conference, San Jose, CA, Oct 14 -18, 1992. 
pp.447-448.  
[7] B. Gillespie and M. Cutkosky. "Dynamical 
Modeling of the Grand Piano Action," Proceedings 
of the International Computer Music Conference, 
San Jose, CA Oct 14-18, 1992, pp. 77-80. 
[8] T. Topper, B. Wills. “The computer simulation of 
piano mechanisms” International Journal of 
Modelling and Simulation, Vol. 7, No. 4, 1987
t1  t2  
t4 t3  
0.1s/div  
t1 t2 t3 t4 
t5 t6 
0.1s/div  