Latin American NIMEs: Electronic Musical Instruments 
and Experimental Sound Devices 
in the Twentieth Century 
 
Martín Matus Lerner 
Desarrollos Tecnológicos Aplicados a las Artes 
EUdA, Universidad Nacional de Quilmes 
Buenos Aires, Argentina 
mmatus@unq.edu.ar 
 
ABSTRACT  
During the twentieth century several Latin American nations  
(such as Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Cuba and Mexico) have 
originated relevant antecedents in the NIME field. Their 
innovative authors have interrelated musical composition,  
lutherie, electronics and computing. This paper provides a  
panoramic view of their original electronic instrument s and 
experimental sound practices, as well as a perspective  of them 
regarding other inventions around the World. 
 
Author Keywords  
Latin America, music and technology history, synthesizer, drawn 
sound, luthería electrónica. 
 
CCS Concepts  
• Applied computing → Sound and music 
computing    • Applied computing → Performing arts   • Social 
and professional topics → Historical people 
 
1.  INTRODUCTION 
In previous editions of The International Conference on New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression, Latin American researchers 
have presented interfaces and instruments of their own 
authorship. The Pandiva [5] and Illusio [6] from Brazil, Santiago 
[16] and Osiris [18] from Argentina, and the Chilean Arcontinuo 
[8] may be mentioned as examples. 
However, in many relations on the history of music and 
technology, there exist partial or total gaps regarding the 
emergence and evolution of NIMEs in Latin America during the 
twentieth century, as well as the figures who developed them. 
This paper aims to provide a panoramic map of some of the 
experimental music and sound devices developed during this 
period in Latin America by musicians, researchers and electronic 
luthiers, for the creation of their own works or as technological 
support for other composers (up to the earliest compute r-based 
instruments). The main objective is to make a historiog raphic 
contribution to the NIME community, in the context of its first 
edition held on Latin American territory. 
 
                                                             
1 A hundred years later a commemorative experience was to be 
held at the original amphitheater [14]. 
2.  EARLY EXPERIENCES 
2.1  The singing arc in Argentina 
In 1900 William du Bois Duddell publishes an article in whic h 
describes his experiments with “the singing arc”, one of the first 
electroacoustic musical instruments. Based on the car bon arc 
lamp (in common use until the appearance of the electric light 
bulb), the singing or speaking arc produces a high volume buzz 
which can be modulated by means of a variable resistor o r a 
microphone [35]. Its functioning principle is present in lat er 
technologies such as plasma loudspeakers and microphones. 
In 1909 German physicist Emil Bose assumes direction of the 
High School of Physics at the Universidad de La Plata. Within 
two years Bose turns this institution into a first-rate Department 
of Physics (pioneer in South America). On March 29th 191 1 
Bose presents the speaking arc at a science event motiva ted by 
the purchase of equipment and scientific instruments from the 
German company Max Kohl. In this demonstration, a 
phonograph reproduced a recording of Italian Singer Eva 
Tetrazzini’s voice, while the sound emitted was caught by a 
microphone. The current modulated by the microphone fed the 
speaking arc. The press at the time notes that those invited to the 
event were “a select group of our intellectual element, journalists 
and even ‘some ladies’.” [27]. The event was a great succe ss 
according to public opinion, and had unheard of repercussion for 
a university event, acquiring the dimension of a theatrical event. 
Ramón Loyarte describes it as “a performance” and the scientists 
as “actors”, Bose being spoken of as “a high-hearted magician” 1. 
 
2.2  The Multi-Organ 
Juan Blanco was a key figure in the electroacoustic and 
contemporary musical creation in Cuba. In 1946 Blanco gives at 
UNEAC (Unión Nacional de Escritores y Artistas de Cuba) the 
first concert of concrete and electronic music in that country. In 
1942, besides obtaining a degree as Doctor of Civil Law from 
the Universidad de La Habana, he’d also presented at the Patent 
and Trademark Office the descriptive memory and graphic 
information of a musical instrument of his invention: the 
Multiórgano (Multi-Organ). 
The operating principles of this instrument are based on the 
reproduction of loops made with the old technique of recording 
on magnetic wire (Figure 1). It’s provided with twelve l oops, 
each with the recording of one note of the chromatic scale. These 
recordings are read by a magnetic head, and the signal is 
amplified by the activation of corresponding keys on a keyboard, 
with the possibility of adding different timbres depending on the 
loops installed. It is polyphonic and it is further prov ided with 
two pedals: one to change the intensity of the sound and another 
228
one to vary the speed of reproduction of the wires, which allows 
for changes in pitch [29]. 
Even if Blanco never gets to build this instrument, it represents 
a pioneer project in Latin America, since its design ant icipates 
principles used in later instruments such as the Chamberlin and 
the Mellotron (both based on magnetic tape recordings). The  
original design printed on ferroprusside was presented by Blanco 
at the international symposium “Musical Inventions and 
Creations: Denial of Utopia” in 1991 (Bourges) [9]. Juan 
Blanco's original schematic was collected by the UNESCO [17]. 
 
 
Figure 1. Diagram of the Multiórgano 
3.  INSTRUMENTS BY RAÚL PAVÓN 
SARRELANGUE 
Mexican engineer Raúl Pavón Sarrelangue recalls that, after 
attending a concrete music concert at Radio France (Paris ) in 
1958, he felt that “the logical path for music (…) was by means 
of utilizing the enormous resources provided by music 
electronics”. As a consequence, Pavón builds a prototype for a 
one-octave music instrument, in which each note controls the 
reproduction of a magnetic tape loop. In trying to obtain a patent, 
he learns that this principle had already been patented, and was 
being used in several instruments [25]. Similarities may be 
observed between this instrument and the design of Blanco’s  
Multiórgano. 
In the sixties, Pavón designs and builds an analog synthesizer 
which he names Omnifón (Figure 2). According to the 
description rendered by the author, this synthesizer had an 
oscillator with square, sine and sawtooth waveforms (with a 10 
Hz to 20kHz frequency range), an envelope generator, a noise  
generator, and filters, among other modules 2. Around the same 
time, researchers in different parts of the World were working on 
diverse analog synthesizers; the Synket by Paolo Ketoff and John 
Eaton in Italy, the multiple musical instruments by Robert Moog 
and Donald Buchla in the USA, and the Integrated Synthesizer 
by Erki Kurenniemi in Finland [22]. 
One of the concerns expressed in his book refers to a new profile 
of “technological artist” that is outlined in the twentieth century 
                                                             
2 In his book Pavón mentions 1960 as the year of creation of the 
Omnifón, while Pareyón points out 1964 [24]. 
thanks to the use of new technologies in the arts. Pavón reflects 
upon the fact that since the sixties “a hybrid generatio n of 
scientist-artists has emerged, who are giving an enormous  
impulse to art in all its manifestations [25]. 
In 1970 Pavón, with Héctor Quintanar, founds the Electronic 
Music Laboratory at the Conservatorio Nacional de Música, 
where the first electronic and electroacoustic music concerts will 
be held in Mexico. In 1976 Pavón leaves his work in the industry, 
devoting himself completely to electronic music and the 
development of the Icofón. This is an instrument for the 
generation of images based on sound, using the visual results 
given by an analog oscilloscope in Lissajous mode being fed 
with audio signals. Even if the oscilloscope screen g ives out 
monochromatic results, Pavón obtains color images by pl acing 
spinning color discs in front of the screen, a technique i nspired 
by the first experimental color TV sets. The Icofón allowed not 
only the generation of still images; the author refers to the work 
with filmed sequences, color transparencies, multi-expo sure, 
among other techniques and possibilities. On April 20th 1980  
Pavón presents the Icofón in an audiovisual performance wit h 
multiple screens in Mexico. In this concert the electro nic 
soundtrack was used to generate the visuals. Later he’d create a 
series of works for this new instrument, among which Suite 
Icofónica (1983) “probably inaugurates the era of multimedia 
electroacoustics in Mexico” [28]. 
 
 
Figure 2. The Omnifón 
4.  EXPERIMENTAL SOUND DEVICES BY 
FERNANDO VON REICHENBACH 
The CLAEM (Centro Latinoamericano de Altos Estudios 
Musicales) was 
 inaugurated in December 1961 within the setting 
of the Torcuato Di Tella Institute (Buenos Aires, Argentina). It 
emerged under the initiative of composer Alberto Ginaste ra, 
counting on key funding by the Rockefeller Foundation. Among 
its main objectives were the formal training and perfecting 
 of 
composers, as well as the diffusion by means of concerts and 
festivals. From its beginning and until its closure in 1971 , 
besides providing formation to an important amount of Lat in 
American interns, this center received the visit of in ternational 
figures such as Pierre Schaeffer, Iannis Xenakis and Vladimi r 
Ussachevsky, among others [21]. 
In 1964 Horacio Bozzarello is put in charge of building the first 
Electronic Music Laboratory at the CLAEM. Two years later this 
role is passed on to engineer Fernando Von Reichenbach, a 
researcher specialized in the creation of technologies applied to 
music and arts, who within this area will develop a ser ies of 
original experimental inventions applied to electronic and 
electroacoustic musical creation. In 1967 the Electronic Musi c 
229
Laboratory is formally inaugurated, and it will come to position 
itself as the most important one in Latin America. According to 
Vázquez the incorporation of composer Francisco Kröpfl tha t 
same year, along with Von Reichenbach’s inventive power 
“enabled an ideal means for interns to explore composing by 
unconventional media of difficult access at the time” [33]. 
Between 1968 and 1971 the Laboratory had Walter Guth, Julio 
Manhart and Enrique Jorgensen as technical assistants. Von 
Reichenbach would also give the course "Techniques of 
Electroacoustic Instruments" in 1969 [15]. 
At the 
 CLAEM Von Reichenbach conceives a very original 
device: the Convertidor Gráfico Analógico (Analog Graphic 
Converter), also known as “Catalina”. This system allows the 
control of synthesizers and audio processors by means of Control 
Voltage, based on visual information captured by an analog  
video camera. Its creation dates back to 1967 and the modules  
controlled originally were a Moog oscillator, a filt er and 
equipment of his own construction (Figures 3 and 4). 
 
 
Figure 3. Von Reichenbach with the Convertidor Gráfico 
Analógico 
Von Reichenbach explains that “the composer could take the 
paper sheet or roll home, and by means of a template which had 
the tempered scale on it, he could draw a melodic line an d the 
volume alterations, filtering level or combinations of them” [11]. 
“Examples: a horizontal straight line produces a determined 
frequency whose pitch depends on its distance from the abscissa 
axis or reference line. An inclined line, however, produces a 
glissando. If the line is drawn free-hand, aleatory fluctuations are 
produced with a certain degree of control, similar to those  
produced by the performer on a traditional instrument, e.g.,  a 
violin” [34]. Analogías Paraboloides  (1970) by Pedro 
Caryevschi was the first composition created with this device. 
It is possible to situate Von Reichenbach’s Analog Grap hic 
Converter in the tradition of “drawn sound” devices [10], suc h 
as the ANS Synthesizer by Yevgeny Murzin (c1950-57) and the 
ORAMICS system by Daphne Oram (1962-65). However, the 
previous inventions are based on optic sound, whereas the 
innovation of this system lies in the work with analog video 3. For 
his research in this field, Von Reichenbach will receive in 1971 
a Guggenheim Foundation scholarship. In the same year, the 
                                                             
3 In the mid-sixties, Fausto Maranca and Jorge Menyhart built  
the “Fotomodulador Dinámico” (Dynamic Photo-modulator) for 
the Estudio de Fonología Musical (Universidad de Buenos 
Aires). This device allowed the mixing of electronic sounds, 
based on photoresistors. According to Menyhart, it was inspired 
by the Analog Graphic Converter, and by means of graphic s it 
allowed "to control the envelope of several signals 
simultaneously without the need of a synthesizer like the Moog, 
inventor presents the application for its patent in the USA, under 
the name “Process and apparatus for converting image elements 
to electric impulses” [34], to be granted to the Torcuato Di Tella 
Institute two years later. 
 
 
Figure 4. Original diagram by Von Reichenbach 
Besides this system, Von Reichenbach conceives other original 
artifacts: a polyphonic filter by thirds and octaves bas ed on a 
modified Bruel & Kjaer filter controlled by a keyboard, a visual 
patch panel for the interconnection of audio equipment and an  
analog system for multichannel sound spatialization. Von 
Reichenbach further designs a system based on the use of 
photoresistors that provides interactive sound for the immersive 
installation 500 watts, 4.635kc, 4,5 ciclos  by the artist Margarita 
Paksa, presented at the “Visual Experiences” exhibit (1967)  at 
the Di Tella Institute 4. 
5.  ELECTRONIC MUSICAL 
INSTRUMENTS FROM BRAZIL 
Since the 1960s, successful experiences in the NIME field have 
been carried out in Brazil. Pinto marks as a key miles tone the 
electroacoustic music concert "Concerto da série Juventude " 
held in September 1961 at the Municipal Theater of Rio d e 
Janeiro, directed by Henri Pousseur and interpreted by D avid 
Tudor. Works such as Kontakte  by K. Stockhausen and Scambi  
by Posseur, among others, were presented. This concert w as 
attended by Jorge Antunes, a student at the Escola Naciona l de 
Música, who will then approach electronics through radio repair 
courses (from 1962 Antunes will also study physics at the 
Faculdade Nacional de Filosofía). 
Since his youth, Antunes was interested in the possibilities of 
new technologies and the use of electronic sounds in musical 
creation. In 1961, based on a circuit taken from the magazine 
"Radio Técnica", the composer built a Sawtooth Wave Generator 
designed specifically with musical performance in mind. It had 
a frequency range of 0.4 Hz to 20 kHz and had an interface 
composed of switches, potentiometers and a modulation control 
(similar to a pitch bend wheel of more modern instruments). Also 
based on a circuit from a magazine, in 1962 Antunes elaborates 
a spring reverberation module. 
instrument that unfortunately was out of the scope of the EFM" 
[19]. 
4 In several interviews, it is interesting to catch a glimpse of how 
Von Reichenbach’s particular inventive conception possesses an 
artistic-technological ethos that could be related to the  more 
recent one of “hardware hacking” [11] [23]. 
230
Later Antunes will be attracted to the Theremin, building two 
versions of this classic electronic instrument. The first version of 
1963, had an antenna with an original sculptural design 
(composed of wooden balls joined by aluminum tubes), designed 
to add visual appeal to the performance. This version was based 
on the original circuit, but its unique antenna allowed the control 
of the frequency, the amplitude being fixed (Figure 5). The 
second version (1965) had two antennas (for frequency and 
amplitude) and a design similar to that of the original instrument 5 
[26]. 
 
 
Figure 5. Antunes playing his first Theremin in 1968 
Some years later, between 1975 and 1978 Guido Stolfi designed 
and built the Sintetizador Modular Digital (Digital Modula r 
Synthesizer) at the Escola politécnica da Universidade de São 
Paulo. This modular monophonic voltage-controlled synthesizer 
could be controlled both manually and by a computer in real 
time. It was built with a Hewlett-Packard 21MX computer a nd 
its software was programmed in Assembler 6. It had several 
analog modules (filters, envelope generators, etc.) and th e 
innovative aspect that the waveforms were generated by a digital 
oscillator. In addition, the system had a synchronization module 
for magnetic tape control, which allowed simultaneous playback 
of recordings (Figure 6). 
Stolfi details that the computer has two versions of the compiler 
program to generate sequences of notes and parameters ("Score 
Music Compiler" and "Quick Compiler") [31]. Programs can be 
stored in memory to be executed, or stored on perforated paper 
tape for later reading. Among other options, it had pos sibilities 
for Fourier FFT analysis and the possibility of generati ng 
random sequences based on statistical distributions, based in turn 
on user-defined tables. Although this synthesizer was not used 
effectively by any musician, experiences with different musical 
styles were made: works by J.S. Bach, Anton Webern, Francisco 
Espuny and popular songs, among others. In the eighties, Stolfi 
develops the SOM sequencer software (for Apple II computers), 
and a sampler named Papagaio (which means “parrot”, making 
reference to the imitative behavior of this bird). 
Other synthesizers will be developed between the seventies and 
the eighties. Claudio Cesar Diaz Batista creates the CCD B-1 
Synthesizer (1975) designed to be controlled by a guitar, w hile 
Ricardo Peculis creates a series of synthesizers, includi ng the 
SPIN Poly-Synth (1983), with analog audio generation and 
digital control by means of the Spin microcomputer (based on a 
Zilog Z-80 microprocessor). That same year, Ivan Seiler creates 
                                                             
5 In 1969-70 Antunes was a fellow at CLAEM. 
6 Initially, it was controlled by the computer Patinho Fei o 
(considered the first Brazilian computer) built in 1971-72 by the 
the Modular Polyphonic Seiler Synthesizer, inspired in modular 
synthesizers such as Serge and Moog [26]. 
 
 
Figure 6. Sintetizador Modular Digital 
6.  COMPUTING EXPERIENCES BY JOSÉ 
VICENTE ASUAR 
The Taller Experimental del Sonido started its activities in May 
1957 at Universidad Católica de Chile (Santiago). Within this  
context, José Vicente Asuar would stand out due to his sound 
formation both in engineering and composing 7. In 1969 Asuar 
began his investigations on applying computers to musical  
creation. Influenced by the work of Max Matthews with the 
Music series of programs and by the composition techniques 
applied by Hiller and Isaacson in the Illiac Suite, Asuar created 
the research group Grupo de Investigaciones en Tecnología del 
Sonido with the aim of inquiring on the possibilities of  
composing assisted by computers. In the computing center at the 
Universidad de Chile an IBM360 computer was programmed 
using the FORTRAN IV language. The computer delivered 
sequences of parameters based on the composing principles of 
serialism. The results given by the computer were transcribed by 
the researchers, who in addition made certain decisions (such as 
instrumentation and tempo, among others). The resulting works 
(including Formas I  by Asuar) were presented at a chamber 
music concert on December 1st 1971 [2]. 
After an investigative stay in the United States, with Víctor 
Rivera and Cristian Vergara from the Grupo de Investigaciones 
en Tecnología del Sonido, Asuar designs a system (formed by a 
PDR-8 computer and a converter module created by them) which 
allows the digital control of analog voltages, to control an ARP 
2600 synthesizer (1972). Asuar explains that by means of this  
system it is feasible to “investigate new ways of pe rforming 
impossible to be carried out by human players, and it opens up a 
path toward the achievement of new articulations and sonorities 
beyond instrumental technique and traditional electronic music” 
[3]. Some results of these investigations are in the al bum El 
Computador Virtuoso  (1973). According to Asuar, the use of 
computers in composing and musical processes was 
“inevitable”, as a result of the levels of progress reached until 
then by the “scientific art” [2]. 
team of the Laboratório de Sistemas Digitais (Escola Politécnica 
- USP). 
7 In 1964 Asuar is a visiting professor at CLAEM, teaching the 
course "Technique for the Composition of Electronic Music". 
231
 
 
Figure 7. The COMDASUAR (LP cover art)  
As from 1975, Asuar will continue his research in his own 
personal lab. In 1978 he’ll create the first computer in C hile 
designed with exclusively musical purposes: the COMDASUAR 
(COmputador Musical Digital-Analógico ASUAR: the “Asuar 
Digital Analog Musical Computer”). Based on an Intel 8080 
microprocessor, it’s provided with an 8 Kb EEPROM internal 
memory, a 2KB RAM memory, besides six digital-analog 
converters (DAC) connected to two Intel 8255 parallel 
interfaces. As regards peripheral devices it’s provided with a 
regular TV set, a keyboard and a magnetic tape unit for software 
storage. The system is polyphonic (6 voices) and multi timbral, 
and it allows digital sound synthesis as well as controll ing 
external analog equipment for audio generation and processing 
(noise generators, LFOs, effects such as ring modulator, tremolo, 
phaser, reverb and mixers, among other modules). One of the key 
characteristics of the COMDASUAR is the incorporation o f 
tools for assisted composing, which Asuar calls “Heuris tics”. 
These possibilities allow the computer to work with 
probabilistic-type procedures of generation and variatio n of 
values and musical series [4]. The album Así habló el 
computador  edited in 1979 shows some of the musical results 
obtained by Asuar with the COMDASUAR, with a didactic 
approach (Figure 7). According to Fumarola: “The 
COMDASUAR has been useful not only for high-end computer-
based composition but also for pedagogical and teaching 
purposes. Many of its features were an advance of computer 
music developments that came years later” [12]. 
7.  FINAL REMARKS 
Latin America has configured a fertile ground for experimenting 
in the NIME field throughout the twentieth century. It’s possible 
to situate these experiences in relation to the four stag es of 
electronic music proposed by Battier: emergence of the  first 
electric and electronic instruments; laboratories; synthes izers 
and studios on stage; and computer-based instrumentation [7]. 
                                                             
8 The Archivo de Música y Arte Sonoro FvR (opened in 2018) is 
located in the Laura Manzo Library (Universidad Nacional de 
Quilmes). It has the documentary archive of Fernando Von 
Reichenbach, who served as a professor at this University. 
https://archivofvr.unq.edu.ar 
 
9 There are exceptions such as the Seiler DigiDrum, an electronic 
drum by Iván Seiler (1985) that sold more than 500 units [26]. 
The cases described in this investigation were selecte d due to 
several reasons. An important aspect is that a significa nt 
proportion of these authors has transcended the mere fact of 
having made these specific innovations, making also relev ant 
contributions to broader fields of their respective countries such 
as music, art and education. Another determining aspect is the 
relative difficulty to access documentation, both primar y and 
secondary sources. Dal Farra states that “Latin America  is 
synonymous with diversity and cultural richness, but it is also 
synonymous with a lack of support in terms of documenting and 
preserving its cultural heritage” [9]. This work aims to b e an 
initial contribution to the NIME community, which we hope can 
be expanded through future research. Recent events such as the 
opening of the “Archivo de Música y Arte Sonoro FvR” in 
Argentina allow us to expect new contributions to the field 8. 
The instruments and devices presented in this article we re 
prototypes developed both in institutional laboratories  and 
private studios. They were used for periods of a few ye ars and 
most of them never got commercialized 9. Referring to his 
Omnifón, Pavón reflects that his synthesizer represents in  
Mexico “an industry that died without having been born, by the 
work and grace of our traditional apathy and indifference (it s 
fabrication was offered to several electronic equipment 
manufacturers)” [25]. In a broader sense, the difficulty in the 
sustained use of new instruments over time continues to be a 
relevant concern in the NIME field nowadays 10 . 
The inventors, composers and electronic luthiers who have 
conceived these instruments and experimental sound devices 
were influenced both by aesthetic trends and technological 
innovations coming mainly from the USA and Europe. However, 
both through the study of these inventions and by encountering 
the thinking of their creators, it is possible to affirm that their 
experiences were not mere imitations of foreign inventions. They 
possess unique traits of their own and were carried out by means 
of original strategies. Therefore, it is possible to understand these 
experiences as “processes of hybridization” which “mor e than 
leading us to assert self-sufficient identities, helps us t o get to 
know ways of situating ourselves in the midst of 
heterogeneity” 11 . It’s useful to study this type of processes 
defying “binary thinking, and any attempt to sort out the World 
in pure identities and simple antagonisms. It is necessa ry to 
notice that which, in the intertwining, remains different” [13]. 
Even if the analysis of the historical evolution and current state 
of science and technology in the region exceeds the objectives of 
this paper, it is difficult not to mention that currently these areas 
are given much less priority than more developed countrie s, a 
fact that has a determining influence in the NIME field, as well 
as in the field of art and technology in a broader sense. About the 
current educational situation in this area, a United Nations brief 
asserts: “The geographical distribution of science, tec hnology, 
engineering and mathematics (STEM) graduates is also ver y 
unequal, with two thirds of them being in Asia – mainly in India 
(29.2 per cent) and China (26 per cent) –, only 5.2 per cent in  
Latin America and less than 1 per cent in Africa” [32]. As Alonso 
points out, in Latin America the “precarious technologic al 
distribution, added to the difficulties of access and meddling in 
the developments of applied science, unites the region, situating 
it in a derivative position vis-à-vis  the nations that conduct 
10  In a recent study Morreale and McPherson claim that “most  
DMIs fail at the longevity exam”. They also wonder: “is non-
continuation necessarily a sign of failure of DMIs?” [20]. 
11  García Canclini understands by hybridization “socio-cultural 
processes in which discrete structures or practices, i n the sense 
that they existed separately, are combined to generate ne w 
structures, objects and practices” [13]. 
232
primary research. This unequal distribution and its political and 
social consequences (…) constitute one of the most pressing  
grievances in our countries, in an era in which the globa l 
reconfiguration on the basis of technological ownership sets the 
pace of the world´s politics and economics” [1]. 
8.  REFERENCES 
[1]  R. Alonso. Elogio de la low-tech. Historia y estética de las 
artes electrónicas en América Latina . Luna Editores, 
Buenos Aires, 2015. 
[2]  J. V. Asuar. Música con computadores: ¿Cómo hacerlo? 
Revista Musical Chilena , N° 118, XXVI, 1972. 
[3]  J. V. Asuar. Haciendo Música con un Computador. 
Revista Musical Chilena , N° 123-124, XXVII, 1973. 
[4]  J. V. Asuar. Un sistema para hacer música con un 
microcomputador. Revista Musical Chilena , N° 151, 
XXXIV, 1980. 
[5]  J. Barbosa, F. Calegario, J. Tragtenberg, G. Cabral, G. 
Ramalho, and M. M. Wanderley. Designing dmis for 
popular music in the Brazilian northeast: lessons learned. 
In Proceedings of the International Conference on New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression , Baton Rouge, 
Louisiana, USA, 2015, 277–280. 
[6]  J. Barbosa, F. Calegario and G. Cabral. Illusio: A drawing-
based digital music instrument. Proceedings of the 
International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical 
Expression , Daejeon, Republic of Korea, 2013, 499–502. 
[7]  M. Battier. Electronic Music and Gesture. Trends in 
Gestural Control of Music . Ircam - Centre Pompidou, 
Paris, 2000. 
[8]  R. Cadiz and A. Sylleros. Arcontinuo: the instrument of 
change. In Proceedings of the International Conference on 
New Interfaces for Musical Expression , Copenhagen, 
Denmark, 2017, 499–500. 
[9]  R. Dal Farra. Latin American Electroacoustic Music 
Collection. The Daniel Langlois Foundation for Art, 
Science, and Technology, 2004. 
[10]  H. Davies. Drawn sound. The New Grove Dictionary of 
Musical Instruments . Macmillan, London, 1984. 
[11]  O. Edelstein. Entrevista a Fernando Von Reichenbach. 
Lulú. Revista de teorías y técnicas musicales , Nº 3. 
Fundación Da Camera, Buenos Aires, 1992. 
[12]  M. A. Fumarola. Report of the COMDASUAR: A 
significant and unknown Chilean contribution in the 
history of computer music. In Proceedings of the 
International Computer Music Conference , Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, 1998. 
[13]  N. García Canclini. Culturas híbridas: estrategias para 
entrar y salir de la modernidad . Paidós, Buenos Aires, 
2012. 
[14]  A. Ghisolfi, L. Junciel, D. Gulich and C. Von 
Reichenbach. Desarrollos tecnológicos para la 
reconstrucción histórica: el caso del arco parlante. XCVII 
Reunión Anual de la Asociación Física Argentina . Villa 
Carlos Paz, Córdoba, 2012. 
[15]  L. Herrera. The CLAEM and the construction of elite art 
worlds: philanthropy, latinamericanism and avant-garde 
music. Dissertation. University of Illinois, Urbana, 2013. 
[16]  H. Kerlleñevich, M. C. Eguía, and P. E. Riera. An open 
source interface based on biological neural networks for 
interactive music performance. In Proceedings of the 
International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical 
Expression , Oslo, Norway, 2011, 331–336. 
[17]  N. Leonard III. Juan Blanco: Cuba's Pioneer of 
Electroacoustic Music. Computer Music Journal . Vol. 21, 
No. 2, 1997, 10-20. 
[18]  M. Matus Lerner. Osiris: a liquid based digital musical 
instrument. In Proceedings of the International 
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression , 
Copenhagen, Denmark, 2017, 52–55. 
[19]  W. Montano. La acústica en Argentina, un reportaje. 
Asociación de Acústicos Argentinos, Gonnet, 2016. 
[20]  F. Morreale and A. P. McPherson. Design for longevity: 
Ongoing Use of Instruments from NIME 2010-14. In 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression , Copenhagen, Denmark, 
2017, 192–197. 
[21]  M. L. Novoa. Cuando el futuro sonaba eléctrico. La 
música en el Di Tella: resonancias de la modernidad . 
Secretaría de Cultura, Buenos Aires, 2011. 
[22]  M. Ojanen, J. Suominen, T. Kallio, and K. Lassfolk. 
Design principles and user interfaces of Erkki 
Kurenniemi's electronic musical instruments of the 1960's 
and 1970's. In Proceedings of the International 
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression , 
New York City, NY, United States, 2007, 88–93. 
[23]  I. Orobigt, A. Subieta, F. Uslengui and F. Wiman. El 
desarrollo de la Música Electroacústica en Buenos Aires. 
Revista del Instituto de Investigación Musicológica Carlos 
Vega , Nº 18, Año XVIII, 2003. 
[24]  G. Pareyón. Diccionario Enciclopédico de Música en 
México , Vol. 2. Universidad Panamericana, Guadalajara, 
2007. 
[25]  R. Pavón Sarrelangue. La Electrónica en la Música… y en 
el Arte . SEP INBA-Cenidim, México, 1981. 
[26]  T. A. Pinto. Música e Eletrônica no Brasil. Vôos abortados 
de uma pesquisa frutífera. MA diss. Universidad de São 
Paulo, São Paulo, 2002. 
[27]  A. Ranea. Origin and (mis)fortune of the collection of 
scientific instruments of the Departament of Physics, La 
Plata, Argentina. In Proceedings of the Eleventh 
International Scientific Instrument Symposium , Bologna, 
1991, 117-123. 
[28]  M. Rocha Iturbide. Cronología Comparada de la Historia 
de la Música Electroacústica. Pauta. Cuadernos de teoría 
y crítica musical. Vol. XXII, No. 89. CONACULTA – 
INBA, México, 2004. 
[29]  F. Rodríguez Alpízar. Juan Blanco y la profecía del sonido 
futuro. Boletín Música . No. 39, Casa de las Américas, 
2015.  
[30]  F. Schumacher Ratti. La música electroacústica en Chile. 
50 años . Fondart, Santiago de Chile, 2005. 
[31]  G. Stolfi. Descricão de um Sistema Modular de Síntese de 
Sons com Controle Automático por Computador. In 
Proceedings of 1º Congresso Brasileiro de Acústica . Univ. 
Fed. Do Paraná, Curitiba, 1979. 
[32]  United Nations. Technology and innovation report 2018 . 
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 
Geneva, 2018. 
[33]  H. G. Vázquez. Historia, actividad y recepción crítica del 
CLAEM. La música en el Di Tella: resonancias de la 
modernidad . Secretaría de Cultura, Buenos Aires, 2011. 
[34]  F. Von Reichenbach. Process and apparatus for 
converting image elements to electric impulses . US Patent 
3719, 1973. 
[35]  R. Wittje. The Electrical Imagination: Sound Analogies, 
Equivalent Circuits, and the Rise of Electroacoustics, 
1863–1939. Osiris . Vol. 28, No. 1, 2013, 40-63.
 
233