Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
Playability Evaluation of a Vir tual Bowed String Instrument
Diana Y oung
MIT
Media Lab
Cambridge, MA
diana@media.mit.edu
Stefania Seraﬁn
∗
CCRMA, Department of Music
Stanford University
Stanford, CA
seraﬁn@ccrma.stanford.edu
ABSTRACT
Driving a bowed string physical model using a bow con-
troller, we explore the potentials of using the real gestures
of a violinist to simulate violin sound using a virtual instru-
ment. After a description of thes o f t ware and hardware de-
veloped, preliminary results and future work are discussed.
1. INTRODUCTION
One of the aspects that makes the family of bowed string
instruments successful is the incredible degree of nuance and
expressivity that a player can obtain with a bow. In build-
ing virtual bowed string instruments, the same expressivity
is a desirable characteristic. The issue of expressivity in syn-
thetic bowed string research is well known in the computer
music ﬁeld. The importance of controlling a bowed string
physical model with input parameters that simulate a phys-
ical gesture was ﬁrst underlined in the work of Chafe [2] and
Jaﬀe and Smith [5]. In this research the combination of the
input parameters of a bowed string physical model was used
to reproduce diﬀerent bow strokes such as detach´e, legato
and spiccato.
Although the goal was to reproduce a particular sound
speciﬁc to a certain performer’s gesture, no real-time in-
put controller was used. To our knowledge, one of the ﬁrst
attempts to control a bowed string physical model using de-
vices other than the traditi onal mouse and keyboard was
proposed in the early 90s by Cadoz and his colleagues at
ACROE. Using a devi ce capable of provi ding tactile feed-
back the player was able to feel the synthetic bowed string.
Recent results of this research are detailed in [3].
Recently, an increasing interest has been shown in con-
trollers for virtual bowed str ings developed u sing physical
models.
Preliminary experiments using a Wacom tablet to con-
trol a real-time waveguide bowed string model developed in
the Max/MPS environment were performed at IRCAM and
described in [10]. The Wacom tablet allows a straightfor-
ward mapping of the parameters of the bowed string phys-
ical model, since iti sa b l et oc a p t u r ethe pressure and two
axis position of the pen providedwith the tablet itself; these
values can be e asily mapped to the bow pressure, velocity
and bow-bridge dis tance. Moreover, the tablet is able to
detect the horizontal and vertical tilt angle of the pen. This
immediately shows an advantage of the Wacom tablet ver-
susm oret raditional input devices such as a mouse and a
keyboard, i.e. the possibility of having the same degrees of
freedom as a bow in contact with a string. The tablet, how-
ever, shows limitations that are mainly illustrated by the
∗Current address: VCCM, McIntyre Department of Music,
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA.
diﬃculties of using it as a performance instrument. These
are due also to the lack of tactile feedback (because of the
lack of elasticity of the tablet compared to the bow hair) and
the dramatic diﬀerence between its ergonomics and that of
at r a d i t ional violin bow.
This lack of force feedback was compensated for when
controlling the same bowed string physical model using the
Moose, a device built by Sile O’Modhrain and Brent Gille-
spie. Experiments show that the playability of the bowed
string physical model greatly increases when tactile feed-
back is provided [7]. Researchers simulated the friction of
the bowed string using the Moose, thereby providing force
feedback associatedwith bowing gesture.
In order to introduceb o t hforce feedback and ergonomics
that are reminiscent of a traditional violin interface, Charles
Nichols built the vBow [6], a haptic feedback controller. The
goal of the vBow is to be able to introduce a new violin
interface that addresses the prior limitations of MIDI violins
as well as to provide a controller that can also play other
real-time synthesis tools.
In this paper, we extend the previous research by propos-
ing an evaluation of the playability of a virtual bowed string
instrument when driven by a bow controller that has the
same ergonomics of a traditional violin bow.
2. ASPECTS OF PLAYABILITY
In virtual musical instruments and musical acoustics, the
word playability has diﬀerent deﬁnitions. While in this paper
we focus on playability of virtual bowed strings, the same
issues can be applied also to all other expressive virtual in-
struments.
According to Jim Woodhouse [14], playability of virtual
instruments means that the acoustical analysis of the wave-
forms produced by the model fall within the region of the
multidimensional space given by the parameters of the model.
This is the region where good toneis obtained. In the case
of the bowed string. good tonerefers to the Helmholtz mo-
tion, i.e. the ideal motion of a bowed string that each player
is trying to achieve. The Hel mholtz motion is given by an
alternation of stick-slip-stick-slip, in which the string sticks
to the bow hair for the longest part of its period, slipping
just once. Experiments show that simulated bowed strings
have thes ame playability as real bowed strings as calculated
by Schelleng [9].
Further experiments also show that the playability of vir-
tual bowed strings increases when accurate friction models
that account for the thermodynamical properties of rosin
are taken into account [12].
This above mentioned deﬁnition of playability is interest-
ing from a musical acoustician’s point of view but does not
NIME03-104
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
reﬂect performance issues. In these experiments, in fact, the
input parameters that drive the bowed string model corre-
sponding to the right hand of the player are kept constant
for each simulation. This is a situation that is clearly not
the same as that which occurs in violin performances, as
in performance it is the continuous evolution of the input
parameters that constitutes the nuances that are the char-
acteristics of an expressive performance. In order to address
this issue, Askenfelt [1] studied the contribution of bowing
parameters in diﬀerent bow strokes, trying to determine the
physical limits of the input parameters in order to achieve a
speciﬁc stroke. He determined the maximal duration of the
pre-Helmholtz attack allowed in order to judge a particular
stroke as acceptable.
In interactive performances, other issues related to playa-
bility must be considered. Sile O’Modhrain [7], for example,
studied the inﬂuence of tactile feedback on the playability
of virtual bowed strings.
She discovered that haptic feedback greatly increases the
playability of virtual instruments. In this context, playabil-
ity is referred to as the ability of bowed string players to
consistently perform diﬀerent bow strokes that produce vi-
olin sounds that are judged as perceptually acceptable by
professional bowed string players and also have waveforms
that reside within the playability region as deﬁned by [14].
Another imp ortant issue in v irtual musicali n s t rument
playability refers to the precision and accuracy of both the
hardware and the software thatcomprise the virtual instru-
ment itself.
In the situation where a controller is used to drive a syn-
thetic model, we may say that a controller is precise if it al-
lows the player to control subtle variations of the gesture pa-
rameters with great care, and we may say that it is accurate
if the data collected by the device may be easily correlated to
ar e a lp h y s i c a lv a l u eso fag e s t u r e .Correspondingly, we may
say that the model is precise if it reproduces the nuances in
the sonorities that are produced by a real instrument, and
it is accurate when the physical input/output data can be
matched to measurements on real acoustic instruments. An
issue of importance in conside ring both of these aspects is
that of latency, which may be adversely aﬀected by limita-
tions of either precision or accuracy. Of course, in musical
performance, minimizing latency is a priority.
Obviously, the acceptance level of responsiveness varies
according to the instrument played. Forexample, percussion
instruments require a higher responsiveness than woodwind
instruments. In general, it is reasonable to assume that
transient instruments require a higher level of responsiveness
that sustained instruments.
In the case of the bowed string, the issue of responsiveness
is crucial when fast bow strokes such as staccato, balzato,
martellato are performed.
Another more general deﬁnition of playability is the abil-
ity of the virtual instrument to be ergonomically playable.
That is, the player should be able to physically manipulate
the interface freely and with ease.
Ac hart that summarizes all the playability issues men-
tioned above is shown in ﬁgure 1.
3. NEW EVALUATIONP L A Y ABILITY
In this paper we are interested in exploring all the previous
deﬁnitions of playability and extending them by driving a
violin bowed string physical model using a bow controller.
Rather than building or adopting an alternate controller
or working with a haptic device such as in the examples
Figure 1: Playability chart of a virtual musical in-
strument
mentioned above, we are interested in exploring the possi-
bility of reproducing traditional bowing techniques using a
bow controller that behaves in a manner as closely related
to that of a traditional violin bow as possible.
This allows us to validate both the model and the con-
troller by comparing it to the b ehavior of the traditional
instrument.
Figure 2: Playability plot obtained by capturing the
waveforms after steady-state motion is obtain. Hor-
izontal axis: bow force. Vertical axis: bow position.
3.1 A bowed string physical model
We built a bowed string physic al model t hat combines
waveguide synthesis [13] with latest results on bowed string
interaction modeling [8].
As c h e m a t i cr epresentation of the model is shown in ﬁgure
3. In this model, the bow excites the string in a ﬁnite num-
ber of points, which represent the bow width. The frictional
interaction between the bow and the string is modeled con-
sidering the thermodynamical properties of rosin [12]. The
bow widthis modeled by discretizing the region of the string
in contact with the bowu s i n gﬁnite diﬀerences and calculat-
ing the coupling between the waves propagating along the
string and the frictional interaction between the bow and
the string at each point. Once the velocity of the string at
NIME03-105
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
thec ontact point has been calculated, the waves propagat-
ing along the string are modele du s i n gdigital waveguides.
More precisely, transversal and torsional waves propagating
toward the bridge and the ﬁngerboard are modeled as pairs
of one dimensional digital waveguides.
The outgoing velocity at the b ridge is ﬁltered through
the violin body’s resonances and corresponds to the output
waveforms perceived by the listener.
For a detailed description of the physical model see, for
example, [11].
Thei nput parameters of the model corresponding to the
right hand of the player are bow position relative to the
bridge (normalized between 0 and 1, where 0 corresponds
to the bridge, 1 corresponds to the nut, 0.5 corresponds
to the middle of the string), bow pressure, bow velocity,
and amount of bow hair in contact with t he string. The
model has been implemented as an external object in the
Max/MSP environment.
Figure 2 shows the waveforms obtained by running the
model with a constant bow velocity of 0.05 m/s, and vary-
ing the bow force and bow position between 0 and 5 N and
0.01 and 0.4r e s p e c t i vely. The waveforms are captured after
as t e a d y - s tate motion is achieved. Inside the two straight
lines appears the playability region as measured by Schelleng
with the same parameter conﬁguration. Note how the syn-
thetic model and the real instrument are in good agreement
concerning the playability region’s results.
3.2 The bow controller
The bow controller provides three diﬀerent types of mea-
surement that reﬂect the nua nces of gesture that may be
observed in traditional string instrument bowing technique.
The controller’s sensing system employs commercial MEMS
accelerometers to measure three axes of acceleration, electric
ﬁeld sensing to track bow position and bridge distance from
the bowing point, a nd foil strain gauges to detect changes
in the downward strain of the bow stick as well as in the
orthogonal direction (toward the scroll).
Figure 3: A bowed string instrument and the corre-
sponding simplﬁed block diagram of its model.
Figure 4: Input parameters of the bowed string
physical model.
Figure 5: Data ﬂow for the violin controller.
These sensors were chosen so as to oﬀer a player and com-
poser the ability to capture data concerning all of the param-
eters of bowing that contribute to the interaction between
the bow and the string: bow speed and bowing point (from
the position tracking), downward force and bow width (both
reﬂected by strain sensors). Additionally, the accelerometers
were included as a means of observing with great precision
changes in bowing direction as well as the diﬀerences in char-
acteristics of various kinds of string attacks.
The placement of the sensors and the accompanying elec-
tronics were c arefully designed so as to provide good re-
sults in measurement, while also maintaining as completely
as possible the balance, weight, and feel of the bow. Also
ap r i o r i t yi nt h i si m plementation is the protection of the
hardware itself and robustness of the overall system, as the
interface was intended for use in live performance and rig-
Figure 6: One to one mapping of the bow controller
to the bowed string physical model.
NIME03-106
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
orous laboratory experiments.
The strain sensors are eﬀectively integrated onto the com-
posite material of the bow, as they are permanently adhered
around the midpoint of the stick. They are protected from
wear by a thin layer of ﬂexible tubing, and their connecting
wires run down the lower length of the bow to the elec-
tronics board mounted on the frog (while still allowing the
frog to slide freely in order to adjust the tension of the bow
hair). This electronics board houses the accelerometers, the
microcontroller, and the wireless transmitter, which sends
the acceleration and strain data to a remote receiver board
containing a serial port. This board also sends two sepa-
rate signals to either end of a resistive strip that runs the
length of the bow stick, acting as an antenna for the position
measurement. The resultant mixed signal is received by an
antenna mounted behind the bridge of the violin, and this
signal is connected to another electronics board that deter-
mines the diﬀerent amplitudes of the two received signals.
The mechanical layout of the electronics on the bow allows
the player to use traditional right hand bowing technique,
while keeping the hardware out of harm’s way from the play-
ers hands and the strings of the violin. The electronics add
about 30g of weight to the original carbon bow, but because
of the careful distribution of the weight along the length of
the bow the balance point of thebow is still well within the
normal range for a traditional violin bow. In addition, the
remote electronics boards are small and light, and the bow
is wireless and runs on a camera-style battery with a lifetime
of over 20 hours, and so the interface is highly portable.
The data from the bow controller is carried by two sep-
arate serial buses: one for the acceleration and strain data
and one for the position data. In this experiment, a commer-
cial serial/USB converter is used to connect the two serial
lines with the input of a Macintosh computer [15].
4. MAPPINGS
In order to build an expressive virtual musical instrument,
the capture of the gesture of thep e r f o r m a n c ei sas important
as the manner inw h i c ht h em apping of gestural data onto
synthesis parameters is done. In the case of physical model-
ing synthesis, a one-to-one mapping approach of control val-
ues to synthesis parameters makes sense, due to the fact that
the relation between gesture input and sound production is
often hard-codedi n s i d ethe synthesis model [4]. Because
both the physical model and the bow controller are devel-
oped according to physical input and output parameters,
the mapping between the two is straightforward. Figure 6
shows how the data sent by the bow controller is mapped to
the input parameters of the physical model. Downward bow
strain of the controller is directly mapped into bow force in
the physical model. Bow velocity and bow-bridge distance
are captured by measuring the horizontal and vertical posi-
tion of the bow respectively. Moreover, lateral strain sensors
are mapped into the amount of bow hair in contact with the
bow.
5. PRELIMINARY EXPERIMENTS
The ﬁrst experiments completed to begin the integration
between the bow controller and the violin physical model
were encouraging. With the model parameters of bow-bridge
distance, bow velocity, and bow width for a ﬁxed frequency
held constant, we mapped the downward strain data from
the bow controller to the downward force parameter. While
applying pressure on the strings of our test violin (without
actually drawing the bow acrosst h es t r ings) using the bow
controller, we were able to quickly produce sonorities from
the model that sounded appropriate for the amount of pres-
sure we appliedt ot h eb o w .
We also experimented by drawingt h eb o wa c ross damped
strings to determine the response for changes in downward
force that occur during diﬀerent bow strokes. Again, the
response of the model and the feel of this simple mapping
produced a satisfying interaction and was interpreted by us
as extremely promising for continued work.
6. CONCLUSION
The initial experiments for this research project yielded
positive results. Players were able to produce bow strokes
that felt natural and were judged as acceptable from bowed
stringplayers. Furthermore, the mapping between the amount
of force and th ec h ange in amplitude of the sound seemed
intuitive.
Mapping each of the remaining input parameters of the
physical model to the appropriate sensor data and aim to it-
eratively build a convincing link between physical controller
and virtual violin. This allows us to evaluate each compo-
nent of the system as well as the overall system by examining
all aspects of playability discussed.
Using this methodology we area b l et ovalidate not only
the acoustical properties of our system, but also the perfor-
mance capabilities, issues which are often treated separately.
7. REFERENCES
[1] A. Askenfelt. Measurement of the bowing parameters
in violin playing. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 86(2):503–516, August 1989.
[2] C. Chafe. Simulating performance on a bowed string.
TechnicalR e p o r t,S TAN-M-48, May 1988.
[3] J.-L. Florens and C. Henry. Bowed string synthesis
with force feedback gesture interaction. In Proc.
InternationalC o mputer Music Conference,p ages
115–118. ICMA, 2001.
[4] A. D. Hunt, M. Paradis, and M. M.W anderley. The
importance of parameter mappings in electronic
instrument design. In Proc. NIME, 2002.
[5] D. Jaﬀe and J. Smith. Performance expression in
commuted waveguide synthesis of bowed strings. In
Proc. International Computer Music Conference,
pages 343–346. ICMA, 1995.
[6] C. Nichols. The vbow: A virtual violin bow controller
for mapping gesture to synthesis with haptic feedback.
Organized Sound.I np ress.
[7] S. O’Modhr ain, S. Seraﬁn, C. Chafe, and J. Smith.
Qualitative and quantitative assessment on of a bowed
string instrument. In Proc. International Computer
Music Conference.I CMA, Aug. 2000.
[8] R. Pitteroﬀ. Mechanics of the contact area between a
violin bow and a string. part i:reﬂection and
transmission behaviour. part ii: Simulating the bowed
string. part iii: Parameter dependance. In
Acustica-ActaA c u s t i c a,p ages 543–562, 1998.
[9] J. C. Schelleng. The bowed string and the player.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
53(1):26–41, Jan. 1973.
[10] S. Seraﬁn, R. Dudas, M. M. Wanderley, and X. Rodet.
Gestural control of a real-time model of a bowed
string instrument. In Proc. International Computer
Music Conference.I CMA, Oct. 1999.
NIME03-107
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
[11] S. Seraﬁn, J. O. Smith, III, and J. Woodhouse. An
investigation of the impact of torsion waves and
friction characteristics on the playability of virtual
boweds trings. New York, Oct. 1999. IEEE Press.
[12] J. H. Smitha n dJ .W o odhouse. The tribology of rosin.
J. Mech Phys.Solids, 48:1633–1681.
[13] J. O. Smith. Physical modeling using digital
waveguides. 16(4):74–91, Winter 1992.
[14] J. Woodhouse. On the playability of violins. Part I:
Reﬂection functions. Part II: Minimum bow force and
transients.Acustica, 78:125–136,137–153, 1993.
[15] D. Young. The hyperbow controller: Real-time
dynamics measurement of violin performance. In Proc.
NIME, 2001.
NIME03-108