ThumbTec: A New Handheld Input Device
 Philippe Stanislas Zaborowski
Sound Processing and Control Laboratory
Faculty of Music - McGill University
555, Sherbrooke Street West
Montreal (Qc), Canada H3A 1E3
philippe.zaborowski@mail.mcgill.ca
ABSTRACT
This paper describes ThumbTEC, a novel general purpose
input device for the thumb or finger that is useful in a wide
variety of applications from music to text entry. The device is
made up of three switches in a row and one miniature joystick
on top of the middle switch. The combination of joystick
direction and switch(es) controls what note or alphanumeric
character is selected by the finger. Several applications are
detailed.
Keywords
One-Thumb Input Device, HCI, Isometric Joystick, Mobile
Computing, Handheld Devices, Musical Instrument.
1. INTRODUCTION
Together, the mouse and keyboard have remained the
industry standard for the personal computer. The standard
keyboard is ideal for the desktop computer, but hardly an
adequate solution for mobile computing, where size and
portability are of utmost importance.
Nevertheless, most attempts at designing a suitable
interface for handhelds have used some sort of keyboard.
However, the keyboard works best when all the fingers of both
hands are used. Each finger is responsible for a certain area on
the keyboard and typing is quick and efficient. This paradigm
does not work that well for one or two thumbs. The keyboard
foot print is large, while the keys are usually small and close
together. Because of this, the user must focus their attention
on the keyboard to avoid making mistakes, which can slow
progress. In order to type faster both hands are usually used.
Thus, handhelds become bi-manual for text entry. Although
stylus-based interfaces have a significantly smaller footprint
than the keyboard, both hands are needed and typing can be
quite slow. There is a third category for text entry, namely the
predictive technique like the T9 in cell phones. This technique
works quite well with the cell phone keypad. However, it
requires lots of storage and is language specific [3].
Therefore, there is a need for a one-thumb input device for
text entry. The ThumbTec is a novel input device that attempts
to solve most of these problems and can also be used as a
pointing device. It can make selections quickly, efficiently
and unambiguously and can be as small as a fingerprint. These
features make it ideal for handheld devices from cell phones to
graspable musical instruments.
Figure 1. ThumbTec Prototype
2. DESIGN
Several electronic musical interfaces have been based on
acoustic instruments. Although it is important to study
acoustic instruments extensively, there are fundamental
differences between acoustic and electronic instruments that
may have been overlooked. When playing an acoustic
instrument, such as the piano for example, the finger must
move to the location of the desired key in order to play it.
When playing an electronic instrument the physical model is
inside the computer. There is no need to move the thumb or
finger to another location in order to select a particular note.
With the ThumbTec the finger or thumb can  make note
selections while staying in place.
The ThumbTec was initially designed for music with the
idea that very subtle thumb gestures could be used in order to
select pitches in an electronic instrument. The major challenge
is making sure that these gestures are unambiguous, efficient,
natural and easy to learn. The first step in this challenging
process is to really understand what gestures are natural for the
thumb. Video game controllers demonstrate that it is very
intuitive for the thumb to push a joystick and press down on
buttons. The second step is using this insight to build an
interface that is unambiguous. Choosing forward, backward,
left and right as the only directions that can be selected by the
thumb seem like the most natural choice. Push buttons
switches that make a “click” when pressed are the most
obvious choice for sensing downward pressure. The clicking is
important because it gives the user tactile feedback. The
ThumbTec was designed with this in mind.
Figure 3 a) shows a side view of the ThumbTec. One
switch is placed in front of the joystick, the other in back, and
a final switch would be placed beneath the joystick. The thick
black horizontal lines are panels that are placed on top of the
push button switches. The switches are represented by the
boxes below the panels. An “X” inside the box indicates that
the switch is turned on or depressed by the thumb.  Figure 3 b)
shows a top view of the ThumbTec. The three squares are the
panels. An “X” inside these boxes indicates that the switch
below the panel is on. The term “clicked” will be used from
now on when describing when a switch is turned on. Figure 3
c) through h) shows all six possible switch combinations that
can be simultaneously clicked by the thumb. Both a top view
and a side view are shown for each of these combinations. It is
important to note that the thumb is always in contact with the
joystick. While clicking the front switch, as in Figure 3 c), the
finger can simultaneously push the joystick North, South, East
or West. This is true for all six different switch combinations.
When the joystick direction is factored in, the number of
different simultaneous joystick/switch combinations is 24.
Figure 2. ThumbTec Prototype
2.1 Single-Click Technique
The single-click technique describes when the thumb
pushes the joystick in a direction (N, S, E or W) while
simultaneously clicking either one, two or all three switches.
Clicking on the middle and back switches, as in Figure 3 f),
while pushing the joystick E, would be just one example of the
single-click technique. Figure 4 shows all 24 of these single-
click techniques. The arrow inside the circle indicates the
direction of the joystick, while the X’s inside a box indicates
that the switch is clicked. The positive or negative number
below every permutation, namely the interval jump, will be
explained in the next section. In this section the interval jump
number will be used as a name identifying a particular single-
click technique. The technique is called single-click because
the thumb presses down on the switch(es) once.
2.2 Double-Click Technique
The double-click technique can be thought of as a single-
click technique preceded by a switch combination without a
joystick direction. In other words, the thumb would first
choose one of the six switch combinations without pushing
the joystick in any direction, then would select a single-click
technique from Figure 4. For example, the front switch could
be clicked, as in Figure 3 c), and then the single-click
technique named +5 from Figure 4 could be selected. The total
number of double-click permutations would be found by
multiplying 6 by 24 giving a total of 144. Adding the 24
single-click techniques would give 168. This gives a total of
64 more options than the standard computer keyboard at the
tip of a finger.
Figure 3. All Possible Switch Combinations
3. MUSICAL APPLICATION
This section describes the application of the ThumbTec
interface as a monophonic and polyphonic instrument, as well
as applications in both acoustic and electronic instruments.
3.1 Monophonic Instrument
As discussed in the previous section, there are 24 single-
click techniques. Figure 4 lists all 24 single-click technique
permutations in a graphical manner. The arrows indicate the
direction of the joystick, while the X’s indicate when a switch
is clicked. The positive/negative number below each single-
click technique graphic is the interval jump. The interval jump
is simply the number of semitones to go up or down from the
current note played. +1 would mean go up one semitone, -4
would mean go down four semitones, all relative to the current
location. One major advantage of an instrument that uses
relative intervals is that the pattern for a particular scale is the
same regardless of the starting note. Take the major scale: C, D,
E, F, G, A, B, C’. If we assume that we are currently on note C
then to get to D we would go up two semitones, or +2. D to E
would also be +2, and so on. Using this relative interval
approach, the pattern would be +2, +2, +1, +2, +2, +2, +1. This
pattern would be the same for all major scales, which is quite
different from the piano, which has a different white/black key
pattern for each major scale.
3.2 Mapping Rationale
If one looks closely at Figure 4, one would notice that the
switch combination for each negative/positive pair, like +4/-4,
is the same. The only difference between each
negative/positive pair is the direction of the joystick. Taking
+4/-4 as an example, we notice that both have the middle and
back switches clicked but that +4 has the joystick poiting N,
while -4 has the joystick pointing S. In fact, the joystick is
always pointing in the opposite direction for each positive
negative pair. The intervals are also organized in terms of size.
All the small intervals, namely +1 to +6 and -1 to -6, have
joysticks pointing N or S. In other words, all the small
intervals have a joystick direction that is on the same vertical
axis. While all the big intervals, namely +7 to +12 and -7 to -
12, have their joystick directions on the horizontal axis. This
kind of organizational scheme was designed to make learning,
remembering, and performing the intervals as intuitive as
possible.
3.3 Polyphonic Instrument
    If the thumb and fingers each have a ThumbTec, they
would potentially be able to make selections from the list of
intervals in Figure 4. In this context the thumb could play the
melody while the fingers could play the accompaniment.
However, the interval selections by the fingers would always
be relative to the melody. Let us again take our C major scale:
C, D, E, F, G, A, B, C’. Let us assume that we are playing C, E, G,
with the middle finger, index finger, and thumb respectively. G
is assumed to be a note in a melody, while C, and E are the
accompaniment. In order to play this accompaniment, the
index finger would select -3 because E is three semitones lower
than G, while the middle finger would select -4 because C is
four semitones lower than E. Each finger is relative to one
another, but it is the thumb that is at the top of this chain. The
electronic circuit and software used to interpret the musicians
actions would be designed such that, if the thumb and fingers
each make a selection at the same time it would know to play a
chord. The thumb would decide the next note, while the fingers
would decide the notes of the chord. Again, this pattern would
be the same for all major chords with the thumb as the leading
note. Thus learning might be easier as each particular
accompaniment would always have the same pattern. It is
interesting to point out that the interval between each finger
can be as much as an octave. Thus the thumb and fingers of the
hand could actually span as much as four octaves.
Figure 4. All Possible Single-Click Permutations
3.4 Vibrato, Volume, Glissando
Selecting pitches or intervals has been described in detail
in the previous paragraphs. However, many musical
instruments, like the violin can perform vibrato, control
volume and glissando of the note being played. The joystick
(without clicking any of the switches of course) is ideal for
controlling vibrato and volume. Forward and backward motion
of the joystick could control the volume, while side-to-side
movement could control vibrato. The initial loudness of the
note could be controlled by how hard the joystick is pushed
when selecting a note. Gliding from one note to another
smoothly and continuously could be done by the amount of
force applied to the joystick during note selection. For
example, to go from C to D in a smooth and continuous
manner, the musician would select +2, but apply or build the
pressure on the joystick gradually after clicking down on the
middle switch (see Figure 4). The more pressure applied to the
joystick, the closer to D one would get. Once the pressure
reaches a certain threshold the circuit and software would
recognize that the motion is finished, and you would now be
precisely on D. Thus the musician would be able to control the
rate of the glissando with the pressure applied to the joystick
during note selection.
3.5 Application In Other Instruments
    ThumbTec's small footprint makes it an ideal addition to
extended instruments. For example, two ThumbTec devices
could be added beneath the thumbs on a saxophone along with
a pitch detector near the bell [1]. The thumbs would choose
what notes to play relative to the saxophone. In this
configuration the musician would create a polyphonic
saxophone able to play three part harmony. This kind of setup
would suit instruments where the musician has one or two
fingers that are idle [2]. In the case of the trumpet, the free hand
would enable six part harmony. In the case of a slide guitar, the
slide could be outfitted with up to five ThumbTec input
devices allowing the musician to play a wide variety of sliding
chords. The vBow and Hyperbow are prime candidates for this
technology as well[4],[5].
4. CONCLUSION
    The ThumbTec project indicates that, although research in
alternate and instrument-inspired interfaces is very important,
exploring other interface paradigms can lead to interesting
results as well. Future scientific research is needed to compare
the effectiveness of the ThumbTec with other text entry
methods. Feedback from musicians concerning the ease or
difficulty of learning to play an instrument based on relative
notes is also of great interest.
5. REFERENCES
[1] Butner, M. Noisegate 67 for Metasaxophone:
Composition and Performance Considerations of a New
Computer Music Controller. In Proceedings of the 2002
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression,
Dublin, Ireland, 2002.
[2] Cook, P. Principles for Designing Computer Music
Controllers. In Proceedings of the 2001 Conference on
New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Seattle, WA, USA
[3] MacKenzie, I. S., & Soukoreff, R. W. Text entry for mobile
computing: Models and methods, theory and practice.
Human-Computer Interaction , 17, 147-198, 2002.
[4] Nichols, C. The vBow : Development of a Virtual Violin
Bow Controller Haptic Human-Computer Interface. In
Proceedings of the 2002 Conference on New Interfaces
for Musical Expression , Dublin, Ireland, 2002.
[5] Young, D. The Hyperbow Controller: Real-Time Dynamics
Measurement of Violin Performance. In Proceedings of
the 2002 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical
Expression , Dublin, Ireland, 2002.