Developing a Hybrid Contrabass Recorder 
Resistances, Expression, Gestures and Rhetoric 
 
Cesar Marino Villavicencio Grossmann 
Universidade de São Paulo 
Escola de Comunicações e Artes 
Departamento de Música  
São Paulo, Brazil 
+55 11 97232460 
cevill@usp.br 
ABSTRACT 
In this paper I describe aspects that have been involved in my 
experience of developing a hybrid instrument. The process of 
transformation and extension of the instrument is informed by 
ideas concerning the intrinsic communication aspects of 
musical activities. Decisions taken for designing the instrument 
and performing with it take into account the hypothesis that 
there are ontological levels of human reception in music that are 
related to the intercorporeal. Arguing that it is necessary to 
encounter resistances for achieving expression, it is suggested 
that new instrumental development ought to reflect on the 
concern for keeping the natural connections of live 
performances. 
Keywords 
New instruments, live processing, recorder.  
1. INTRODUCTION 
Experiencing live music performances stimulates not only our 
auditory and visual sensory systems, but allows us to sense a 
number of connections that occur between both systems. This 
fact influences the manner in which we perceive the music and 
become moved by it . The observation of a mechanical action 
such as a player’s moving finger, the voluntary or involuntary 
movements of eyes, head, arms, etc, may induce changes in our 
perception of music. In this aspect, the musical experience in a 
live situation is maybe r icher in communicating intentionalities 
than that of an event where the visual aspect is cut -off from the 
experience such as, for instance, listening to an audio recording. 
On the other hand, we could also think that an excess of 
gestures in a live present ation may disrupt the musical 
experience rather than increase the intensity of its reception. 
Unnecessary voluntary  body movements may become artificial 
and disrupt the perception of the sounds. This paper focuses on 
the analysis of the theoretical and pr actical issues based on the 
author’s ten-year experience in building and performing with an  
acoustic contrabass recorder with an integrated 32 input 
controller. 
I explain how rhetoric became an important guide for 
developing the project by first presentin g a theory that proposes 
the necessity of resistances for obtaining expression [1]. I also 
expose issues regarding human ontological aspects related to 
the intrinsic corporeal engagement in musical communication, 
in which gestures and their interpretation offer some interactive 
constraints involving responses based in our emotive, affective, 
and expressive capabilities [2]. On the practical side, I explain 
how some key decisions made for adapting the electronic 
interface to the instrument helped in the achi evement of more 
musical expressive consistency and organological coherence.  
2. RESISTANCES 
John Dewey’s aesthetic theory reveals the importance of what 
he calls resistances to transform an impulse  into an expression. 
An outward impulse without resistance would simply be a 
discharge. Dewey tells us that, “To discharge is to get rid off, to 
dismiss; to express is to stay by, to carry forward in 
development.” [3] D e w e y ’ s  c o n c e p t  o f  r e s i s t a n c e  i s  b a s e d  o n  
the need of “obstacles” for transforming what he calls 
“impulsion” into expression. Impulsions, he tells us, “Are the 
beginnings of complete experience because they proceed from 
need…” [4] H e  a l s o  e x p l a i n s  t h a t  f o r  i m p u l s i o n  t o  b e  
transformed, or rather “distilled”, into an expression 
“impulsion…meets many thi ngs on its outbound course that 
deflect and oppose it. In the process of converting these 
obstacles and neutral conditions into favouring agencies, the 
live creature becomes aware of the intent implicit in its 
impulsion.” [5] While impulsion is the movemen t of the whole 
organism, impulse, he affirms, “is specialized and particular; … 
a part of the mechanism involved in a complete adaptation with 
the environment.” [6] Dewey also tells us that prior experiences 
induce reflection upon the experience resulting from the 
impulsion, “one that does not know where it is going.” This 
reflection represents a resistance which helps in converting a 
“direct forward action into re -flection; what is turned back upon 
is the relation of hindering conditions to what the self p ossesses 
as working capital in virtue of prior experiences.” [7] 
In theory, a resistance may manifest itself by meeting and 
overcoming the technical difficulties of, for instance, an 
instrument. In the case of computer music, for example, the 
learning proc ess required for managing the electronic music 
hardware and software could be thought as offering resistances 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage  and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.  
NIME2010, June 15-18, 2010, Sydney, Australia 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
223
 
as well. However, the manner for controlling them is usually 
restricted to a mouse or a couple of sensors, which do not offer 
a developed platform  for allowing resistances to come forward 
from the interaction between the corporeal and the sound 
manipulation. Furthermore, we could also think of another level 
of resistances, one that is linked to knowledge and experience. 
Since playing music is a prac tice that requires training, both 
physical and mental, we could think of the second as a set of 
constraints which offer resistance that control expressive 
devices such as timbre, loudness, timing, etc. Those set of 
constraints are possibly built through in dividual experience 
within the realm of expressive generation and treatment [8]. 
It is maybe useful to consider that, since we are making the 
decision to use sounds to express ourselves and that there is an 
intrinsic concern on the expressiveness that we c an achieve 
through making music, we ought to search for the development 
of new manners for dealing with sound. We cannot forget that, 
although we can choose to use innovative structures, sounds, 
media, and decorum, the manner in which the human receptive 
apparatus works still depends on certain kinds of dynamics in 
order to be moved by music. 
3. BODY AND GESTURE 
If we reflect on the idea that considers the body as playing a 
central role in musical activities, we should also think that there 
is an intrinsic corporeal engagement in musical communication, 
which allows moving sonic forms to affect our bodies. Roland 
Barthes in his Musica Practica acknowledges the existence of a 
“muscular music in which the part taken by the sense of hearing 
is one only of ratification, as though the body were hearing.” [9] 
Furthermore, Richard Leppert tells us: “When people hear a 
musical performance, they see it as an embodied activity. While 
they hear, they also witness: how the performers look and 
gesture, how they are costume d, how they interact with their 
instruments and with one another.” [10] Conclusively, the 
observation of a performance has a dialectical perception that 
involves aspects related to the mind and body.  
Although it is maybe difficult to contextualize musical  
corporeal significations, they exist and affect us in the process 
of listening to music. Marc Leman proposes that if there is an 
intrinsic engagement of the body in music, there ought to be a 
signification through body action rather than through thinking 
[11]. S i n c e  m e n t a l  r e p r e s e n t a t i o n s  a r e  n o t  d e t a c h e d  f r o m  
physical reality there must be characteristics that humans share 
in the reception of music. Antonio Damasio tells us that “the 
processes of the mind, including those of consciousness, are 
based on br ain activity; that the brain is part of a whole 
organism with which it interacts continuously; and that we as 
human beings, in spite of remarkable individual traits that make 
each of us unique, share similar biological characteristics in 
terms of the struc ture, organization, and function of our 
organisms.” [12] T h e s e  q u a l i t i e s ,  f o r  i n s t a n c e ,  m a y  a c c o u n t ,  
according to Leman, for the fact that music from a largely 
unknown culture in Africa can have meaning for Western 
listeners [13]. 
The problem is that how music affects our bodies is not easily 
contextualized, leading mostly to be dismissed by researchers 
for being too subjective. In the case of individual musical 
creativity, we ought to think at a root level for a moment. A 
person performing with his/her ins trument is essentially a 
human being dealing with an interface which allows air to be 
moved so that others can listen to it. This is the easy part to 
understand. Now, what is more difficult to understand is how 
humans are capable of communicating intention alities through 
this moving air. Because it must be clear that sound in itself 
cannot have an intrinsic affect, there are other aspects than the 
mere production of sound that are at play in the process of 
making music. Those aspects are not easily explaine d but we all 
know they are the essential part in a musical experience.  
Recalling the concept of resistances in music performance, an 
instrument, for example, can be seen as an obstacle that has to 
be overcome and controlled so that we can produce expressio n. 
While performing, humans meet the instrument so that their 
impulses can be transformed into expressions. In this process of 
putting forward intentionalities, symbiotic interactive sequences 
are triggered in which mind and body shape each other 
continuously. It is during this symbiotic process that a balance 
between the conscious and the subconscious would allow 
dealing, on the objective side, with the mechanical aspects of 
playing while, on the subjective side, performing music with 
what we call “inspira tion”. The result of this would eventually 
arrive objectively in the form of music to the receptive 
apparatus of the listeners who in turn may also achieve 
equilibrium between the objectivity of receiving the sound, and 
the subjectivity of becoming “moved”  by i t .  N at ura l l y,  a s  i n a 
good kitchen, the ingredients used for cooking ought to be well 
chosen. The quality and diversity of sounds, rhythms, shapes, 
gestures, structures and intensities would contribute to making 
the delivery of music eloquent and clea r. 
 
Practically speaking, humans are able to communicate a 
diversity of intentionalities through music. Those processes 
may be difficult to understand and explain fully by using 
theories of human creativity, imagination, behavior and 
cognition. However, we might profit from taking an approach to 
understanding straightforwardly its products: the 
intentionalities. An ancient area of thought that deals directly 
with these issues is rhetoric.  
4. RHETORIC 
One line of inquiry that seems to be useful for approach ing the 
ambit of music expressiveness that deals with the 
intentionalities transmitted through music in an objective 
manner is rhetoric. Assuming that the musical experience in 
question is one which requires direct involvement, with no 
distractions or inte rferences, the action sequences of musical 
communication may provoke a body -mind receptive synergy. In 
other words, body and mind work together in the process of 
listening to music. Rhetoric is based on preparing and adapting 
Figure 1. The symbiotic relationship be tween mind 
and body 
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
224
 
the discourse to the condition s, decorum, for making this 
receptive synergy one that is more responsive to the message. In 
this aspect it seems that rhetorical studies acknowledge as a fact 
that there are human physical constraints that are universal and 
that, to a certain extent, it o ught to be possible to find shared 
receptive qualities in communicating to each other. In this 
aspect we could suggest that rhetoric is part of who we are as 
human beings and that expressing ourselves in this way is a 
natural human activity [14]. 
Rhetoric, w h i c h  i s  e s s e n t i a l l y  i n t e r p r e t a t i v e ,  h a s  b e e n  u s e d  
since the fourth century B.C. in oratory with the objective of 
rendering the public more receptive to the message. Later, it 
was also used in Rome to increase the power of public 
speaking. With the transf ormations brought by Humanism, 
music went through a radical transformation during the second 
half of the sixteenth century in which polyphonic compositions 
started to be substituted with a musical genre that favored the 
clarity of the texts [15]. Rhetoric then established itself as a tool 
for understanding, performing and arguably also for composing 
music. During that period many treatises were written by 
Burmeister ( Musica Poetica , 1606), Kircher ( Musurgia 
Universalis sive ars magna consoni et dissoni , 165 0), Vogt 
(Conclave thesauri magnae artis musicae , 1719), Quantz 
(Versuch einer Anweisung die Flöte traversiere zu spielen , 
1752), Mattheson ( Der vollkommene Capellmeister , 1739), 
among others [16]. 
However, rhetoric cannot be regarded as a fixed system of 
rules and principles but rather as a tactical tool for achieving a 
determined effect or as a useful tool for describing 
intentionalities. Rhetorical concepts rely most of the time on 
interpretation and are circumstantial. This characteristic is part 
of the inherent heterogeneity of the musical rhetorical theory of 
the baroque. Instead of jumping to the conclusion of 
considering that heterogeneity is an indication of inconsistency, 
we should think that the modus operandi  of rhetoric is one that 
deals with th e diversity of the characteristics of reception. Each 
individual is moved in a different way by music. What rhetoric 
aims is not to persuade a specific person but to find a manner of 
building ways to take people “by -the-hand” through a series of 
emotional experiences. Metaphorically, it is as if the rhetor 
constructs a building with many corridors, many rooms with a 
variety of decorations, gardens and halls, and leads the public 
into a journey with the hope that they become intensely moved. 
Rhetoric allows us to isolate intentionalities through making 
correspondences with structure, rhythm, texture, and intensity, 
allowing us to point out to the field where the intentionalities or 
affections may belong. Example: in a baroque sonata movement 
called largo, in F minor, where there is a consistent use and 
repetition of dissonances, it is easy to say that no realm of 
happy feelings could be present [17]. After that, we know we 
are left with possibilities such as sorrow, anger, pain, and 
sadness. The next step is i dentifying each moment with those 
possibilities and, although it seems very subjective, there are no 
big difficulties in distinguishing, for instance, sorrow from 
anger. 
The music rhetoric of the baroque left us an arsenal of the so -
called figures of rhet oric, Figurenlehren, which are a collection 
of correspondences between musical moments and affections. 
An example coming from baroque music is the figure of 
anabasis, which means a movement upwards with the 
analogous meaning of ascending to heaven or to ex press 
exalted, rising, or elevated and eminent thoughts [18]. T h e  
opposite figure is the catabasis, which points to a descending 
musical passage, which expresses descending, lowly, or 
negative images or affections [19]. Among many other figures, 
it is impo rtant to mention those ones related to the 
categorization of silences. Rhetorical silences are a very good 
example on how rhetoric works in analyzing music. To define 
the characteristics of a silence, it is necessary to explore its 
surroundings. In this wa y it is possible to obtain a clearer idea 
whether the silence is an active silence, such as an abrupt 
interruption ( abruptio) or a questioning silence ( interrogatio), 
an interruption with an emotional content ( suspiratio), or 
simply a pause after a harmoni c resolution (pausa). 
During the Age of Enlightenment, music performance turned 
from audience -centered to artist -centered [20], r e n d e r i n g  
rhetoric in music obsolete. During the 1960s, “new” rhetorical 
theories proved to be necessary to adapt our understan ding of 
rhetoric to the changing conditions of the new era. Lucaites and 
Condit mention two phenomena as particularly important in 
generating the need for such theories. The first is the rise of 
television as a mass medium for public discourse, and the 
second is the rise in social movements such as the civil rights 
movement, the antiwar movement and the woman’s liberation 
movement [21]. The interest was to understand rhetoric and its 
connection with social theory. Today, rhetoric is viewed as the 
energy inh erent in emotion and thought, transmitted to others 
 
Figure 2. The e-recorder 
 
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
225
 
through a system of signs, with the objective of influencing 
their decisions and actions [22]. 
In 1997, when I set course to develop an instrument with the 
aid of computer technology, what gradually becam e the guiding 
premises for developing the structure and the manner to 
perform music with the meta -instrument were (a) the intrinsic 
intercorporeal level of music performances, (b) the congruence 
between gesture and sound, (c) the use of a reexamined concep t 
of music rhetoric and (d) the transformation of impulse into 
expression through the interpolation of resistances. My PhD 
research thesis investigates the connection between rhetoric and 
the musical scope of contemporary improvisation. Today, 
rhetoric ser ves as a set of tools that constantly expands with 
experience. These tools are very useful when elaborating the 
musical discourse. Furthermore, rhetorical concepts have also 
helped in the development of pedagogical lines for teaching 
contemporary improvisation. 
5. THE E-RECORDER 
Extending the acoustic instrument, a contrabass recorder built 
by Herbert Paetzold [23], w it h a n el ec tr oni c s et  of c ontr ol ler s 
proved initially to be a development of heuristic discovery. 
During the process of testing the placement  a n d  r o l e  o f  e a c h  
sensor I had to take decisions on how to make of the electronic 
interface something organologically coherent. The arguments 
behind those decisions were, and are, based on ideas with 
regard to the maneuverability and physical location of s ensors 
and their connection with gestures. On the other side, the 
processes used to transform sound via the electronic interface 
are chosen and informed by a number of satisfactory results 
accumulated in the past. What was initially an  acoustic 
instrument  with the capability of twisting some sounds through 
a set of ten sensors has become a complex hybrid instrument 
with its own instrumental technique. The principle used for this 
development consists of applying a set of changes, practicing 
and performing w ith them for a long period of time in order to 
gain control and expose those aspects that need to be improved. 
In this matter, musical expressivity has always been the driving 
force. 
For example, a major change in the instrument came after 
trying to solve the obstacle of having to perform behind a set of 
electronic devices placed on top of a table. A solution had to be 
found not only for aesthetic purposes but also for removing 
what represented a physical obstacle between the performer and 
the audience. The  way out came after installing a LCD monitor 
on the “head” of the instrument. The small screen shows a copy 
of the computer’s desktop so that the electronic gear could be 
moved to the back or even off -stage. If to create resistances it is 
necessary to deal  w i t h  t h e  “ o b s t a c l e s ”  a r i s i n g  d u r i n g  t h e  
performance, the performer needs time in order to identify and 
react to those elements. In this aspect, staring at a graphical 
interface consumes time, which might be otherwise used for 
musical interactive processe s. The e -recorder’s graphical 
interface shows the status of each of the sensors (rec/stand -by; 
transpositions to several MIDI notes; filterA/B; envelope 
open/closed; etc.) and the size and place where the sound is 
playing back from a buffer of five seconds . Placing the monitor 
above the head of the performer avoids unnecessary visual 
distraction from the graphical interface, allowing for more 
concentration in the process of making music. From a rhetorical 
point of view, this helped in restoring the contact with the 
audience and granted more connection and communication with 
co-participants in the elaboration of music.  
 
Playing the e -recorder, as any other instrument, produces a 
variety of physical gestures. Those gestures originate from two 
sources: (1) pl aying the acoustic platform of the recorder and 
(2) triggering the electronic interface. Some of the electronic 
triggering does not deliver a visible physical gesture parallel to 
the musical gesture, like opening the gate for filling the buffer, 
or switching between modes of filtering and transposing – all of 
this is done by the player’s right thumb at the back of the 
recorder (Figure 4). However, the mouth pressure sensor of the 
instrument can be set to open the envelope when reaching at 
certain pressure, creating a parallel gesture between both the 
acoustic and electronic platforms. This parallel effect also 
becomes evident when turning on the transposition mode that 
makes the electronics follow the pitches of the recorder’s 
fingerings. 
A device that requi res special attention is a mechanism that 
needed to be fit to the instrument so that it could be played in a 
standing position – t h e  o r i g i n a l  r e c o r d e r  w a s  s u p p o s e d  t o  b e  
played in a sitting position. We called this device the bird -cage. 
The bird -cage has a  p o t e n t i o m e t e r  t h a t  a l l o w s  t h e  r o t a t i n g  
movement of the recorder to “scratch” the buffer of the 
MAX/MSP patch [24]. This, in combination with a slider that 
allows the performer to select the amount of milliseconds of 
playback, plus the graphic of the sound  in the LCD screen, give 
a sense of comfortable control on choosing the material for live -
processing. It is possible to remember by looking at the 
graphics where each of the recorded sounds is located. The 
bird-cage also controls, through an accelerometer,  t h e  s e t t i n g s  
of band-filters through tilting the recorder back and forth. This 
movement can also control four channels sound spatialization. 
Constantly planning future developments for the e -recorder may 
be a characteristic intrinsic to the field of devel oping musical 
instruments today. It seems to me that a concern about 
Figure 3. LCD monitor installed on the e -recorder 
Figure 4. Triggers and sliders of the e -recorder 
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
226
 
designing something permanent with the objective of producing 
a musical instrument for the future – such as the idea of a piano 
or a violin – does not have a place in an era with vast adv ances 
in technology. Any preoccupation with this kind of concept of 
permanence may turn out to be counterproductive for the 
development of new instruments. However, I believe in a 
development that takes into account the physicality of live 
music performan ces that use electronics. Regularly there is a 
divergence between what we listen and what we see. This lack 
of connection deprives audiences from understanding what is 
going on between the interpreter and the computer and creates 
an illusion that, once it takes place, threatens to disengage the 
perception of the music with reality. I believe that we should 
not compromise in trying to adjust to this situation by 
understanding it as a problem that the audience itself needs to 
solve by adopting a different con cept of listening, but rather to 
find manners to restore the vital connection natural to live 
performances. 
6. CONCLUSION 
The hypothesis drawn by this paper is that as much as 
communication cannot be disassociated from any musical 
experience, human percept ive mechanisms rely in part on a set 
of ontological characteristics of reception related to the intrinsic 
corporeal engagement of musical experiences. When we 
perform, we engage in an activity that, in several aspects, is 
essential in the way we live. We m ake art because it is in our 
nature to do so. The reason why I am mentioning this is because 
it seems to me that sometimes an excess of concentration in the 
methods and materials used for making music blurs the 
objective of finding new manners for musical expression. 
Today, the expansion of the musical material brought by the 
extended acoustic instrumental techniques, the use of electronic 
technology and the influence of having the possibility to 
become acquainted with music from any place in the world, 
seems to divert the attention to the issue of making the 
expression through music consistent. It must be clear that the 
great variety of materials available for musical creation today 
leads to a broad palette of possibilities but, at the same time, to 
a more complicated path to producing music which is consistent 
and eloquent. I believe that we would profit from 
acknowledging that to fully explore the possibilities for making 
music today, we should experiment with finding a balance 
between the use of a very br oad palette of sounds in 
combination with different levels of intensity and control. At 
the same time, it might be useful to engage in the development 
of ways to create resistances in order to mature the musical 
discourse. Resistances, not only in the ambi t of instrumental 
control, but in the development of a mindset that makes us 
perform with full awareness of our intentions.  
Since I started to investigate and apply the central goals of 
this study – rhetoric and instrument development – my progress 
as a pe rformer and the way I appreciate music as a whole has 
truly expanded. Although experience and the predisposition for 
change might by itself increase the chances of attaining tangible 
results, I believe that rhetoric can help in this matter since it is 
an area of thought and practice that allows us to understand the 
organization of structures in music simultaneously with the 
concatenation of intentionalities.  
Since there is no pre -formulated strategy or rule that 
prescribes how to proceed in pursuing the obj ectives of 
discovering new platforms for musical expression, it might be 
beneficial to surrender to change and let the multiplicity 
inherent in this field help build up human expressions through 
the paths we meet in the course of development. The full 
significance of new instrumental developments is still 
unrevealed and it will probably mean a transformation in the 
manner we create and perceive music in the future.  
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I would like to thank the Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do 
Estado de São Paulo ( FAPESP), Brazil for supporting the 
development of this research. I am also grateful to Lex van den 
Broek and Johan van Kreij from the Institute of Sonology, The 
Hague, The Netherlands, for their collaboration in this project.  
8. REFERENCES 
[1] D e w e y, John. Art as Experience . Penguin Group, New 
York, 1934, pages 58-81. 
[2] L e m a n ,  M a r c .  Embodied Music Cognition and Mediation 
Technology. The MIT Press, 2008, pages 17 -22. 
[3] Dewey, page 62. 
[4] Dewey, page 58. 
[5] Dewey, page 59. 
[6] Dewey, page 58. 
[7] Dewey, page 60. 
[8] Sloboda, John. Exploring the Musical Mind. Oxford 
University Press, 2005, chapters 16.3 -16.6. 
[9] Barthes, Roland, Musica Practica in: Image – Music – Text, 
Hill and Wang, Noonday Press, New York, 1977, pages 149-
154. 
[10] Leppert, Richard, The Sight of Sound: Music, 
Representation, and the History of the Body. University of 
California Press, Berkeley, 1995, page xxii.  
[11] Le ma n,  Ma rc .  Embodied Music Cognition and Mediation 
Technology. The MIT Press, 2008, page 17.  
[12] D a m a s i o ,  A n t o n io. The Feeling of What Happens; Body 
and Emotion in the Making of Consciousness , Harcourt Brace 
& Company, 1999, page 85.  
[13] Le ma n,  Ma rc .  Embodied Music Cognition and Mediation 
Technology. The MIT Press, 2008, page 21.  
[14] Herrick, James A. The History and Theory of Rhetoric . 
Scottsdale, 1997, page 5. 
[15] Palisca, Claude V. Studies in the History of Italian Music 
and Music Theory . Oxford University Press, 1994, pages 19 -29 
and 
[16] Bartel, Dietrich. Musica Poetica , University of Nebraska 
Press, 1997, page 93. 
[17] T h e  u n e q u a l  t e m p e r a m e n t  u s e d  f o r  t u n i n g  k e y b o a r d s  
during the baroque era gives different characteristics to 
Figure 5. The bird-cage 
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
227
 
tonalities. The equal temperament of today actually reduced the 
characteristics of tonalities to two: one major and one minor.  
[18] Kircher, Athanasius. Musurgia Universalis sive ars magna 
consoni et dissoni  (Rome, 1650) L.8 p.145 in Bartel, Dietrich. 
Musica Poetica, University of Nebraska Press, 1997, 180.  
[19] B a r t e l ,  D i e t r i c h .  Musica Poetica , University of Nebraska 
Press, 1997, page 214. 
[20] T a r l i n g ,  J u d y .  The Weapons of Rhetoric . Corda Music 
Publications, Hertfordshire, 2004, page 40. 
[21] Lucaites John L. & Condit Celeste M. & Caudill Sally 
Editors C o n t e m p o r a r y  R h e t or i c a l  T h e o r y ,  The Guilford Press, 
New York, 1999, page 8. 
[22] Ke nne dy, George translator’s introduction to Aristotle on 
Rhetoric: A Theory of Civic Discourse.  C am br i dge U ni vers i t y 
Press, 1989. 
[23] T h e  a c o u s t i c  i n s t r u m e n t  i s  m a d e  b y  H e r b e r t  P a e t z o l d  i n  
Munique, Germany. 
[24] The Max/MSP patch is designed by Johan van Kreij . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
228