Plink Jet
Lesley Flanigan 
Interactive Telecommunications Program 
New York University 
721 Broadway 4/F 
New York, NY, USA 
+1 212 998 1894 
lesleyflanigan@gmail.com
Andrew Doro 
Interactive Telecommunications Program 
New York University 
721 Broadway 4/F 
New York, NY, USA 
+1 212 998 1894 
andy@sheepish.org 
ABSTRACT
Plink Jet is a robotic musical instrument made from scavenged 
inkjet printers and guitar parts. We investigate the expressive 
capabilities of everyday machine technology by re-
contextualizing the relatively high-tech mechanisms of typical 
office debris into an electro-acoustic musical instrument. We also 
explore the performative relationship between human and 
machine.
Keywords
Interaction Design, Repurposing of Consumer Technology, DIY, 
Performing Technology, Robotics, Automation, Infra-Instrument 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Plink Jet is a robotic musical instrument made from scavenged 
inkjet printers. The mechanical parts of four inkjet printers are 
diverted from their original function, re-contextualizing the 
relatively high-tech mechanisms of typical office debris into 
musical performance. Motorized, sliding ink cartridges and 
plucking mechanisms play four guitar strings by manipulating 
both pitch and strumming patterns mimicking human hands 
fingering, fretting, and strumming a guitar. Plink Jet is designed 
to play in three modes: automatic (played by a micro-controller), 
manual (played by a musician), or a combination of both.  A 
musician can choose varying levels of manual control over the 
different cartridges (fretting) and string plucking speeds 
(strumming), while improvising with preprogrammed sequences 
of Plink Jet. 
2. INTERFACE 
Plink Jet is designed to play guitar strings both manually and 
automatically. The interface consists of four toggle switches, four 
three-way switches, four dials, a single six-position rotary switch 
and a single power switch. Each of the four toggle switches and 
three way switches is associated with a single ink carriage. The 
rotary switch allows the user to select different pre-programmed 
patterns while a carriage is under automatic control. 
2.1 Fretting
The guitar strings are strung across the printer mechanism where 
the optical sensor used to be. Cartridges slide up and down the 
strings and touch the strings just enough to change the pitch, 
similar to a slide guitar. The farther away the cartridge is from the 
plucking mechanism, the lower the pitch of the note.  
Each carriage is controlled by a toggle switch and a 3 way switch. 
Toggle switches control whether the associated inkjet carriage is 
under manual or automatic control. While under manual control, 
the back-and-forth motion of each carriage is controlled by a 
three-way switch. While under automatic control, the carriage is 
controlled by a micro-controller containing programmed patterns 
of movement.  
2.2 Strumming 
The guitar strings are plucked by motors with a single thin metal 
strip that strikes the string as it rotates around. Four dials control 
the speed of the strumming motors. Control over the strumming 
motors exists regardless of whether the associated carriage is 
under manual or automatic control.
2.3 Amplification 
Inside each ink cartridge is a piezoelectric microphone used to 
pick up the sound of the plucked guitar string as well as the 
ambient sounds of the sliding cartridge.  In many ways Plink Jet is 
an elaborate guitar, and like an electric guitar it has a single 
quarter-inch output jack which allows it to be connected directly 
to a guitar amplifier.  
3. TECHNOLOGY 
The printer carriages and motors are from four inkjet printers. The 
controlling circuits and electronics are custom-designed. The 
optical encoder of each inkjet printer has been removed and 
replaced with a tunable guitar string that uses actual guitar tuning 
mechanisms built into the machine.   
3.1 Circuitry 
While under manual control, Plink Jet’s circuitry is completely 
analog. The only digital element is the micro-controller used in 
automatic mode. 
3.1.1 DC Motors 
A DC motor connected to an H-bridge chip controls the back and 
forth movement of each carriage. While in manual mode, the 
three-way switch controls the H-br idge with 5VDC. While in 
automatic mode, the H-bridge is under the control of the micro-
controller. 
3.1.2 Stepper Motors 
The strumming mechanism is driven by stepper motors, normally 
used for the docking procedure of the ink carriages. Each dial is 
attached to a potentiometer which controls the speed by changing 
the voltages on an oscillator chip. The oscillator signals are 
connected to hex divider chip, that acts as a stepper driver. The 
stepper signals are then relayed through a Darlington array before 
triggering the stepper motors.     
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
349
3.1.3 Micro-controller 
Plink Jet uses an ATMEGA168 chip containing six pre-
programming patterns to control the fretting when a carriage is in 
automatic mode. A six-position rotary switch selects which 
pattern to use. When a carriage is in automatic mode, the 
ATMEGA controls the associated motor’s H-bridge. 
Figure 1. Plink Jet at the ITP Winter Show 2007 
4. EVERYDAY MACHINES AND MUSIC 
The repurposing of consumer technology is a growing trend for 
artists and technologists in the DIY genre exploring circuit 
bending, hardware hacking and retro-engineering [6]. Artists who 
have used the mechanics of printers for producing sound include 
Paul Slocum with his dot matrix printer and Eric Singer's 
printer/scanner-inspired musical instrument, GuitarBot. The 
innovative American composer Harry Partch built many of his 
instruments out of trash and his own carpentry. Plink Jet emerged 
from the process of hardware hacking and could be considered an 
infra-instrument, a concept developed by John Bowers and Phil 
Archer. Infra-instruments are often created by taking a non-
instrument and finding the instrument within [1]. With Plink jet, 
we have found the infra-instrument within the inkjet printer. 
Machines are built to be reliable.  When they no longer function 
consistently, we quickly upgrade to new machines and readily 
discard the old.  But usually, these discarded machines are not 
dead.  Their mechanisms still function, though perhaps not as 
originally intended. Taking apart these discarded machines is an 
opportunity to appreciate them for what they are, as opposed to 
what they are intended for; such is appreciating a printer for its 
mechanics, rather than its ability to print. Combining the parts of 
these machines with parts of musical instruments is a way to see 
their operative similarities and learn how they work through 
sound. 
Inside an ordinary inkjet printer are the same toy-like, clockwork 
mechanisms that have delighted people and sparked imaginations 
for centuries. When we made Plink Jet, we took these 
mechanisms and combined them with guitar. Now we not only 
see the back-and-forth motion of the inkjet cartridge, we hear it.  
Adding a guitar string highlights the design structure inherent in a 
printer by relating pitch and rhythm directly to its mechanics. The 
mechanical relationship between human fingers fretting a guitar 
string and an inkjet cartridge riding an optical sensor is heard in a 
musical scale.  We did not take apart printers to make a guitar. 
Plink jet is a hybrid. Both printer and guitar are heard.  The 
pickups not only amplify the guitar strings, but how the guitar 
strings sound within a printer.  The ticks, clicks and hums of the 
printer mechanisms are amplified expressiveness, like slapping 
the neck of a guitar or rubbing its strings. There is respect for the 
original sound of the printer and it remains present in the new 
invention.
Plink Jet is part of a long tradition of re-appropriating office 
technology to create music. As early as the 1970s, computer 
technicians learned how to use the early IBM 1400 mainframe 
computer series to generate music- “… a purpose for which this 
business machine was not at all designed. The method was 
simple. The computer's memory emitted strong electromagnetic 
waves and by programming the memory in a certain way and by 
placing a radio receiver next to it, melodies could be coaxed out - 
captured by the receiver as a delicate, melancholy sine-wave 
tone.” [3]. Technicians also learned to use the IBM 1403 printer 
under the control of an IBM 1401: 
Clever engineers figured out what line of characters to print to 
make a noise at a given pitch, and how many times to print that 
line repeatedly to sustain that pitch for a given duration. In 
other words, the printer could play musical notes. All that was 
needed was a program for the IBM  1401 computer system that 
read in a deck of punched cards, each card containing a single 
note of melody, and then played the melody on the printer. The 
tempo could be adjusted using the sense switches on the 
computer console. [2]  
Future iterations of Plink Jet could include more printers, more 
precise levels of user control, different stringed instruments, 
greater levels of automated control, and more precise tuning and 
plucking mechanisms. But decisions that concern the number of 
printers used or the use of guitar strings rather than violin strings 
are ultimately irrelevant to the nature of Plink Jet. Plink Jet is an 
experiment, a way for us to learn and have fun with mechanics 
though sound. Plink Jet is not yet a fine-tuned and finessed 
robotic instrument. It is an illustration of deconstruction and 
reconstruction in process, alive with imperfections. It will be 
interesting to see how future versions Plink Jet can change our 
relationship to the original machine. The different sounds we are 
able to coax out of more printers could inspire new observations 
on how machines work and teach us more about what we desire in 
their performance. 
Permission to make digital or hard copies  of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on se rvers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME08, June 4-8, 2008, Genova, Italy 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
350
5. STRUCTURE AND IMPROVISATION 
Intuition plays a powerful role in how and why people perform. A 
human listens to his or her performance and is able to react and 
make constant changes. A machine does not have this self-
awareness; it simply follows prepared instructions. We do not 
want our machines to improvise. We want a printer to function as 
a printer, printing exactly what we want when we want it.  If it 
does not do what we expect, it becomes useless to us. With Plink 
Jet, human improvisation plays with the machine and transforms 
the predicable function of a printer into a unique and 
irreproducible performance. 
A musician playing Plink Jet is like a pianist playing a player 
piano. Two performance operations are occurring simultaneously. 
There are the programmed, ordered movements of the machine 
itself, and there are the improvised decisions of the user regarding 
levels of automatic and manual control and his or her reactions to 
the precise mechanical patterns. The Player Piano is one of the 
first examples of an automatic, mechanically played musical 
instrument, but early player piano rolls lacked expressiveness 
when played because they were created by hand directly from the 
music score [4]. Electronic or machine music often evokes very 
different emotions as opposed to human-performed music because 
of its super-human precision. The combination of these two 
musical aesthetics (prepared and improvised, machine and 
human) expresses a tension in our relationship with machines. 
Reflecting upon the interplay between a mechanical presence and 
human player, Eric Singer of LEMUR has said “I believe it is an 
entirely new experience for the human players. The robots create 
a physical, responsive presence (unlike synthesizers) which can 
profoundly affect the humans interacting with them. Because they 
move as well as sound, they take on a personality of sorts, and 
inspire the human players in a unique way.” [5] Numerous 
options for playing Plink Jet between manual and automatic 
control opens a dialog between the player of Plink Jet and the 
robotics of the mechanisms themselves, and a performance 
broadcasts this dialog between machine structure and human 
improvisation. 
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We would like to thank Danny Rozin, Todd Holoubek, Tom Igoe, 
Gideon D’Arcangelo, Gian Pablo Villamil.  
7. REFERENCES
[1] Bowers, John, & Archer, Phil. Not Hyper, Not Meta, Not 
Cyber but Infra-Instruments. 
<http://hct.ece.ubc.ca/nime/2005/proc/nime2005_005.pdf >. 
[2] Computer History Museum. 
<http://www.computerhistory.org/exhibits/>. 
[3] Jóhannsson, Jóhann. IBM 1401, A User´s Manual. 
<http://www.ausersmanual.com/data/ >.
[4] Kapur, Ajay. A History of Robotic Musical Instruments. 
<http://mistic.ece.uvic.ca/publications/2005_icmc_robot.pdf
>.
[5] Lotti, Giulio. LEMUR: League of Electronic Musical Urban 
Robots. <http://www.simultaneita.net/lemur2.html>.
[6] Ramocki, Marcin. DIY: The Militant Embrace of 
Technology. <http://ramocki.net/ramocki-diy.pdf>. 
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
351