Instant Instrument Anywhere: A Self-Contained Capacitive
Synthesizer
David B. Gerhard
University of Regina
3737 Wascana Parkway
Regina, Saskatchewan, Canada
gerhard@cs.uregina.ca
Brett Park
University of Regina
3737 Wascana Parkway
Regina, Saskatchewan, Canada
park111b@uregina.ca
ABSTRACT
The Instant Instrument Anywhere (IIA) is a small device
which can be attached to any metal object to create an
electronic instrument. The device uses capacitive sensing
to detect proximity of the player’s body to the metal ob-
ject, and sound is generated through a surface transducer
which can be attached to any ﬂat surface. Because the ca-
pacitive sensor can be any shape or size, absolute capacitive
thresholding is not possible since the baseline capacitance
will change. Instead, we use a diﬀerential-based moving
sum threshold which can rapidly adjust to changes in the
environment or be re-calibrated to a new metal object. We
show that this dynamic threshold is eﬀective in rejecting
environmental noise and rapidly adapting to new objects.
We also present details for constructing Instant Instruments
Anywhere, including using smartphone as the synthesis en-
gine and power supply.
Keywords
Capacitive Sensing, Arduino
1. INTRODUCTION
Instant Instrument Anywhere (IIA) is a small electronic
device which can be connected to almost any metal ob-
ject and attached to any surface, turning that object into
an electronic musical instrument with the surface as the
speaker. IIA is inspired by the “LED throwie” [3], a small,
low-cost, battery-powered magnetic LED used for graﬃti
and street art. The idea of being able to augment any sur-
face with coloured light is taken one step further with the
IIA, which can augment any surface it is attached to in or-
der to create music. IIA is also inspired by the youtube
video entitled “Homemade Synthesizer - KITCHEN MU-
SIC1”, (Fig. 1a) where a composer seems to construct a syn-
thesizer out of standard household objects and repurposed
electronics. The video author admitted that the video was
fake, but many of the objects he uses are plausible. Based
on his video, we ﬁrst constructed a simple capacitive-sensing
paper-cup instrument 2 (Fig. 1b) and after experimenting
with diﬀerent materials and diﬀerent ways of processing the
signals and turning them into music, we settled on a small
1http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tCeYMpu3oXg
2http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dLHrn5v772E
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’12,May 21 – 23, 2012, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Arduino-based system using a surface transducer, with al-
ligator clips to attach capacitive sensing probes to nearby
metal objects.
Figure 1: (a) Kitchen music; and (b) our ﬁrst IIA
The result is a musical instrument which is attached to
a ﬂat surface (which becomes the resonator for the trans-
ducer), with probes from the instrument attached to a nearby
metal object (which becomes the capacitive sensor). Fig-
ure 2 shows the exterior of the prototype IIA device.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d) (e)
Figure 2: Prototype IIA device. (a) random metal
object; (b) Additional unused probes; (c) Surface
transducer; (d) power supply jack; (e) USB port
for programming.
2. BACKGROUND
The Arduino has become a staple of the hacker/maker com-
munity, enabling the integration of embedded processing
into many standalone music projects over the last ﬁve years.
Many opportunities exist for locally manipulating MIDI [1]
and OSC data, and building new interfaces. Recently, the
Arduino platform has started using an ATmega8u2 (16u2
in the Uno R3 version) as the USB interface. This advance-
ment has opened up many new opportunities for MIDI con-
nectivity (see Section 4).
2.1 Capacitive Sensing
Electrical ﬁeld sensing has been a popular topic of investiga-
tion in the music interface ﬁeld for decades [8]. Capacitive
sensing works by measuring the inﬂuence of the human body
on a capacitive plate. A conductive surface or object can
be given an electrical charge which can be aﬀected by the
air and nonconductive surfaces around it. When a person
brings their hand close to the charged object, the storage
characteristics of the object change and that change can be
measured by an electrical circuit. Most capacitive sensing
systems use an additional nonconductive surface surround-
ing the charged object (like glass on smartphones) that al-
lows the user to touch the surface without discharging the
object. For this reason, there is a common misconception
that capacitive sensing requires contact, where in fact only
proximity is required.
Capacitive touch systems have been used in music syn-
thesis systems in a number of diﬀerent instances beginning
with the Theremin. The Snyderphonics Manta [10] was
presented at NIME last year. It uses a touch-based iso-
morphic hexagonal keyboard [6] similar to the MUSIX iOS
software3. Traditional instruments, such as a guitar [4] and
a piano [7], have been augmented using capacitive sensors
to provide additional information such as touch location.
New instruments like the T-Stick [5] use capacitive touch
sensors as one type of sensor among many to create original
experiences and sounds.
2.2 Circuitbending
A signiﬁcant community has recently emerged around the
concept of circuit bending [2]. Circuit bending is the re-
purposing of electronic toys, instruments, and other devices
with the goal of creating new and interesting sounds. In a
similar manner, the IIA uses found metallic objects in order
to create new and interesting instruments.
3. PROTOTYPE CONSTRUCTION
VS1053
Metal 
Object 1 Arduino or 
ATmega 32u4
CapSense 
Library
Surface
Transducer
Surface
dC/dt and
threshold
make notesynth
Ampliﬁer
(LM358)
C
👋
MOk
out
in1
ink
Figure 3: System bock diagram
Figure 3 shows the block diagram of the prototype sys-
tem as constructed. The core of the system is a micropro-
cessor which is set up to detect changes in capacitance and
translate them into note messages. Our prototype uses an
Arduino Uno with an ATmega328 microprocessor, but we
3http://www.shiverware.ca/musix.html
have also successfully deployed the codebase on a standalone
ATmega32u4-based breakout board, which is less expensive
and has a smaller footprint than the Arduino Uno.
3.1 Sensor Construction
Because the goal of the IIA is to turn any metal object into
a capacitive sensor, a small circuit must be constructed to
allow the capacitance to be measured by the CapSense li-
brary4. A set of alligator clips are attached to I/O pins on
the microprocessor through a very large resistor ( ≈ 1MΩ).
The large resistor means that the RC time constant of the
circuit is large, and can be measured in software using pulses
expressed through the “output” pin. The “input” pin mea-
sures the voltage on the metal object, which is the same
as the voltage across the capacitor. The time lag between
the voltage changes can be used to measure the RC time
constant, and thus the capacitance of the metal object that
the circuit is attached to.
3.2 Capacitive Sensing with CapSense
The main use-case for the Instant Instrument Anywhere
was to have a person approach a surface, attach the trans-
ducer to the surface, clip probes on to a nearby piece of
metal, and start to make sounds with no reconﬁguration
required. Traditional capacitive sensing requires the free-
space capacitance of the sensor to be know beforehand and
to use a threshold above that free-space capacitance to in-
dicate a trigger event. Because we cannot know what metal
the IIA will be attached to, we cannot know the free-space
capacitance and are not able to use an absolute threshold to
calculate triggers. Instead, we used a relative capacitance
measure to detect how fast the capacitance was changing.
Figure 4 shows an example trace of the data coming from
the CapSense library on the ATmega328 microprocessor.
Note that C is not the measured capacitance of the system,
but a time-based value related to RC.
The value of C relates to the time it takes to charge and
discharge the system. Each probe connected to a metal ob-
ject is in series with a large resistor (1MΩ) which brings the
RC time constant into a measurable range. The output pin
provides +5v to the system, which charges the RC circuit.
When the input pin associated with the probe crosses the
hysteresis input threshold of the ATmega328 (+3v rising,
+2v dropping), the CapSense library measures the time for
a complete 4-stage charge-discharge cycle to be performed:
1: The circuit is charged past +3v on the input pin; 2:
the input pin is set high, pinning the capacitor to +5v; 3:
the input pin is disconnected from +5v and the capacitor
begins to discharge through the resistor; and 4: the input
pin is set low, fully discharging the capacitor to 0v. This
complete cycle happens n times (in our case, n = 30) and
a single measured C value is related to time to complete n
charge-discharge cycles. The charge/discharge time is actu-
ally measured in number of CPU clock cycles multiplied by
a looping factor which is determined empirically.
Referring again to Fig. 4, points a, c, d, and f are inter-
preted as note-on events, while b and d are note-oﬀ events.
Note that at point c, the environmental capacitance has
changed and a new baseline is present. A standard thresh-
old would fail at this point, but our dynamic threshold con-
tinues to accurately detect events and reject the background
noise. Additionally, after point g, we can see a signiﬁcant
variation in the background capacitance which is not caused
by the player moving in the vicinity of the sensor. This vari-
ation is too slow to cause an event, but a strict threshold
would likely trigger on these values. The background capac-
4http://arduino.cc/playground/Main/CapSense
C
dC
dt
dC
dt∑
Sample Number
a fd
4
b c ge
50
100
150
200
250
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
Figure 4: Processing of measured data. C = Mea-
sured values from CapSense; dC/dt = diﬀerential;
and ∑
4(dC/dt) = moving four-tap sum of the diﬀer-
ential, thresholded at ±50.
itance can change due to any number of factors including
static discharge, humidity, and people in the room.
In a second interaction mode (termed “hold”), a player
can start a note by quickly moving their hand toward the
metal object, then slowly move their hand away preventing
a release. If the player moves their hand slowly enough, the
change in capacitance will not surpass the change threshold
and the note will be sustained until triggered again.
3.3 Sound Synthesis
The sound synthesis module is the VS1053 5 sound decoder
chip. This device, from VLSI solutions, contains decoders
for MP3, Ogg, AAC, and WMA as well as a bank of General
MIDI instruments for real-time synthesis. Our prototype
only makes use of the General MIDI synthesis engine. We
decided not to use an analog synthesis engine in order to
keep the size and power constrains down. The synthesizer
output is routed to a HIAX25C10 8Ω frog transducer.
3.4 Constructed prototype
Figure 5 shows a photograph of the internal construction
of the prototype. SparkFun industries makes an Arduino
“shield” that breaks out the VS1053 synthesizer chip and
contains some prototyping space, so we used that to build
the ampliﬁer circuit and attached a resistor for each of four
connection probes.
3.4.1 Null Plate
Allowing four connection probes meant that the prototype
device could be connected to up to four metal objects. We
discovered, however, that when the probes were not con-
nected to a metal object, they continued to function as sen-
5http://www.vlsi.fi/en/products/vs1053.html
(c)
(e)
(d)(b)(a)
Figure 5: IIA prototype internals. (a) Connection
probes; (b) null plate; (c) VS1053 protoboard; (d)
Resistors on the receive pins; (e) LM358-based am-
pliﬁer (wired to transducer) and headphone jack.
sors, causing unwanted touch events. In order to mitigate
this issue we added a copper plate to the outside of the de-
vice, soldered to the output of the circuit pin. When not in
use, probes are connected to this “null” plate causing them
to instantly charge and discharge, which indicates to the
software that they should be ignored without slowing down
the sensing algorithm.
3.4.2 Probe Shielding
A second consideration in creating the prototype itself is
that the wires used to attach to the metal objects do them-
selves have capacitance, which can inﬂuence the result of the
measurement. This was discovered when playing multiple
objects which were near to each other: in some instances, if
the wires connected to the objects were touching or tangled,
multiple instruments would sound at the same time due to
crosstalk, or worse, false positives would appear.
out
in Cs Co
(a) (b)
Figure 6: Shielded probe. (a) shielded cable has an
inherent capacitance between the core wire and the
outer wrapping. (b) Grounding the outer wrapping
causes the capacitance of the shield CS to be in par-
allel with the capacitance CO of the metal object.
By switching to shielded wires (see Fig. 6), the probe
wires are no longer reactive to environmental capacitance
and will not interact with each other or the player. This
was proven by measuring the reaction of the circuit with and
without the shielding connected to ground while repeatedly
touching the outside of the wire once every two seconds for
12 seconds.
We can see from this ﬁgure that without shielding, the
wire acts as a sensor and will transmit noise into the system
if the user touches the wire. With the shielding, this noise
is excluded from the system. The overall capacitance of the
system is increased to CS + CO with CS being constant,
which increases RC and thus the time it takes to charge or
discharge the circuit. Our measurements indicated that it
takes about twice as long ( ≈ 18 ms vs ≈ 9 ms) to charge
the system with the shielded cables attached to a metal ob-
ject. The size and dimensions of the metal object will of
course aﬀect the overall capacitance of the system, increas-
ing or decreasing the time required to charge the system
and receive a measurement.
150
170
190
210
230
250
150
170
190
210
230
250
0 3000 6000 9000 12000
time (ms)
C (open shield)C (grounded shield)
(a)
(b)
Figure 7: (a) Shield is not grounded and wire capac-
itance can be aﬀected; (b) shield is grounded and
probe is protected from environmental capacitance.
4. SMARTPHONE-BASED IIA
Although the goal of the Instant Instrument Anywhere is
to make a standalone device, there is a signiﬁcant advan-
tage of pairing the capacitive touch sensing module with
a smartphone. Modern smartphones are able to run more
advanced software synthesizers; they contain a headphone
jack to output audio and small speakers which can be aug-
mented acoustically with devices such as the iPhoneAmpli-
ﬁer6. Additionally, the phone battery could power all the
components for all-day operation. Figure 8 shows an exam-
ple of a smartphone IIA.
Metal 
Object
ATmega 32u4
Capsense
👋
Smartphone
Conﬁgure 
and Calibrate
Synthesis 
and Control
USB
Speaker
phones
Figure 8: Smartphone-based Instant Instrument
Anywhere, with the smartphone fulﬁlling the role of
conﬁguration, synthesis, power source and speaker.
An further advantage of using a smartphone for the IIA is
that a custom app can be created to provide access to con-
ﬁguration settings relating to the digital capacitive sensing.
For example, the app could allow the user to modify the
dC/dt threshold, or route diﬀerent probe values to diﬀerent
control parameters (aftertouch, bend etc.) or choose dif-
ferent notes or eﬀects for each sensor being played. This
increases the utility and reconﬁgurability of the system.
A smartphone version of the IIA was constructed as a
6http://www.iphoneamplifier.net/
proof of concept. An Arudino Uno was loaded with the
CapSense library as well as a USB driver that made the
8u2 chip appear as a General MIDI device. The device was
then connected, via USB and the apple camera connection
kit, to an iPhone running synthesis software. The result was
a peripheral device connected to the iPhone which provides
capacitive touch sensing. This is the device shown in our
video response to the Kitchen Synthesizer.
5. FUTURE WORK
Building on the portability and DIY construction of these
instruments, we plan to create a single-PCB device that con-
tains all of the circuitry necessary for the IIA. This single
board device would contain an ATmega32u4, a sound syn-
thesizer, and an ampliﬁer circuit. It will have connection
terminals for a power source, a speaker, probes, and USB
for programming and MIDI out. This could be the heart
of any new instrument that uses capacitive sensing as the
fundamental interface characteristic. It will also serve as a
platform for a true acoustic throwie (with a small battery,
speaker, and a magnetic probe).
6. REFERENCES
[1] D. Diakopoulos and A. Kapur. HIDUINO: A ﬁrmware
for building driverless USB-MIDI devices using the
Arduino microcontroller. In A. R. Jensenius, A. Tveit,
R. I. Godøy, and D. Overholt, editors, Proceedings of
the 11th international conference on New interfaces
for musical expression (NIME 2011), pages 405–408,
Oslo, Norway, 2011.
[2] R. Ghazala. Circuit-Bending: Build your own alien
instruments. Wiley, 2005.
[3] Graﬃti Lab. LED Throwies. Online, last checked:
Febuary 1, 2011, [http://www.graffitiresearchlab.
com/blog/projects/led-throwies/].
[4] E. Guaus, T. Ozaslan, E. Palacios, and J. Arcos. A
left hand gesture caption system for guitar based on
capacitive sensors. Proceedings of the 10th
international conference on New interfaces for musical
expression (NIME 2010), pages 238–243, 2010.
[5] J. Malloch and M. M. Wanderley. The T-Stick: from
musical interface to musical instrument. In
Proceedings of the 7th international conference on
New interfaces for musical expression (NIME 2007),
pages 66–70, New York, NY, USA, 2007. ACM.
[6] S. Maupin, D. Gerhard, and B. Park. Isomorphic
Tesselations for Musical Keyboards. In Proceedings of
the 8th Sound and Music Computing Conference
(SMC 2011), 2011.
[7] A. McPherson and Y. Kim. Design and Applications
of a Multi-Touch Musical Keyboard. Proceedings of
the 8th Sound and Music Computing Conference
(SMC 2011), 2011.
[8] J. Paradiso and N. Gershenfeld. Musical applications
of electric ﬁeld sensing. Computer Music Journal,
21(2):69–89, 1997.
[9] G. Roma and A. Xamb´ o. A tabletop waveform editor
for live performance. Proceedings of the 8th
international conference on New interfaces for
musical expression (NIME 2008), 2008.
[10] J. Snyder. The Snyderphonics Manta and a Novel
USB Touch Controller. In A. R. Jensenius, A. Tveit,
R. I. Godøy, and D. Overholt, editors, Proceedings of
the 11th international conference on New interfaces
for musical expression (NIME 2011), pages 413–416,
Oslo, Norway, 2011.