Pragmatic Drum Motion Capture System 
 
Robert Van Rooyen  
rvanrooy@uvic.ca 
  
George Tzanetakis  
gtzan@cs.uvic.ca  
University of Victoria, 3800 Finnerty Road, Victoria, BC V8P 5C2  
ABSTRACT 
The ability to acquire and analyze a percussion performance in an 
efficient, affordable, and non-invasive manner has been made 
possible by a unique composite of off-the-shelf products. Through 
various methods of calibration and analysis, human motion as 
imparted on a striking implement can be tracked and correlated with 
traditional audio data in order to compare performances. Ultimately, 
conclusions can be drawn that drive pedagogical studies as well as 
advances in musical robots.  
Keywords 
Dataset, drum, motion capture, rudiments, robotics 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Musicians interact with their instruments both in generalized and 
subtly nuanced ways. The former is part and parcel to learning how 
to play the instrument given standard instruction in the context of the 
associated physics. The latter is a fine tuning of the physical 
interaction that brings out the best musical performance and sound of 
the instrument. What is the  distinction between these two 
components of a performance? By what methods can we begin to 
analyze the musician’s competence, and by extension, their 
uniqueness when compared to other performers? To answer these 
questions in a quantitative manner we need access to real-world data, 
which in this context is defined as multi-dimensional temporal data 
from the unencumbered musical performance of a score. 
A highly trained and experienced musician can evaluate the 
quality of a performance purely by ear. This is of course a qualitative 
and highly subjective measure, but consensus within a population of 
experts is achievable due to the application of learning constraints 
[1]. If we breakdown a performance into attributes that can be graded 
on a scale such as timing, dynamics, and timbre, we can compute the 
mean, average, and standard deviations for each attribute in a survey. 
We could further establish a weight based on the experience of the 
individual evaluator, but ultimately we will derive an informed 
opinion on the quality of the performance. 
In contrast, with access to real-world data as suggested earlier, we 
can begin to critically evaluate a performance against expected values 
and in comparison to other musicians. The expected values for 
attributes can be derived from an original score and can be further 
adjusted by genre experts with the goal of establishing a reference 
performance [2]. Although this adjustment can be interpreted as 
another form of subjective evaluation, the intent is to define ground 
truth, which will serve as the basis for a subsequent quantitative 
analysis. The definition of ground truth for our purposes is a dataset 
that is representative of a quality performance that can be used for 
comparative studies. A thorough analysis of other performances in 
reference to ground truth can lead to tangible conclusions about the 
quality of a given performance and how it is unique within a 
population of musicians. Further, we will be able to quantify what a 
high quality performance looks like in addition to what it sounds like. 
In order to achieve this objective, we established a practical and 
entirely non-invasive data acquisition method for the recording 
and interpretation of striking implement tip motion. 
2. MOTIVATION 
Artistic expression can come in many forms, but a common 
thread is the notion of individuality. In the case of a musical 
performance, the uniqueness can be subtle when comparing the 
work of two highly skilled musicians. Nevertheless, their 
technique, virtuosity, and style can still set them apart to the 
trained listener. You might wonder what it takes to become a 
trained listener. The obvious answer of course is years of 
formal musical training coupled with an ability to concentrate 
on subtle sonic detail such as timing, timbre, and dynamics. It 
comes as no surprise however that computers are also 
particularly good at differentiating stylistic attributes with the 
application of expressive models [3, 4].  
Extending the concept of automated performance analysis a 
bit further, it is conceivable that computers can begin to learn 
what a uniquely human performance encompasses. By 
comparing musicians against each other and formal notation, 
statistical patterns and other performance traits such as latency 
and drift begin to emerge. By applying elements of machine 
learning, robotic musicians can start to incorporate these 
nuances into their own renderings, which can dramatically 
improve the quality of an otherwise sterile, although technically 
accurate performance. 
3. PRIOR WORK 
A major challenge of acquiring real-world data is its effect on 
the system being measured. One can easily postulate that 
attaching physical sensors to an instrument, musician, or both 
has the potential to adver sely affect the quality of the 
performance and sound. As an example, previous research 
conducted by Tindale, A. et al. [5] with percussion instruments 
have included attaching pressure sensors, contact leads, and 
accelerometers to sticks and/or drumheads. These sensors 
inadvertently cause modifications to the sound and perhaps 
more importantly, the playability of the instrument can be 
compromised, which can negatively impact the quality of a 
performance. Moreover, the inclusion o f cables and other 
related hardware can significantly diminish the dynamics of the 
instrument and the musician’s range of motion [6]. 
The work of S. Dahl, et al. [7] uncovered remarkable detail 
associated with percussionist motion using high-speed optical 
motion capture. This approach required the attachment of LED 
markers on both the subject and the striking implement that 
worked in concert with the commercially available Selcom 
Selspot1 system. Additionally, strain gauges were added to the 
implements along with an electrically conductive path that 
provided contact force and duration measurements respectively 
[8]. As was noted previously, modifications to the striking 
implements can negatively affect playability. In addition, the 
cost and complexity associated with this type of motion capture 
system can be prohibitive. It is important to note however that 
each approach is motivated by different research questions, 
                                                                 
1 The Selcom Selspot system was first introduced in 1975 and 
has been used in a wide variety of multi-plane motion capture 
applications. 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on 
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME’15, May 31-June 3, 2015, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
339
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
which implies that subsequent results can have equally different 
applications. 
In comparison to prior work, our approach has its own 
unique set of advantages and disadvantages. One of the key 
benefits is non-invasive data acquisition, which allows the 
performer to play the instrument in a natural setting without 
being encumbered with sensors or augmented striking 
implements. Additionally, the use of low cost commodity 
equipment provides accessibility to researchers with limited 
funding and/or access to specialized equipment. As a 
consequence however, positional accuracy is dictated by the 
resolution of the camera and the quality of the motion tracking 
algorithms. Furthermore, manual intervention when extracting 
motion data due to occlusions or motion blur can result in the 
introduction of positional errors, which would be manifested as 
discontinuities or outliers in the data. 
4. DATA ACQUSITION 
Acquiring real-world performance data in a non -invasive 
manner does impose limitations on the type of data that can be 
captured. In some cases however, it is possible to either derive 
non-measureable values from measureable quantities or infer 
weighted correlations using calibrated references. For example, 
a calibrated sound pressure level (SPL) meter can be used at a 
fixed distance to establish a baseline reference that is 
synchronized with the audio recording. 
4.1 Video 
A study conducted at Harvard University by A. Hajian, et al. 
[9] concluded that the upper bound of the impact rate for a 
drum roll performed by an accomplished musician is on the 
order of 30Hz. In this case however, the signal of interest is not 
the impact rate, but rather the motion that results in the impact 
rate. To capture the related motion sufficiently we must have a 
video frame rate that is “high enough” to produce reasonably 
smooth data [10, 11, 5]. 
A survey of commercially available video cameras resulted 
in a number of candidate products that ranged widely in cost, 
features, and size [10, 2, 7, 12, 13]. The camera we selected 
was the GoPro HERO3+ Black Edition2, which is a very 
versatile camera, intended for rugged outdoor use when 
contained within its protective housing. The GoPro supports a 
variety of resolutions and frame rates that includes 848x480 at 
240 frames per second. By rotating the wide angle field of view 
by 90° the relatively inexpensive camera c an produce the 
desired quality and sampling rate for the motion capture 
system. 
The video data acquisition elements are composed of the 
snare drum, foam board backdrop, video camera, and key light 
as shown in Figure 1. As depicted in the diagram, the drumhead 
is tilted at an obtuse angle θ of 110°, which results in a Z-axis 
projection that enables depth perception. This is an important 
attribute of the configuration as it eliminates the need for a 
second camera in order to resolve drumhead region mapping. 
The video camera has a wide angle lens and is used in portrait 
mode in order to utilize the full 848 vertical lines of resolution, 
which results in a field of view that  encompasses a typical 
range of motion for a performance. Finally, an inexpensive 
project lamp outfitted with a 100W compact florescent bulb is 
used as the key light [2].  
                                                                 
2 Additional information on the GoPro HERO3+ Black Edition 
can be found at http://bit.ly/1zVt7DP. 
Pearl
θ
 
Figure 1. Camera orientation 
An example of the actual view from the camera’s perspective 
can be seen in Figure 2. In this frame grab, the striking 
elements, drum surface, and backdrop are visible. In addition, 
the backdrop contains a dimensional reference placard that 
enables video tracking software distance calibration and radial 
distortion compensation.  
 
Figure 2. Camera view 
 
Each tip of the striking implements has been coated with an 
enamel paint, which in this case is green for the left stick, and 
red for the right stick. These colors are used by the tracking 
software as unique contrast to distinguish individual motion 
[10, 2, 12]. The only caveat is that the red tip must not occlude 
the green tip, which can be accomplished by using a slight 
horizontal offset when performing, or potentially adjusting the 
lateral came ra position with angle compensation using 
calibration references. 
The software [2] that was used to extract tip motion is the 
“Tracker” application3 for Windows, which is a project of the 
Open Source Physics organization. This program provides a 
rich set of tools for importing content, filtering video, 
calibrating distance, tracking motion, and extracting a variety 
of time referenced values. 
4.2 Audio 
Audio recording is naturally at the very heart of capturing a 
musical performance. In this instance, an industry standard 
Shure SM57 dynamic microphone4 was used along with an 
Edirol UA-25 (24-bit/96kHz) audio interface5, which includes 
an integrated dual channel preamp. The audio interface was 
connected to a high-performance laptop running Windows 7 
                                                                 
3 Detailed information or the cross-platform Tracker v4.85 
application, © 2014 Douglas Brown, is available at 
http://bit.ly/1qWLHem. 4 Additional information on  the Shure SM57 dynamic 
microphone can be found at http://bit.ly/1uCQMbC. 5 Detailed specifications for the Edirol UA-25 audio interface 
are located at http://bit.ly/1s2yRNL. 
340
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
that was configured with the Sonar X1 Digital Audio 
Workstation6 software.  
4.3 Vibration 
In contrast to capturing variations in sound pressure through the 
air, recording the vibration of the drumhead can reveal other 
subtleties related to a given performance, such as timbre and 
tuning characteristics [5]. The transducer used in our system 
was the Roland RT-10S acoustic drum trigger7. Drum triggers 
are normally used with an electronic “brain” that interprets the 
analog signal in order to determine MIDI onset and velocity 
data for sound samples while filtering out false triggers. In this 
configuration however, we can benefit from the raw analog 
signal coming directly from the transducer, which is 
mechanically connected to the drumhead surface. A spectral 
analysis of the signal data can reveal the resonant frequency of 
the drum along with key harmonics that are directly influenced 
by the mechanical composition of the drum. The signal from 
the acoustic drum trigger is treated as a standard microphone 
input. 
5. DATA PROCESSING 
5.1 Session Calibration 
Calibrating the data acquisition system is a critical step in 
understanding and categorizing performance data [5]. Aside 
from validating equipment configuration and position 
specifications, two of the key calibration elements are timbre 
and dynamics. 
5.1.1 Timbre 
A component of snare drum timbre is dependent on the location 
of drumhead impact. A performance of the score depicted in 
Figure 3 with motion capture enables the quantization of impact 
locality.   
 
Figure 3. Timbre score 
 
As illustrated in Figure 1, the obtuse angle of the drumhead 
in relation to the camera field of view results in a Z -axis 
projection. This projection is quantized into three regions, 
which are labeled as center, one -third, and rim [13] as 
illustrated in Figure 4.   
4
321
 
Figure 4. Impact regions 
 
To identify these regions, we must process the Y-axis data from 
the calibration performance by subtracting the global minimum 
as defined in Equations 1, 2.   
𝑐 =  min (𝑌) (1) 
                                                                 
6 The Sonar X1 Digital Audio Workstation software is a 
product of Cakewalk, which produces a variety of audio 
production tools: http://bit.ly/1wlfPjy. 7 Information on the Roland RT-10S acoustic drum trigger can 
be found at http://bit.ly/1ri2rMV. 
𝑧(𝑡) = 𝑦𝑡 − 𝑐 (2)  
This is followed by defining static thresholds 𝑎 and 𝑏 that 
ideally delimit the impact regions. The point of impact 
represents a local minimum, which can be simplistically 
determined by evaluating a given sample with adjacent values 
that meet a minimum distance criterion  𝑚 as depicted in 
Equation 38. Identification is achieved by locating the point of 
impact and mapping the elevation value to a region based on 
the established thresholds as shown in Equation 4. The plot in 
Figure 5 demonstrates detected hits from a performance of the 
score in Figure 3 and how they were categorized as center (C), 
one-third (O), and rim (R).  
ℎ(𝑛, 𝑡) = {𝑧𝑡, 𝑧𝑡<𝑧𝑡−1 − 𝑚 Ʌ𝑧𝑡 < 𝑧𝑡+1 − 𝑚
𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑑  (3) 
 
𝑐(𝑛) = {′
′𝐶′, ℎ𝑛 < 𝑎
𝑂′, 𝑎 < ℎ𝑛 < 𝑏
′𝑅′, ℎ𝑛 > 𝑏
  (4) 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Timbre calibration 
5.1.2 Dynamics 
Calibration of dynamics is an attempt to identify a range of 
sound pressure levels (SPL), from very quiet to very loud. The 
score in Figure 6 defines a performance that is a two measure 
crescendo from piano pianissimo to forte fortissimo, for which 
the related audio signal from a performance can be seen in 
Figure 7.  
 
Figure 6. Dynamics score 
 
As depicted in Figure 7, the peak and hold function of 
Equation 5 captures the successive dynamic level increase of 
each impact [7]. The  regression curve was derived in 
MATLAB using a second order polynomial as shown in 
Equation 6 with coefficients {-0.0286, 0.3542, -0.1047}.  
 
Figure 7. Dynamics curve 
 
                                                                 
8 A more robust min/max search algorithm for multivariate data 
should be used in practice. 
341
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
ℎ(𝑥,𝑡)={𝑥𝑡,ℎ𝑡−1 <𝑥𝑡
ℎ𝑡−1
 (5) 
 
𝑓(𝑥)=𝑐1𝑥2 +𝑐2𝑥+𝑐3 (6)  
5.2 Onset Time 
In addition to many other attributes, it is possible to detect 
the onset time for each strike as shown in Figure 8 using 
transient selection mode in Sonar X1. The recording of eighth 
note strikes (red onset) illustrates instances of both leading and 
lagging the reference beat (vertical black bands) at 96bpm.   
 
Figure 8. Onset time 
 
By examining the delta between actual onset time and meter, 
statistical metrics can be computed for the performance. In this 
case, the median delta is -33ms, which indicates a bias towards 
leading the beat. The tendency towards leading is clearly 
visible in Figure 8 when comparing onsets to the established 
meter.  
5.3 Spectral Plot 
The result of plotting a power spectrum for both the vibration 
transducer and dynamic microphone can be seen in Figure 9. 
Despite a common source, the spectral profile is quite different 
given wave propagation through air versus a solid material, 
where the latter is a complex combination of the transducer 
location, drumhead, and all of the physical components of the 
drum.  
 
 
Figure 9. Power spectrum 
 
6. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Capturing the motion associated with percussion instrument 
performances requires an infrastructure of equipment, software, 
analytical processes, skilled musicians, and a formal calibration 
technique. The result however is the ability to evaluate a 
performance from multiple vantage points in a non-invasive 
manner with respect to the musician and the instrument. It is 
also evident that meaningful motion capture can be 
accomplished with minimal resources and at a relatively low 
cost.  
A specific area of research that can greatly benefit from 
validated ground truth and a repeatable acquisition system is 
the development of ro botic musicians. Many of the 
implementations to date have focused on absolute timing 
accuracy and speeds that exceed human ability. In contrast, 
designing algorithms and electromechanical systems that can 
learn to reproduce a truly human inspired performance could 
represent a new and exciting branch to an existing body of 
work. 
7. BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 
[1]  K. A. Ericsson and C. A. Lehmann, "EXPERT AND 
EXCEPTIONAL PERFORMANCE: Evidence of 
Maximal Adaptation to Task Contraints," Annual Review 
of Psychology, vol. 47, pp. 273-305, 1996.  
[2]  M. Miura, "Inter-Player Variability of a Roll Performance 
on a Snare -Drum Performance," in International 
Conference of the Forum Acusticum, Budapest, 2005.  
[3]  E. Stamatatos and G. Widmer, "Automatic identification 
of music performers with learning ensembles," Artificial 
Intelligence, vol. 165, pp. 35-56, 2005.  
[4]  G. Widmer and W. Goebl, "Computational Models of 
Expressive Music Performance: The State of the Art," 
Journal of New Music Research, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 203-
216, 2004.  
[5]  A. R. Tindale, A. Kapur, G. Tzanetakis, P. Driessen and 
A. Schloss, "A Comparison of Sensor Strategies for 
Capturing Percussive Gestures," in International 
Conference of New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 
Vancouver, 2005.  
[6]  M. Collicutt, C. Casciato and M. M. Wanderley, "From 
Real to Virtual: A Comparison of Input Devices for 
Percussion Tasks," in International Conference of New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression, Pittsburgh, 2009.  
[7]  S. Dahl, M. Grossbach and E. Altenmuller, "Effect of 
Dynamic Level in Drumming: Measurements of Striking 
Velocity, Force, and Sound Level," in International 
Conference of the Forum Acusticum, Denmark, 2011.  
[8]  S. Dahl and E. Altenmuller, "Motor Control in Drumming: 
Influence of movement pattern on contact force and sound 
characteristics," in International Proceedings of Acoustics, 
Paris, 2008.  
[9]  A. Z. Hajian, D. S. Sanchez and R. D. Howe, "Drum Roll: 
Increasing Bandwidth Through Passive Impedance 
Modulation," in International Conference on Robotics and 
Automation, Albuquerque, 1997.  
[10]  E. Schoonderwaldt, N. Rasamimanana and F. Bevilacqua, 
"Combining Accelerometer and Video Camera: 
Reconstruction of Bow Velocity Profiles," in International 
Conference of New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 
Paris, 2006.  
[11]  S. Dahl, "Striking Movements: A Survey of Motion 
Analysis of Percussionists," Acoustic Science and 
Technology, Denmark, 2012. 
[12]  H. Kawakami, Y. Mito, R. Watanuma and M. Marumo, 
"Analysis of Drum Player's Motion," in International 
Proceedings of Acoustics, Paris, 2008.  
[13]  A. Bouenard, S. Gibet and M. M. Wanderley, "Enhancing 
the Visualization of Percussion Gestures by Virtual 
Character Animation," in International Conference of New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression, Genova, 2008.  
 
 
342
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 