A Study of Two Thereminists: Towards Movement 
Informed Instrument Design
Nicholas Ward
Sonic Arts Research Centre
Queen/.notdef.g0001s University Belfast
BT7 1NN, Northern Ireland
+44 (0)28 90974829
Nward04@qub.ac.uk
Kedzie Penfield
Queen Margaret University
Edinburgh
Edinburgh EH21 6UU
 +44 (0)131 474 0000
KPenfield@qmu.ac.uk
Sile O/.notdef.g0001Modhrain,
R. Benjamin  Knapp
Sonic Arts Research Centre
Queen/.notdef.g0001s University Belfast
BT7 1NN, Northern Ireland
+44 (0)28 90974829
{sile, bknapp}@qub.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
This paper presents a comparison of the movement styles of two 
theremin players based on observation and analysis of video 
recordings. The premise behind this research is that a 
consideration of musicians’ movements could form the basis for a 
new framework for the design of new instruments. Laban 
Movement Analysis is used to qualitatively analyse the movement 
styles of the musicians and to argue that the Recuperation phase 
of their phrasing is essential to achieve satisfactory performance. 
Keywords
Effort Phrasing, Recuperation, Laban Movement Analysis, 
Theremin
1. INTRODUCTION
A decoupling occurs in the design of a new digital music 
instrument (DMI) due to the freedom of not having to match 
physical exertion to driving energy.  The instrument can be viewed 
as being composed of distinct interconnected parts such as the 
interface, mapping, sound engine, and sound reinforcement. This 
decoupling has been the focus of much research in terms of the 
opportunities it affords and also in terms of problems that arise for 
the instrumentalist and audience when the relationship between 
gesture and sonic result is obfuscated or removed.  
In a ‘traditional’ acoustic instrument, the physics of the sound 
production provides a guiding framework within which the 
instrument design evolves. The excitation of a string, the physics 
of a standing wave in a column of air, these physical realities 
force their influence upon the instruments overall physical 
realisation, its size, where the valves and buttons are positioned 
etc. In the design of Digital Musical Instruments (DMI) this 
framework is absent.
Many different approaches to DMI design are evident in the 
literature. The field of tangible interface design points towards the 
notion of physicality in the interface particularly when contrasted 
with standard mouse and keyboard paradigms for computer 
control [1]. Other designers look towards HCI for a framework to 
base the design process on. Design practise may be informed by 
ergonomics with a task based view  o f  i n s t r u m e n t a l  p e r f o r m a n c e  
and an associated desire to reduce the effort required by the 
performer to complete a musical task [2]. Ryan and others 
however have pointed towards a notion of desirable effort in 
instrumental performance, expressing a view that an integral part 
of expressive musicianship stems from the struggle with the 
instrument in the creation of the sound, “Though the principle of 
effortlessness may guide good word processor design, it may have 
no comparable utility in the design of a musical instrument. In 
designing a new instrument it might be just as interesting to make 
control as difficult as possible. Phys ical effort is a characteristic of
the playing of all musical instruments.” [3]
The notion of introducing physicality by making ‘control difficult’ 
is one that has been explored in several new interfaces [4]. As 
previously described by the first author the GSpring can be seen 
in this vein [5]. This approach however trivializes the complexity 
of human expressive movement. Simply requiring more force for 
a given result does not necessarily engender a more expressive 
performance. The Theremin for exam ple is an instrument that at 
first consideration would seem to require little force in its 
performance due to its ‘hands free’ non-contact interface. It does 
however allow for rich expressive movement as part of its 
performance. Clearly there is something else to this notion of 
effortful performance than merely  t h e  r e q u i r e m e n t  f o r  p h y s i c a l  
exertion. As Waiswicz indicates in  his comments regarding effort 
and expression, “In the early eighties I formulated thoughts about 
the importance of forcing the performer to apply physical effort 
when playing sensor instruments. I assumed that also this effort 
factor was crucial in the transmission of musicality through 
electronic instruments. Now I think the crucial aspect of perceived 
musicality is not the notion of effort itself, but what we feel and 
perceive of how the physical effort is managed by the performer.”
[6] The term ‘managed’ is key here. It invokes an 
acknowledgement of the temporality of movement; that 
movement unfolds in time and that therefore to consider musical 
performance is to consider how the performer’s movements 
unfold over time. Analogous to the musical idea of phrasing we 
must consider how the performer phrases their movement and 
how this correlates with the musical result if we are to enquire 
into the nature of effortful musical expression. What are the 
qualities that establish a certain relationship between movement 
phrasing and sonic phrasing as desi rable? It is our belief that a 
better understanding of these qualities could inform the design of 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
NIME08, June 4-8, 2008, Genova, Italy
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
117
new DMI’s that allow for the visceral physicality of performance
visible on acoustic instruments without being simply mimetic.
As a starting point in our enquiry into the nature of physicality in 
musical performance this paper presents an analysis of two 
musicians’ theremin performances and attempts to draw from 
these observations lessons that may inform the design of new 
instruments. Our premise is simple: when playing a musical 
instrument, the human performing artist needs to use their body in 
order to allow an expressive musical process to occur. Therefore 
in designing a new musical instrument, we need to take this 
premise into account and design instruments that allow for –
perhaps even invite – expressive human movement in the 
production of the sound. 
In our performer observations La ban Movement Analysis (LMA) 
is used as a qualitative framework for the description of this 
movement. In particular we focus on one concept taken from the 
Laban framework, Exertion/Recuperation and its role in 
movement phrasing. All terms that are part of LMA are 
capitalized. Within LMA these terms have specific defined 
meaning.
2. BACKGROUND
The study of musicians’ movement is a well explored area of 
research within the field of NIME seeing much concentration on 
attempts to classify musicians’ movement in terms of gesture
types [7]. On the quantitative level, motion capture has been used 
to study the ancillary gestures of clarinetists [8]. Laban Movement 
Analysis (LMA) has been applied to provide a qualitative 
description of clarinetists’ ancillary gestures [9]. Elsewhere 
Laban’s theory of Effort, which constitutes part of the LMA 
framework, has been used to investigate the impact of dynamic 
resistance modulation on performer’s movement [10]. Since it is 
the musician’s body movement that produces the sound from the 
instrument, we believe that qualitatively observing and describing 
the body’s movement both in conversational and in performing 
situations can give us an understanding of how that performer 
produces his/her expressivity while playing.
2.1 Overview of LMA
A full description of LMA is beyond the scope of this paper. Here 
we present a general overview of the framework and explain the 
background to Effort phrasing in particular
Exertion/Recuperation.
LMA provides a rich overview of the scope of movement 
possibilities. The basic elements of Body, Effort, Shape and Space 
(BESS) can be used for describing movement and providing an 
inroad to understanding movement. Every human being combines 
these movement factors in their own unique way and organizes 
them to create phrases and relationships which reveal personal, 
artistic, or cultural style [11]. 
An important distinction between LMA and other forms of 
movement description is that LMA describes the movement of the 
body in qualitative terms – not in aesthetic, quantitative or 
anatomical terms. It is the qualitative aspect of movement that is 
the key to describing and therefore understanding expressive non-
verbal communication. If we are describing a businessman losing 
his temper at a board meeting and we say, “His arm traveled 
downwards until his closed hand came to the table” (a quantitative 
or mechanical description of an action) we have no sense of how 
the gesture expressed his fury. If we say “He brought his fist 
down onto the table with a dimini shed Punch – Strong, Quick, 
Direct” – we have a better idea of the expression. Equally, if we 
saw the gesture - an arm coming down with a clenched fist toward 
the table – done with that Strong Quick Direct Effort quality, we 
would not have to hear the words, nor would the hand even have 
to hit the table in order to see and interpret the expression of the 
gesture as angry. If the hand came down (clenched or not) with 
Light, Free Flow, Sustained we would probably not interpret it as 
an angry gesture. The expression in the communication comes 
through the quality of the movement. This is an example of Effort. 
The Body, Shape and Space are also informative of the 
individual’s movement patterns in other ways. It is assumed that 
each individual has their own movement preferences in all four 
categories of movement and that these preferences are 
recognisable aspects of that person’s personality and expressive 
style.
Figure 1 Basic Elements of LMA [12]
An aspect that we feel is of particular interest in studying 
musicians’ movement is how Efforts are sequenced together.
Laban emphasised the role of rhythm in manual work which lead 
to the development of his concept of phrasing in movement. This 
was particularly evident in his work with Lawrence on the 
movement of factory workers in wartime Britain. In this situation
Laban‘s remit was to alleviate strain and dissatisfaction amongst 
conveyor belt based workers in factories. Prior to this ‘time and 
motion’ studies had been used to minimize the amount of 
movement required for a particular job in the belief that this 
approach would maximize productivity. Laban however 
emphasized the need for full body movement as part of any 
process to alleviate strain and through his Effort system developed 
movement training programs for workers that allowed for 
Recuperation as part of the production process. He emphasized 
the correct phrasing of Efforts to allow for Recuperation
following Exertion. In this way workers were able to minimize
strain, enjoy their work more and work for longer. [13]
Many movement observers [14][15][16] have developed Laban’s 
concept of phrasing, or what he originally called “rhythm” in their 
work. Peggy Hackney defines phrases as perceivable units of 
movement which are in some sense meaningful. They begin and 
end while containing a through line [17]. Irmgard Bartenieff was 
particularly interested in how a well-phrased movement was 
simultaneously more expressive and more functionally effective: 
“Thus, it is not just the activity that identifies the behavior but it is 
the sequence and phrasing with their distinctive rhythms that 
express and reinforce verbal and emotional content.” [18] Maletic 
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
118
comments on a particular basic training exercise that Laban used: 
“Its characteristic sequence is a rhythmic chain of a preparatory 
swing (Anschwung) followed by a main swing (Aufschwung) and 
its expiration which can coincide with its re-initiation.” [19]
Practitioners using the concept of a phrase of movement have 
divided it up in various ways. Hackney depicts this graphically:
Figure 2 Phases of Phrasing [20]
2.2 Phases of Phrasing
In LMA a movement is commonly seen as being organized into 
three sections: a Preparation phase that may overlap with the 
initiation phase, a Main Action and finally a Recuperation or 
follow through phase that may resolve into a transition and 
subsequent preparation phase for the next action. Here we use the 
idea that a phrase has three phases:  Preparation, Main Action, and 
Recuperation. 
2.2.1 Preparation phase:
In order to do any physically demanding or complex task, we see 
an individual prepare themselves: whether it is the ballet dancer 
before a pirouette, a pole vaulter about to run or a new graduate 
about to go into a job interview. The body prepares as the mind (ie 
the focus, concentration) prepares for the task. “It is in the 
preparation moment that we claim our intention. Intention patterns 
the organism.” [21]
2.2.2 Main Action
The main action is that which is most connected with the sound 
produced and will vary according to the individual’s style and 
understanding of what they are doing. In terms of playing the 
instrument the main action can often be associated with the 
excitation phase of the movement. 
2.2.3 Recuperation
 “After the Main Action happens, there is generally a natural 
change of movement quality which allows the mover to 
recuperate from the exertion of that action.” [22] Whether this 
Recuperation is letting the breath out after a tense or high energy 
interaction or the follow through of a tennis serve in which the 
Flow quality goes from Bound to Free, the individual needs a 
recovery from their Min Action. This recovery may be described 
in any of the movement categories but will be as individual and 
unique as the rest of the performer’s movement style.
We propose that the ability to recuperate and prepare as part of the
performed movement is essential for the musician if they are to 
access their expressivity: if the pe rformer is unable to recuperate, 
the flow of their performance which is the vehicle for expression 
is disrupted. It must be emphasized that Recuperation need not 
necessarily be a moment where no sound is produced or control of 
the instrument is relinquished. Further, the ability to recuperate 
can be seen as a function of several things, the movement 
repertoire of the performer, the affordances of the instrument and 
the score or musical goal.
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
3.1 Choice of material
These observations are taken from a DVD produced in 1998 by 
Moog Music Inc called Mastering the Theremin  [ 2 3 ] .  T w o  
Theremin players, Lydia Kavina and Clara Rockmore, 
demonstrate, discuss and perform pieces on the theremin. A 
movement analysis of the two women has been carried out using 
both formal performance and inform al interactive situations. In 
the case of Clara Rockmore three different situations were 
analysed: firstly a social gather ing discussing the theremin with 
her sister and nephew at her apar tment, secondly a demonstration 
of theremin performance technique where she explains the basics 
of performing with the instrument and finally her performances of 
three pieces accompanied by her sister on piano. In the case of 
Lydia Kavina we analyzed six lessons given by her to camera and
four performances.  The performers were chosen as they are both 
considered experts on this instrument. The availability of footage 
showing the two performers both in and out of performance was a 
requirement for the study as we wished to be able to compare both 
styles in as wide a context as possible. We were also interested in 
observing their individual movement patterns of phrasing in 
different situations.
3.2 Analysis Method
Each section of the DVD described above was observed on four 
different days over a period of a month. Each observation session 
lasted between two and four hours. Three other Laban Movement 
Analysts were consulted on an informal basis to compare 
observations. All four categories of BESS were used in order to 
establish some understanding of the differences in the performers’
movement styles before focusing on their respective Recuperation 
phase of phrasing.
3.3 Results: Comparison of Performances
Here we will give a brief overview of each performer’s movement 
style in order to set their respective Recuperation styles in the 
context of their overall phrasing. 
3.3.1 Lydia Kavina’s Movement Qualities
Lydia has a preference for the Vertical Plane, Light Effort and a 
wide range of Free and Bound Flow, some Shape Flow with 
Quick or Sustained Efforts.  She tends to Prepare with a Shape 
Flow Widening and Lightness of the upper torso seen clearly as 
she lifts her elbows to the side. (A clear example of this takes 
place at the beginning of Swamp Music)  Her Recuperation tends 
to be a Light Free flow gesture of the right arm often accompanied 
by a Postural Shift of the body stepping back or to the side of the 
instrument. For example at the end of lesson 4: [24] she finishes 
playing “Somewhere Over The Rainbow” with a Light Free Flow
gesture of the right arm before she turns off the instrument and 
steps back from it. We see variations of this pattern throughout 
her demonstration: sometimes she simply drops her arms in 
Passive Weight and Shape Flow, sometimes she does the more 
active Recuperation of a large Kinesphere Gesture with Free 
Flow. 
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
119
Figure 3 Lydia’s Effort Phrasing
3.3.2 Clara Rockmore’s Movement Qualities
Clara has a preference for the Sagittal plane and she uses 
Quickness, Direct Focus (Space Effort) and Bound Flow in her 
personal movement repertoire. Her Bound Flow and use of 
Carving Mode of Shape Change while playing is the hallmark of 
her performing movement style; her face (in particular, her 
eyebrows) is often where the expressiveness of her playing is
most evident. Her Recuperation is almost a collapse; as we see at 
the end of Hebrew Melody she steps back from the instrument and 
drops her Focus, Flow and Sagittal stance.
Figure 4 Clara's Effort Phrasing
4. DISCUSSION
Laban’s theory emphasizes the importance of phrasing in 
movement, “a movement makes sense only if it progresses 
organically and this means that phases which follow each other in 
a natural succession must be chosen” [25].  For the performer of 
an established instrument the ability to evolve phases that can be 
efficiently sequenced develops as part of the learning process. 
Laban’s theory of phrasing in this context emphasizes that the 
ability to find sequences of movement that allow for preparation, 
action and Recuperation is key to the development of 
musicianship. It must be noted that the Recuperation from one 
action may also form the preparation for the next action and that 
Recuperation may be active in that sound is produced during this 
phase. 
In terms of phrasing Clara does not seem to have much visible 
preparation or recovery. The camera often does not let us see the 
moment before or after she performs so we are making 
assumptions based on observations made of her in social 
interaction and demonstration of the theremin. Her preference for 
Flow variation at the Bound end of the continuum seems to allow 
her to play the instrument with almost no Preparation or 
Recovery. She comes from and returns to a Neutral or Bound 
Flow state which seems to allow her to Prepare or to Recuperate 
without a high degree of variation in the Efforts used. 
Lydia’s Recuperation of a large Kinesphere Gesture with Free 
Flow is notable in that the instrument would not allow such an 
amount of Free Flow or large l ooped movement while playing the 
piece; it is interesting to speculate that she incorporates these 
qualities into her Recuperation because they are part of her 
personal repertoire and she needs to return to them in order to 
Recuperate from the Exertion of playing the piece. Both these 
performers return to at least one  E f f o r t  i n  t h e i r  R e c u p e r a t i o n  
Phase that is present in their Preparation and in their personal 
movement style: Bound Flow in the case of Clara Rockmore, 
Lightness in the case of Lydia Kavina.
With all of this observation, our belief is that, within the demands 
of the task, the individual must find their own way of playing the 
instrument; ‘matching’ so to speak, their individual movement 
style with the technical demands of the task. In terms of the 
Theremin, the design of the instrument dictates a set of demands 
that are very specific: due to the effect of body proximity on 
tuning the performer must remain quite still except for the arms 
and hands: in Laban terms, Bound Flow, spatial accuracy through 
Direct Space Effort, a held torso and head and prescribed weight 
shifts are encouraged for the performance of tonal music. Despite 
these limitations, both Clara and Lydia find very individual ways 
of playing the Theremin. In the context of NIME we feel this 
point highlights the importance of considering not just the range 
of movement sensed and used directly by the interface but also the 
range of movement that is left free to the performer.
In his work with industry Laban emphasized the need for 
Recuperation in order to avoid strain. In musical performance the 
degree to which a performer may recuperate may be seen to 
impact upon musical tension. Composers for voice and wind 
instruments do so with an understanding of the need to breathe. In
considering the need to recuperate we see three interrelated 
factors: the movement phrasing available to the musician 
developed through the attainment of musical skill and personal 
movement preference, the movement requirements of the 
instrument by virtue of its physical realization and mapping 
structure and the particular requirements of the score or 
performer’s intention. In seeking to use movement as an 
interaction design element the designer must address the 
interdependence of these three factors. 
An understanding of the relations hip of movement phrasing and 
sonic phrasing evident in many acoustic instruments may be used 
to inform the development of a higher order mapping system as 
part of a new instrument. We believe that focusing on this 
relationship can inform the process of creating new interfaces for 
musical expression that seek to leverage the notion of effortful 
interaction exemplified by many acoustic instruments whilst 
avoiding a purely mimetic approach. Further a consideration of 
the availability for Recuperation provided by the instrument may 
be used to allow for the creation and resolution of musical tension 
in music composed for the instrument.
The theremin interface can be seen simply as two proximity 
detectors mapped to pitch and volume respectively. In the context 
of tonal music we observe this simple mapping of distance to 
pitch as encouraging a correlation between the LMA element of 
Flow, which ranges from Free to Bound, and pitch articulation 
ranging from glissando to staccato. This however need not be the 
case for non-tonal music highlighting the requirement to have a 
musical goal in mind as part of the instrument design process. For 
the designer of a new instrument a consideration of movement 
phrasing in the context of musical outcomes could form the basis 
for a new design that leverages the enjoyment of expressive 
movement rather than seeks simply to minimize effort.
5. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE 
DIRECTIONS
In this paper we have drawn on the Effort theory of Rudolph von 
Laban and the related discipline of LMA in an enquiry into what 
might constitute effortful performance on new interfaces for 
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
120
musical expression. Though LMA has been applied to the analysis 
of musicians movement in NIME before an aspect that has up 
until now been ignored is Effort phrasing. Here we have 
particularly focused on Recuperation as part of phrasing, 
hypothesising that the degree to which the performer may 
recuperate influences the perceived musical tension. We have 
highlighted the factors which influence the Recuperation phase, 
the instruments realisation, the musical goal and the performers 
skill, in the belief that an early consideration of the interdependent 
nature of these three factors can inform the design of a new 
interface. 
Specifically we have presented an analysis of two thereminists 
movement. We have focused on the manner in which they 
Recuperate following the Exertion of playing the instrument. Our 
analysis shows that each performer has a different style of 
Recuperation and we have demonstrated the utility of LMA in 
qualitatively describing this difference.
In our analysis of Recuperation presented here we have focused 
on the Recuperation evident as th e performer finishes a piece or 
takes a rest as the accompanist carries the music. Future work will 
seek to focus LMA’s theory of phrasing on musicians movement 
looking at how the performer phrases their Exertion and 
Recuperation whilst actively playing and seeking to correlate this 
with perceived musical tension.
6. REFERENCES
[1] Ishii, H. & Ullmer, B. Tangible Bits: Towards Seamless 
Interfaces between People, Bits and Atoms  CHI, 1997, 234-
241
[2] Wanderley MM, Orio N. Evaluation of Input Devices for 
Musical Expression: Borrowing Tools from HCI. Comput. 
Music Journal. 2002 ;26(3):62-76.
[3] Ryan J. Some Remarks on Musical Instrument Design at 
STEIM. Contemporary Music Review. 1991 ;6(1):3 - 17.
[4] Bennett P, Ward N, O'Modhrain S, Rebelo P. DAMPER: a 
platform for effortful interface development. Proceedings of 
the 7th international conference on New interfaces for 
musical expression. 2007; 273-276.
[5] Lebel D, Malloch J. The G-Spring controller. Proceedings 
of the 2006 conference on New interfaces for musical 
expression (Paris, France: IRCAM; Centre Pompidou, 
2006), 85-88.
[6] Michel Waisvisz, Composing the now. Available at: 
http://www.crackle.org/compos ingthenow.htm [Accessed 
September 6, 2007].
[7] Cadoz C, Wanderly M. Gesture Music. Reprint from : 
Trends in Gestural Control of Music, M.M. Wanderley and 
M. Battier, eds. . 2000 ;
[8] Wanderley MM et al, The Musical Significance of 
Clarinetists’ Ancillary Gestures:  An Exploration of the 
Field. Journal of New Music Research   2005, Vol. 34, No. 
1, pp. 97 – 113 
[9] Louise Campbell. On the use of Laban-Bartenieff 
techniques to describe ancillary gestures of clarinetists 
[Internet]. 2005 ;Available from: 
http://www.music.mcgill.ca/m usictech/clarinet/LBMF_Final
_Report.pdf
[10] Bennett P, Ward N, O'Modhr ain S, Rebelo P. DAMPER: a 
platform for effortful interface development. Proceedings of 
the 7th international conference on New interfaces for 
musical expression. 2007; 273-276.
[11] Hackney P. Making Connections: Total Body Integration 
Through Bartenieff Fundamentals .  Routledge; 1998. ;237
[12] Hackney P. Making Connections: Total Body Integration 
Through Bartenieff Fundamentals .  Routledge; 1998
[13] Davies, E. Beyond Dance: Laban's Legacy of Movement 
Analysis, Brechin Books. 2001 ;44-45
[14] North, M. Personality Assessment Through Movement, 
Plays, inc. 1975
[15] Penfield, Kedzie Comparison of Two Dancers.
Unpublished Certificate Dissertation at Dance Notation 
Bureau, NYC. 1972
[16] Davis, M., Movement characteristics of hospitalized 
psychiatric patients. American Journal of Dance Therapy ,
4,1 (1981), 52-71.
[17] Hackney P. Making Connections: Total Body Integration 
Through Bartenieff Fundamentals .  Routledge; 1998. ;239
[18] Bartenieff, I. Lewis, D. Body Movement: Coping with the 
Environment, Routledge. 1980. ;73
[19] Maletic, V. Body, Space, Expression: The Development of 
Rudolf Laban's Movement and , Walter de Gruyter. 1987. ;96
[20] Hackney P. Making Connections: Total Body Integration 
Through Bartenieff Fundamentals .  Routledge; 1998
[21] Hackney P. Making Connections: Total Body Integration 
Through Bartenieff Fundamentals .  Routledge; 1998. ;237
[22] Hackney P. Making Connections: Total Body Integration 
Through Bartenieff Fundamentals .  Routledge; 1998. ;240
[23] Mastering The Theremin. (2004). DVD Moogmusic
[24] Mastering The Theremin. (2004). DVD. Moogmusic
[25] Laban RV, Ullmann L. Choreutics.  Macdonald & Evans; 
1966 ;4.
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
121