Body as Instrument – Performing with Gestural Interfaces 
 
 
Mary Mainsbridge  
University of Technology Sydney 
PO Box 123 
Broadway NSW 2007 
m.mainsbridge@deprogram.net
 
 
 
Dr. Kirsty Beilharz 
HammondCare 
Pallister House, 97-115 River Road 
Greenwich Hospital NSW 2065 
kirsty@kirstybeilharz.com.au 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper explores the challenge of achieving nuanced control and 
physical engagement with gestural interfaces in performance . 
Performances with a prototype gestural performance system, Gestate, 
provide the basis for insights into the application of gestural systems in 
live contexts. These reflections stem from a performer's perspective, 
summarising the experience of prototyping and performing with 
augmented instruments that extend vocal or instrumental technique 
through gestural control.    
 Successful implementation of rapidly evolving gestural technologies 
in real-time performance calls for new approaches to performing and 
musicianship, centred on a growing understanding of the body's 
physical and creative potential. For musicians hoping to incorporate 
gestural control seamlessly into their performance practice, a balance 
of technical mastery and kinaesthetic awareness is needed to adapt 
existing approaches to their own purposes. Within non-tactile systems, 
visual feedback mechanisms can support this process by providing 
explicit visual cues that compensate for the absence of haptic 
feedback. Experience gained through prototyping and performance 
can yield a deeper understanding of the broader nature of ges tural 
control and the way in which performers inhabit their own bodies. 
 
Keywords 
Gestural interaction, non -tactile, augmented instruments, vocal, 
ancillary gestures, Kinect, audiovisual. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The notion of body as instrument, unconstrained by the physical 
constraints of a tangible interface or screen-based controller, reflects a 
body-centric approach to examining how performers adopt gestural 
sensor technology in their own practice.  This concept is particularly 
applicable to vocal performance, whe re the vocal sound source 
emanates from the body , bearing  the personal and emotional 
expressive imprint of the performer [11]. This individual body 
signature is further magnified when the voice intersects with motion in 
a non-tactile control interface.  
 Gestural control offers vocalists remote access to  the real-time 
processing capacity of audio software with larger scale gestures and 
energetic input than available through conventional control modes. 
The broader range of movement available through spatial control 
contrasts with the behavioural conformity that accompanies the 
physical design of a particular instrument or the micro-movements [6] 
of laptop performance. 
 The op portunity to directly engage  with the audience while 
maintaining sole responsibility over vocal signal processing, a role 
usually relegated to a sound engineer, attracts vocalists who prefer 
independent control over their overall sound. The ever -shifting 
dynamics of body movement provide a rich source of control 
information, fuelling exploration by bypassing conscious approaches 
to creative decision-making and any form of artificiality. This added 
physical engagement could deliver potentially varied and 
unpredictable sonic outcomes, transcending the influence of the mind 
and ego on live  music-making. The innate movement styles of 
individual performers can also colour sound in unexpected ways. 
 The creative potential of gestural control will be explored through 
reflections on prototyping and performance experiences that stem 
from an artistic perspective. 
2. BACKGROUND 
The prototype system d escribed in this paper relates to  gestural 
enhancement of vocal performance [4, 14, 19 ] and augmented 
instrument design that embraces the unique gestural nuances of 
individual performers.  
 Non-sound-producing performer movements, infused with the 
idiosyncrasies of an individual musician’s playing style, have been 
identified as significant in communicating expressive intent [21]. 
Referred to alternately as ancillary, extra -musical or  expressive 
gestures, these intuitive body movements contain expressive and 
emotive content, conveying musical meaning between the performer 
and audience [5]. Motion tracking studies have confirmed the 
communicative impact of ancillary gestures, influencing emotional 
expression, timing, musical structure and audience perception [7, 8, 9, 
20]. 
 Augmented instruments that rely on ancillary movements as a 
control input include the gesturally controlled improvisation system 
for piano by Nicholas Gillian [12], Multimodal Music Stand [2], and a 
guitar enhancement system that provides control of digital audio 
effects with head and weight shifting movements [16]. In a vocal 
performance context, the design of Donna Hewitt's eMic [13 ] 
integrates common gestures displayed by vocalists. 
 In addition to ancillary gestures, virtual instruments and looping 
functions in Gestate are controlled by open air gestures, borrowing 
features from non-tactile gestural controllers, which are defined by 
Rovan and Hayward as alternative performance interfaces that employ 
non-contact sensing technologies such as near -field capacitive 
measurement, infrared, ultrasound and video [18].  Open air gestures 
are not traditionally associated with music -making, offering the 
performer an opportunity to transcend habitual movement patterns and 
explore fresh links between gesture and sound. 
3. PROTOTYPING FOR PERFORMANCE 
3.1 Mapping 
As musicians seek to adapt existing controllers to their unique 
musical purposes or develop their own gestural instruments for 
sonic experimentat ion, knowledge of mapping is paramount in 
bridging gestural input to sonic parameters. 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on 
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME’14, June 30 – July 03, 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
110
 
Figure 1. The rich background of gestural interactive interface design shown in this diagram demonstrates the primary influences that 
this research builds on.
In a field dominated by customised and personalised approaches, the 
absence of standard gestural libraries can make prototyping a daunting 
undertaking for performers. Without prior programming knowledge, 
inventing a mapping scheme that represents meaningful relationships 
between gesture and sound represents a significant challenge. 
 A range of toolkits are  available through academic institutions 
including McGill University, Canada. 1 The Centre for New 
Music and Audio Technologies (CNMAT) a t the University of 
California in Berkley also provide Max/MSP objects that can 
route movement data from selected sensors and audio processing 
modules to aid in constructing mapping designs for individual 
projects. For a more integrated solution, the Metas urface, 
implemented in AudioMulch ,2 simplifies the process of 
designing mappings further for musicians [3 ]. 
3.2 Kinaesthetic Awareness 
The development of mappings require much experimentation 
and adjustment to feel natural and intuitive for a musician. By 
reflecting on first-hand physical experiences with gestural systems, 
performers' skills in translating deliberate and unconscious aspects of 
their innate body language into sonic form constantly evolve. 
 Carrie Noland sees kinaesthetic awareness as a force tha t 
encourages experimentation and freedom from habitual “social ly 
acquired bodily practices” [17]. Like every instrument, the experience 
of practice and exploration leads to greater levels of familiarity and 
proficiency. It is not adequate to rely on the system to deliver all of the 
expression. The performer's degree of physical engagement and 
heightened sense of proprioception also play a major role. By shifting 
the emphasis in non -tactile gestural interface design to prioritise 
movement awareness, creative practitioner perspectives founded on 
direct experimentation and experience in live performance scenarios 
can enrich the development of these technologies. 
 Well-developed proprioceptive or kinesthetic awareness of 
individual body state, such as position, velocity and forces exerted by 
the muscles is essential when u sing alternative controllers [18 ]. 
Dancers are trained to develop this type of awareness and motor 
control. However musicians often need to acquire these skills through 
direct engagement with the interface, processing visual and 
proprioceptive feedback in order to orient and calibrate their 
performance gestures. 
 Studies investigating performance movements from a performer's 
perspective are rare [14]. Focusing attention on the lived body and 
drawing from musicians' experiences can provide insights into the 
nature of physical engagement during live performance. To facilitate 
                                                                    
1 http://idmil.org/projects/mappingtools  
2 http://www.audiomulch.com  
such understandings, a design diary is used throughout the prototyping 
process to document first-hand impressions of initial mappings in 
performance. Video recordings of rehearsals and performances 
provide an added source of information about the effectiveness of 
selected mappings and experiences of gestural control. Insights 
gathered thus far reveal an increasing sense of bodily awareness and 
kinaesthetic skill, evolving simultaneously with the technical aspects 
of the system design. Physical engagement with the system during 
rehearsals and performances has influenced the refinement of  
mappings, highlighting the equal importance of bodily awareness and 
understanding of technical mapping concepts  for the gestural 
performer.  
3.3 Embodied Metaphors 
The Gestate system also borrows from embodied metaphor 
theory to inform interaction and establish meaningful 
relationships between gestur e and sound. Interactive audio 
systems that incorporate bodily awareness and pre -reflective, 
automatic knowing [1] incorporate familiar associations and 
embodied understandings of physical phenomena . By tailoring 
movement-based systems to pre -existing know ledge, grounded 
in bodily experience, users are armed with a real -world basis for 
exploring mapping relationships. 
 The initial metaphors employed in Gestate relate pitch to 
verticality, panning to horizontal movement and magnitude of 
movement to processing intensity. These cu lturally specific 
metaphors form a starting point for developing intuitive links 
between open air gestures and sonic outcomes. A user 
evaluation to test the effectiveness of selected embodied 
mapping strategies is currently in progress. 
4. SYSTEM OVERVIEW 
The system's name, Gestate, represents an environment for the gradual 
development of creative ideas, springing from bodily experiences and 
sensations. This evolution of inspiration does not reside in a completed 
work, but in the unfolding process of creation. Gestate aims to provide 
a framework to improvise with the temporal and spatial aspects of 
gestural control in a way that suits the dynamic and experiential 
aspects of live performance. 
 The prototype explores the paradigm of a gestural control system 
that can be used “naturally”, in a non-inhibitive or artificial way, to 
augment instrumental performance with virtual instruments, effects 
and visualisation. The exemplar refers to performances for voice and 
piano. 
 The ideas of mapping gesture and intuitive gesture extend work in 
the areas of (i) flowing gestural manipulation, e.g. by exploring the 
continuous control potential of movement to shape the  evolving 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
111
timbral characteristics of a sound, and (ii) naturalness, intuition, non-
tactile gestures for musical control and augmenting expressivity, and 
(iii) considering the user experience for the performer, especially from 
the perspective of visualising music, visual monitoring and efficacy of 
mapping in the predictability, control and expre ssion of gesture -
controlled augmentation of sound. The latter draws on questions of 
correlation, spatial and proprioceptive awareness, responsiveness, 
latency and accuracy in flowing gestures. Unlike particular cues that 
are recognised by gesture-recognition systems, this kind of system that 
analyses continuous flowing gestures does not require an 
instrumentalist to fundamentally or radically alter their approach to 
their conventional instrument. This sets it apart from gesture -only 
interfaces or dancer-actuated systems. 
 The ancillary motions of the performer are tracked with a Kinect 
depth camera using freely available motion tracking software, 
Synapse.3 Acceleration of upper body motion is mapped to two effects 
bus levels, a looper and a selection of virtual MIDI instruments within 
Max/MSP4 and Ableton Live.5 Acceleration reveals information about 
position, speed and magnitude of gesture. When the acceleration 
stops, the bus levels return to 0, much like a sprung wheel control. 
Minimal movement or static poses return the user to a dry signal. The 
distance of either limb from the torso is mapped to increasing volume 
and processing, thus linking sonic intensity to effort expenditure. 
Figure 2. A screenshot depicting skeleton tracking in 
Synapse and visual fe edback in Isadora Core for the 
audiovisual instrument used in the work, Alignment. 
4.1 Feedback 
The visual feedback component of the Gestate system, designed 
in Isadora Core 6, aims to enhance performability by 
compensating for the absence of haptic feedback  in non- tactile 
controllers. In seeking to supplement the remaining information 
channels of aural and proprioceptive feedbac k for the performer , 
this system offers insights into the application of visual 
reinforcement in the context of non -tactile gestural interfaces, 
building on research findings in the field of multimodal 
environment design. 
 Visual feedback offers the potential to expand the 
communication channel between an instrument and performer 
[15]. It also strengthens audience engagement by illuminat ing 
mapping strategies, helping audiences understand the underlying 
musical processes behind a performance. The capacity for visual 
feedback to present 'audio' feedback and movement data in 
visual form can encourage intuitive understanding and mastery 
of t he interface, allowing simultaneous contro l of multiple 
parameters [15 ]. Visual feedback that reflects varying levels of 
intensity in the piece establishes multidimensional cues for the 
performer to support creative exploration.   
 Another strength of visua l feedback is to amplify the subtleties 
of movement that are sometimes lost in a passing performance. 
Sensors transform and simplify movement – making it a 
                                                                    
3 http://synapsekinect.tumblr.com  
4 http://cycling74.com/products/max   
5 https://www.ableton.com/en/live   
6 http://troikatronix.com/isadora/about/  
valuable exercise to depict this data in different ways to advance 
our understanding of how the machine interprets key movement 
qualities. This becomes a way to nurture creative engagement, 
offering a form of representation that highlights previously 
hidden aspects of gesture and emerging movement patterns. 
5. APPLICATIONS 
The Gestate system has been tested  in a range of solo and group 
performances for both augmented piano and voice.  
 During a performance at the 2013 Electrofringe Festival  in 
Newcastle, Australia , six pieces with accompanying visual 
feedback were presented. Each of these studies explored a 
distinct aspect of gesture manipulation across  a range of musical 
applications, including rhythmic, synthesis, mixing and effects 
control.  
 Visual feedback was projected onto a semi -transparent scrim 
erected in front of the performer. The scrim performed t he dual 
function of providing direct visual feedback to the musician and 
displaying a visualisation of their motion trajectories to the 
audience in abstract form.   
 In the first work, Alignment, punching motions in the right arm 
trigger a selection of MIDI  notes from a predefined scale in 
Isadora Core that are then arpeggiated in Ab leton Live. The 
sound source is  an adapted physical mallet model from the 
Ableton Collision 7 collection. The visual feedb ack for this 
process illustrates each punch, or arpeggiat ed chord trigger, with 
one spin of a three -dimensional cube, as shown in Fi gure 2. The 
left hand controls  a range of effects over the sound, visually 
expressed as a 'spray' of particles emerging from the  cube. Each 
chord transition does  not chan ge predicta bly in pitch, but is  
subject to a random selection process implemented in Isadora 
Core, resulting in an almost generative effect. The intention 
behind controlling a physical model and assigning chords to 
each cube side was to display a transparent mapping to help 
orient the audience early in the performance  before progressing 
to more abstract mappings.  
 This approach illustrates the balance between sonic parameters 
that are triggered consciously by a collection of discrete 
gestures, and the control of audio effects by movements 
naturally occurring during vocal performance.  
 For the piano application, more subtle effects could be 
achieved. The 2012 performance of Concentric Motion: 
Concerto for Voice, Piano and Gestural Controller , was 
composed for a 17 -piece orchestra and soloist performing with 
two forms of gestural control – the first using the ancillary 
gestures of piano performance and the second driven b y the 
extra-musical motions of the vocalist. 
 The first movement is introduced  with a percussive pian o part. 
Subtle effects manipulations emerge  from rhythmic torso 
rocking and head motions, increasing the resonance and overall 
sustain of the acoustic piano. The transition to the second 
movement occurs when the soloist appears  to physically grab the 
tail-end of the last phrase with an upward arm motion, before 
assuming a standing posture in preparation for a  vocal solo. 
 The subtle effects manipulations that characterise the piano 
movement contrast  with the more pronounced digital  signal 
processing produce d by increasingly expansive gestures 
accompanying the vocal performance. Selected phrases are 
intensified by granular delay and echo, triggered by sweeping 
arc-like movements specific to the vocalist's style.  
5.1 Performance Challenges 
Personal insights that have emerged from these performances confirm 
well-documented issues related to gestural and augmented instrument 
                                                                    
7 https://www.ableton.com/en/packs/collision/  
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
112
performance, including cognitive overload [16]. When performing 
with effects controllers, the responsibility of maintaining 
constant audio level s and sonic clarity can distract the performer 
by adding an additional control layer to existing vocal or 
instrumental technique. One proposed solution is to introduce 
non-direct gesture -sound links through a multi -layered mapping 
strategy that frees the u ser from full co nscious control over 
effects [16]. 
 Repeated practice can also assist in reducing cognitive 
overload. When gestural contr ollers are used extensively as the  
main instrument throughout a performer's career, a deeper sense 
of mastery can develop [13]. The temptation to undertake last -
minute instrument redesigns is common with interactive 
systems, leading to possible unresolved technical issues and a 
steep learning phase for the performer before a performance. 
The benefit of moving away from the  cycles of constant 
refinement by 'freezing' development allows the performer to 
explore the system thoroughly, promoting confidence and the 
multitasking skills that such interfaces require. 
 Any time the performer uses an augmented instrument it will 
exercise some influence on their existing technique and 
movement style, even if this contradicts the intuitive design aims 
behind such interfaces. The unconscious movements of the 
performer can be constrained in unnatural ways, causing the 
performer to adapt their behaviour to the system's output rather 
than playing in their usual, idiosyncratic style.  
 With no specific instrument design to conform to or 
microphone stand to use as a prop, the performer can also feel 
very exposed before an audience. For vocalists, the freedom of 
movement offered by non -tactile controllers, paired with 
wireless microphones, can appear equally liberating and 
daunting. In these situations, performers need to invent new 
ways of performing, perhaps even extending or exaggerating 
their movements to create more dramatic sonic results or impact. 
For vocalists accustomed to performing with a microphone and 
stand, this novel way of working with the body may only 
become comfortable after many rehearsals and performances.  
6. REFLECTION 
The main  contribution of this practice -based research is a 
mapping design approach guided by experiential factors. This 
research aims to improve user experience by contributing to 
performability while also broadening our understanding of 
gestural interaction. The value of combining physical awareness, 
a commonplace practice in all vocal and dance training, visual  
feedback and intuitive mapping are explored as a means to 
improving the effectiveness and accessibility of gestural 
performance systems. 
 The success of g estural technologies relies as much on skillful 
technical design as the user's openness to exploring their own 
body's potential. In a mutually beneficial relationship, musicians 
willing to become more aware of their unconscious movement 
patterns and bodily  sensations during rehearsal and performance 
are rewarded with richer sonic outcomes that complement 
technical advances in gestural control of live music. 
7. REFERENCES 
[1] A. N. Antle., G. Corness and M. Droumeva, Human–computer- 
intuition? Exploring the cognitive basis for intuition in embodied 
interaction, Int. J. Arts and Technology, 2 (3): 235–254, 2009. 
[2] B. Bell, et al., The Multimodal Music Stand. In Proceedings of 
the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical 
Expression, 2007.  
[3] R. Bencina, The Metasurface: Applying Natural Neighbour 
Interpolation to Two-to-Many Mapping. In Proceedings of 
the International Conference on New interfaces for Musical 
Expression, 2005. 
[4] M. A. Bokowiec, VOC'T (Ritual): An Interactive Vocal 
Work for Bodycoder System and 8 Channel Spatialization. 
In Proceedings of the International Conference on New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression , 2011. 
[5] C. Cadoz and M. M. Wanderley, Gesture-music. In Trends in 
Gestural Control of Music, IRCAM, Paris, 2000. 
[6] K. Cascone, Laptop music-counterfeiting aura in the age of 
infinite reproduction, Parachute, 2002. 
[7] G. Castellano, M. Mortillaro, A. Camurri, G. Volpe, and K. 
Scherer, Automated analysis of body movement in  
emotionally expressive piano performances, Music 
Perception, 26 (2):103-119, 2008. 
[8] S. Dahl and A. Friberg. Visual Perception of Expressiveness in 
Musicians' Body Movement, Music Perception, 24(5): 433-54, 
2007. 
[9] J. W. Davidson, The role of the body in the production and 
perception of solo vocal performance: A case study of 
Annie Lennox, Musicae Scientiae, 5(2): 235-256, 2001. 
[10] M. Doğantan-Dack, In the Beginning was Gesture: Piano, Touch 
and the Phenomenology of the Performing Body. In A. Gritten 
and E. King (eds), New Perspectives on Music and Gesture, 
Ashgate, 2011. 
[11] S. Emmerson. Living Electronic Music. Ashgate, 2007. 
[12] N. Gillian and S. Nicholls, A Gesturally Controlled 
Improvisation System for Piano. In Proceedings of the 
International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical 
Expression, 2011. 
[13] D. Hewitt. eMic: developing works for vocal performance using 
a modified, sensor based microphone stand. CHI' 13 Extended 
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM 
Press, Paris, France, 2943-2946, 2013. 
[14] E. N. Jessop. The Vocal Augmentation and Manipulation 
Prosthesis (VAMP): A Conducting-Based Gestural Controller 
for Vocal Performance. In Proceedings of the International 
Conference of New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 2009. 
[15] S. Jordà, S., G. Geiger, M. Alonso. And M. Kaltenbrunner, The 
reacTable: exploring the synergy between live music 
performance and tabletop tangible interfaces. In Proceedings of 
the 1st International Conference on Tangible and Embedded 
Interaction, 2007. 
[16] O. Lähdeoja, M. M. Wanderley and J. Malloch, Instrument 
augmentation using ancillary gestures for subtle sonic 
effects. In Proceedings of the 6th Sound and Mus ic 
Computing Conference , 2009. 
[17] C. Noland. Agency and embodiment: performing 
gestures/producing culture. Harvard University Press, 
Cambridge, Mass, 2009. 
[18] J. Rovan and V. Hayward. Typology of Tactile Sounds and their 
Synthesis in Gesture-Driven Computer Music Performance. In 
M. M. Wanderley and M. Battier (eds), Trends in Gestural 
Control of Music, IRCAM, Paris, 2000. 
[19] L. Sonami., “Lady's Glove,” [Web site] Accessed 1/2014. 
http://www.sonami.net/works/ladys-glove/ 
[20] B. Vines, M. M. Wanderley, C. Krumhansl, R. Nuzzo and D 
Levitin, Performance gestures of musicians: What structural and 
emotional information do they convey?' Gesture-based 
communication in human-computer interaction, 2004. 
[21] R. M. Winters and M. M. Wanderley, New Directions for 
Sonification of Expressive Movement in Music. In Proceedings 
of the International Conference on Auditory Display, 2012.
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
113