Quadrofeelia – A New Instrument for Sliding into Notes
Jiffer Harriman
CCRMA
Stanford University
jiffer8@ccrma.stanford.edu
Locky Casey
CCRMA
Stanford University
lauchlan@stanford.edu
Linden Melvin
CCRMA
Stanford University 
lmelvin@stanford.edu
ABSTRACT
This paper describes a new musical instrument inspired by the 
pedal-steel  guitar,  along  with  its  motivations  and  other 
considerations.   Creating  a  multi-dimensional,  expressive 
instrument was the primary driving force.  For these criteria the 
pedal steel guitar proved an apt model as it allows control over 
several instrument parameters simultaneously and continuously. 
The parameters we wanted  control over were volume, timbre, 
release time and pitch.
The Quadrofeelia  is  played  with  two  hands  on a horizontal 
surface.  Single notes and melodies are easily played as well as 
chordal accompaniment with a variety of timbres and release 
times  enabling  a  range  of  legato  and  staccato  notes  in  an 
intuitive manner with a new yet familiar interface.
Keywords
NIME, pedal-steel, electronic, slide, demonstration, membrane, 
continuous, ribbon, instrument, polyphony, lead
1. Introduction
For an instrument to be expressive, it requires several degrees 
of freedom for the performer.   The ability to control volume, 
timbre and pitch in a continuous way is paramount.  The goal of 
this project was to create an electronic instrument that matched 
the expressivity of the pedal-steel guitar. The pedal steel has the 
ability to bend individual notes of a chord while keeping the 
rest  stable  to  form  new  chords.   This  method,  not  readily 
available on current electronic instruments, is featured on the 
Quadrofeelia.  
2. RELATED WORK
The GXTar [3]  interface uses a similar membrane  sensor to 
capture  continuous  data  from  the  left  hand.   However 
Quadrofeelia uses a different method for activating notes and 
has a second set of controllers which affect pitch.  Additionally, 
it is oriented horizontally on a table top instead of being held 
like a guitar.
Many  solutions  have  been  offered  that  provide  means  of 
bending  notes,  including  the  pitch  bend  wheel  and  various 
ribbon controllers such as the Kurzweil RBN1 [2].  What isn't 
readily  available  is  that  which  makes  the  pedal-steel  guitar 
unique, the ability to bend individual notes of a chord, thus 
changing the chord type or voicing, as opposed to moving all 
the  notes  in  unison.   A  previous  offering  geared  towards 
keyboardists is “The Glide” [1].
3. DESIGN OVERVIEW
3.1 Modes of Expression
To achieve a comparable level of versatility in an electronic 
instrument continuous controllers are  needed. The  choice of 
membrane  position  sensors  was  ideal  because  of  their 
continuous output range and intuitive interaction. By adding an 
additional force sensitive resistor (FSR) strip under the position 
sensor,  both  pressure  and  position  can  be  measured 
simultaneously.  By using position sensors for both hands to 
control multiple notes chords can be formed and altered in a 
continuous  way.   Lastly,  additional  FSRs  are  placed  below 
where the palm of the hand rests to provide means to mute 
ringing notes to varying degrees.
2.2 Technology
The instrument uses the BeagleBoard development board and 
the Arduino Nano platform for I/O. The BeagleBoard is running 
an Ubuntu Linux distribution which enables connecting to and 
executing programs through an SSH connection. Installed on 
the  Beagleboard  is  Pure  Data  (PD)  which  is  used  for 
interpreting the sensor data from the Arduino as well as sound 
synthesis.  The  use  of  the  BeagleBoard  for  sound  synthesis 
creates a more portable self-contained instrument.  The current 
iteration has increased latency than with the same patch running 
on a more powerful computer. 
4. Interaction 
4.1 Control
The  controls  for  the  instrument  are  one  long  (500mm) 
horizontal and four short (100mm) vertical strips and a panel of 
four buttons.   Since the instrument is modeled after a string 
instrument, the left hand slider is marked with vertical lines 
indicating musical half-steps, and dots as is typical with guitar 
fretboards.   While  the  left  hand  has  completely  continuous 
behavior  the  right   hand   interface  is  partitioned   off  into  4 
Figure 1: Right Hand interface control
Numbers indicate scale degree for initial tuning
sections per slider.  Within a defined region the note does not 
change  which  makes  it  more  forgiving.   Between  the  static 
regions is a continuous region where the note will gradually 
change  to  the  new  region.   This  combination  provides 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
NIME’11, 30 May–1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
529
flexibility to be able to change notes gradually or stay locked 
into a set of notes.
4.2 Right Hand
Four  buttons  select  between  different  key  mappings,  or 
“tunings”.   The mappings for the right hand were chosen to 
provide  a  simple  means  of  playing  diatonic  chords.   The 
mapping associated with the first button is shown in figure 1. 
The  numbers  indicate  degree  of  a  major  scale  with  1 
representing the root, b3 representing a flat 3 rd, etc.  In this 
configuration the notes in a horizontal line form a  minor-7 
chord.   Since  adjacent  regions  for  each  finger  position  are 
musical half steps, changing to a major chord simply means 
sliding the second finger up to a new region. Below the slider 
regions is a “mute pad” which can be likened to muting the 
strings of a guitar.  When a palm rests on this area the release 
time of the sound is shortened in proportion to the pressure 
applied.  Thus, notes can be allowed to decay slowly or muted 
quickly.
Additional tunings which are changed by selecting one of the 
four buttons, will be familiar to other string instrument players. 
The second mapping creates intervals between the sliders in 
fourths similar to how the four lowest strings of a guitar are 
tuned,  while  the  third  mapping  produces  intervals  of  fifths 
which mirrors the intervals of the violin, viola and cello.  The 
fourth mapping creates intervals of seconds which allows for 
dense chord structures to be easily played.
Simply pressing fingers down on the desired notes results in 
sustained  notes.   The  surface  is  also  conducive  to  swiping 
across a set of sliders which can be likened to strumming.
4.3 Left Hand
As with most string instruments the left hand is charged with 
determining the “fret” position.  The common string techniques 
of hammer-ons and pull-offs available.  Additionally, because 
the sensor is continuous, vibrato is easily achieved by wavering 
the fretting finger back and forth.
In addition to selecting the root note with the left hand, the FSR 
enables another mode of expression by mapping finger pressure 
to volume and brightness depending how hard it is pressed.    
This allows the intensity of a note to be varied after it has been 
struck.
The interface controls are mounted on a wooden box containing 
the  Beagle  Board  and  Arduino  chip  used  to  synthesize  the 
sound.   Carefully  placed  holes  obscure  the  wiring  from  the 
sensors.  Thus, on the outside all you see is a power cable, a ¼” 
jack and the user controls.  
4.4. SOUND DESIGN
The PD patch is divided into several sections which correspond 
to the various controllers.  This modular approach made the 
patch easily scalable to the 4 note polyphony it uses.  This 
layout could be easily scaled beyond the current 4 “strings” 
available.  The left hand slider is mapped to a 2 octave range 
and each of the right hand sliders have a 4 note range with the 
aforementioned static and continuous regions. 
4.5 Synthesis
For the sound synthesis we chose to pursue an electric guitar 
inspired sound which was still distinctly electronic.  Each voice 
contains  three  oscillators:  the  first  two  are  sawtooth  waves 
separated by an octave and very slightly de-tuned comparable 
to a 12-string guitar which can sound “jangly” given the extra 
set of strings not being exactly in a 2:1 relationship. A third 
oscillator  is used for FM synthesis to provide new textures at 
the  players  discretion.  The  sound  is  then  filtered  through  a 
series of enveloped low-pass filters.
The pressure applied by the left hand to the fretboard maps to 
the  FM  synthesis  modulation  amount  and  filter  cut-off 
frequencies.   With  a  physical  string  the  timbre  changes 
depending where it is plucked and with how much force. Since 
the right hand is often occupied whilst playing Quadrofeelia, 
we decided to give this timbral control to the left hand.
The result is a range of timbres from mellow tones, to sharp and 
more complex harmonics.
5. OTHER CONSIDERATIONS
Alternative implementations considered involved a motorized 
wheel  for  the  left  hand  which  would  allow  scrolling 
continuously through a small localized range of the circle of 
fifths with motorized haptic feedback to assist in locking in 
tune.  This was considered too bulky to be involved in the 
sliding motion of the left hand.
To improve the familiarity of this instrument to the family of 
pedal  and  non-pedal  lap  steel  guitarists,  an  alternative 
mechanism that more closely mirrors the plucking of a string 
and strumming would make for an easier transition and provide 
additional  excitation  information  with  say  an  FSR  tab. 
Maintaining the ability to bend notes may require this type of 
design to have a set of sensors for bending strings and another 
for activating notes.  
Finally,  extending  the  instrument  by  adding  an  additional  6 
membrane  sensors  would  allow  for  more  octaves  and  more 
varied chord structures and would also match the most common 
pedal-steel guitar configurations which use 10 strings.
6. SUMMARY
Combining multiple membrane position sensors in a new way 
has allowed for a new way to bend individual notes and shape 
chords.  Leveraging  the  power  of  the  BeagleBoard  and  the 
Arduino made it possible to create a self sufficient and portable 
instrument.
Matching the expressivity of the pedal steel guitar in a simple 
interface that could be played by a beginner helped shape the 
final product.
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Special thanks to Edgar Berhdal and Wendy Ju for their help 
and  generosity  in  sharing  their  knowledge  during  the 
development  process,  not  to  mention  the  CCRMA Satellite 
platform used in this project.
8. ADDITIONAL AUTHORS
Michael Repper
CCRMA
Stanford University 
Stanford, CA
michael.repper@gmail.com
9. REFERENCES
[1] Jakes Bejoy, Kapil Krishnamurthy, and Dan Schlessinger, 
CCRMA 250a 2008, 
(https://ccrma.stanford.edu/courses/250a/moviearchive/Au
t08/Glide.mov
[2] Kurzweil Music Systems, RBN 1Super Ribbon 
Programmable Controller 
(www.kurzweilmusicsystems.com)
[3]  Loic Kessous, Julien Castet, Daniel Arfib, “'GXtar', an 
interface using guitar techniques”, Proceedings of the 
2009 Conference on New Instruments for Musical 
Expression, 2009.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
530