Many-Person Instruments for Computer Music
Performance
Michael Rotondo
Center for Computer
Research in Music and
Acoustics (CCRMA)
Stanford Univeristy
660 Lomita Drive, Stanford
CA, USA
mrotondo@ccrma.stanford.edu
Nick Kruge
Center for Computer
Research in Music and
Acoustics (CCRMA)
Stanford Univeristy
660 Lomita Drive, Stanford
CA, USA
nkruge@ccrma.stanford.edu
Ge Wang
Center for Computer
Research in Music and
Acoustics (CCRMA)
Stanford Univeristy
660 Lomita Drive, Stanford
CA, USA
ge@ccrma.stanford.edu
ABSTRACT
In this paper we explore the concept of instruments which
are played by more than one person, and present two case
studies. We designed, built and performed with Feedbørk,
a two-player instrument comprising two iPads which form
a video feedback loop, and Barrel, a nine-player instrument
made up of eight Gametrak controllers fastened to a steel
industrial barrel. By splitting the control of these instru-
ments into distinct but interdependent roles, we allow each
individual to easily play a part while retaining a rich com-
plexity of output for the whole system. We found that the
relationships between those roles had a signiﬁcant eﬀect on
how the players communicated with each other, and on how
the performance was perceived by the audience.
Keywords
Many person musical instruments, cooperative music, asym-
metric interfaces, transmodal feedback
1. INTRODUCTION
The landscape of musical collaboration has been drastically
altered by the emergence of computer music. New methods
by which musicians can play or perform together include
telematic performances, networked ensembles such as the
Hub, and laptop and mobile phone orchestras [5, 12, 14,
10]. The players in these cases range from being globally
distributed to sharing a physical space with one another.
We have explored a related but even more localized type of
collaboration, where instead of playing instruments together
in an ensemble, multiple people work together to operate a
single instrument. Parallel eﬀorts have been made to create
collaborative interfaces that are transparent to players and
audiences, such as Weinberg’s Beatbugs [16, 15]. Our focus,
however, is on the concept of symmetric vs asymmetrical
interfaces and how we can create opportunities for fun, co-
operative and expressive play by unevenly distributing the
control of an instrument across its players. This echoes the
ﬁndings of Jord` a in [8], where complex and exciting expres-
sion was found to result from the interplay between essential
and interactive roles.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’12,May 21 – 23, 2012, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Figure 1: Barrel in performance by the Stanford
Laptop Orchestra (SLOrk).
Very few many-person instruments have been created,
computer or otherwise. The organistrum was an early form
of hurdy gurdy which was designed to be played by two
people, one of whom would turn the crank while the other
manipulated keys which changed the pitch of the strings.
These two roles are completely distinct in their physical ac-
tions but thoroughly interdependent in how they change the
sound. They show the potential for intimate collaboration
that a single instrument designed for asymmetric control
by multiple players can provide. The Tooka, a sensor-laden
tube into which two players blow simultaneously to make
sound, in this case via symmetric interfaces, provides an-
other example of an instrument which cannot be played to
its full eﬀect by a single person [3, 2].
Feedbørk is controlled asymmetrically by two people, while
Barrel is controlled by nine people, eight of whom operate
completely symmetric interfaces. This allowed us to study
how diﬀerences in scale and player relationships aﬀect the
engagement of performers and audience members. To ac-
centuate the collaborative aspects of these instruments, we
focused on several design ideas: inter-performer awareness
and feedback, visual elements, and emergent complexity. In
this paper, we explain how these ideas manifested in each
instrument, and attempt to extract some design principles
for many-person instruments that might be useful to future
experimentation.
2. FEEDBØRK
2.1 Description
Feedbørk is an instrument that is made up of two iPads
which both route their front-facing camera feeds straight to
their screens. This means that when they are pointed at
one another, a video feedback loop is created. One iPad
captures the image of the second, which itself is capturing
the image of the ﬁrst, and a recursive image is created of
iPad screens trailing oﬀ into inﬁnity. This video feed is
projected from one of the iPads onto a large screen behind
the performers [11]. (Figure 2)
Touching the screen of either iPad sends control data in
OSC format over the network to a laptop which is gen-
erating audio. Additionally, bursts of color appear under
the performers’ ﬁngers on the screens of the iPads. These
splashes of light ﬂow into the video feedback loop and re-
inforce the impression of time recessing back into the pro-
jected image. Finally, the video feed is analyzed using the
OpenCV computer vision library to ﬁnd various features,
including a rough approximation of the distance between
the two iPads and the current visual recursion depth, and
these values are also sent to the laptop via OSC. (Figure 3)
2.2 Mapping and Performance
In our performances with Feedbørk, audio is synthesized
by ChucK [13] code that is controlled via touch gestures
on the iPad screens. A single ﬁnger can be used to play
melodic notes or chords, while multi-touch gestures control
the drum loop by modulating parameters such as density
and randomness. All of these sounds are routed through
reverb and a beat-synchronized feedback delay eﬀect.
With only these sonic elements in place, we would have
created a barely-interesting touch-based virtual instrument.
The key to Feedbørk is in how the relative orientation of
the two iPads changes the appearance of the video feedback
loop, and in how that visual element is used to manipulate
the sound of the instrument. The audio feedback delay and
reverb levels are completely dependent on the visual impres-
sion of a feedback loop. When the iPads are exactly aligned
by the performers, an ”inﬁnite tunnel of light” appears on
the projector, with ﬂashes of color traveling down it each
time a note is played, as the image bounces back and forth
between the cameras. Correspondingly, the sonic environ-
ment changes to harmonize with the visuals, letting each
sound trail oﬀ slowly, echoing at the same rate as the cam-
era’s frame-rate. Additionally, the brightness of the video
image proportionally aﬀects the volume of the drone and
synthesized tones. The result is that the audience perceives
the combined audiovisual stimulus as a cohesive whole [6].
To actually perform with the instrument, the authors put
one iPad face-up on a small table and one player holds
the other iPad over it facing downwards. This player con-
trols the visual aspect of the performance, causing diﬀerent
amounts of video feedback to occur, allowing the feedback to
“blow out”, and manipulating the relative orientations of the
screens to create kaleidoscopic patterns. The other player
controls the sonic elements of the performance, touching
both screens to trigger notes and chords and to control the
drums.
Because of this asymmetric control distribution, both play-
ers have a smaller set of inputs available to them. However,
the interdependent relationship of the audio and visual out-
put mean that the two players are constantly engaged in
communication of their intentions and ideas through their
physical movements. The resultant performance is complex
and dynamic while retaining a kind of synaesthetic clar-
ity, wherein acoustic and visual sensations are at all times
cohesive. The authors have played a great deal of music
together in more traditional collaborative settings (drums
and guitar, etc.). They found that playing and performing
Feedbørk provides a sense of cooperation and a coherence
of output that exceeds that of their other musical experi-
ences. They ascribe this to the physical closeness that is
involved in playing the instrument, and in the intermodal
nature of its performance, which necessitates close attention
to be paid both visually and aurally.
3. BARREL
3.1 Description
Barrel is an instrument which is controlled directly by eight
symmetric operators. Each of these players is tethered by
both of their hands to a steel industrial barrel, manipulat-
ing Gametrak controllers that are duct-taped to the barrel.
These controllers each contain two 3D position sensors that
are connected to the players’ hands by auto-spooling wires.
The wires give the operators a range of motion of about
eight feet in any direction. Each operator’s Gametrak con-
troller is connected to an individual laptop orchestra sta-
tion which includes a laptop and hemispherical six-channel
speaker array. Each laptop synthesizes audio independently,
resulting in highly spatialized sound generation. Standing
atop the eponymous barrel is the ninth player of the instru-
ment, who has no direct physical connection to any sen-
sor or interface. Instead he controls the other performers,
“playing” them by using gestures to direct their movements.
(Figure 4)
With this instrument, we explored a more complex con-
trol scheme than that of Feedbørk. By creating a locally
distributed interface we turned eight players, enough for an
entire ensemble, into completely symmetric operators of a
single instrument, more akin to the arms of a living organ-
ism than autonomous performers of individual instruments.
The ninth player serves as the central nervous system: a
highly asymmetric relationship to the other musicians. His
interface is simple: without physical connections to the in-
strument, he may gesture in predetermined or freeform ways
to his operators, one at a time or in groups. Each operator
also has a highly constrained set of inputs that they may
provide to their controller. Yet due to their number, the
actions of all these performers combine to create a com-
plex system, with its own non-linearities and behaviors for
players to learn and master.
Some insight into the instrument’s design can be found
by contrasting the central player of Barrel and a traditional
conductor, whose language of movement share some out-
ward similarities. While a conductor may direct their en-
semble or even individual players freely, the result will al-
ways be restricted to interpretations of the score which is
being performed. In Barrel’s case, because of the simplicity
of each operator’s interface, the central player may direct
every aspect of the operator’s output via agreed-upon ges-
tures, or he may push the operator into unexplored territory
by exaggerating or abandoning entirely those preordained
physical communications. The conductor of a traditional
ensemble does not have this degree of expressive and im-
provisational power because his gestural language cannot
be suitably mapped onto the complex interfaces of each
player’s instrument.
3.2 Mapping and Performance
One might imagine a great number of musical mappings
which could be used to perform with Barrel’s 16 3D posi-
tion sensors. Out of all those possibilities, the mapping that
we created is extremely simple. Each operator can play a
Figure 2: Feedbørk in performance by the authors.
 Figure 3: Feedbørk instrument schematic.
single repeating note. The pitch of this note is determined
by their distance from the barrel, and the loudness of the
sound is controlled by how high their hands are raised. By
moving their hands further apart or closer together they can
make their note more legato or staccato, respectively, as it
repeats. To combine these notes into higher level musical
structures, we designate the eight operators into two groups
which stand roughly together to the left and right of the
barrel, which is center stage. The central player then uses
each of these two groups to play chords by raising the op-
erators from kneeling positions to standing and back again.
While he is doing this, he is also controlling each group’s dis-
tance from the barrel, moving them inwards and outwards
to control the distribution of pitches in the chords. This is
all done extremely slowly, and in an alternating pattern be-
tween the left and the right groups, which creates a highly
spatialized audiovisual experience. 1 Because each opera-
tor’s sound source is located just behind them, the panning
of the instrument’s sound serves along with the movement
of the performers as a focal point for the audience members’
attention and emotional response [4]. The scene on stage
is evocative of some kind of slow-motion worship ritual, as
the players continually stand and kneel at the will of an ele-
vated central ﬁgure on whom their gaze is continually ﬁxed.
(Figure 1)
In our piece, Barrel accompanies a soloist who is posi-
tioned front and center on the stage, using another Game-
trak controller to manipulate an arpeggiating synthesizer
which is synchronized in key and tempo with the chord
notes. This additional level of collaborative hierarchy poses
an interesting contrast with our new instruments. Only the
traditional musical factors of timing and pitch tie the sound
of the solo instrument to that of Barrel, and there are com-
paratively limited levels of feedback: only sight and sound
cues, with no direct interdependence between the two in-
struments’ output. The experience of collaborating within
both of these contexts simultaneously serves to highlight
the level of communication and cooperation that is possible
within a many-player instrument [1].
4. CONCLUSIONS
1Reference points for the sound of Barrel are Steve Reich’s
Electric Counterpoint I (Fast) which inspired our chordal
sounds, and Takashi Yoshimatsu’s Age of Birds , which in-
spired the full-stage back-and-forth panning.
We have explored the concept of many-player instruments
and discussed two case studies, Feedbørk and Barrel. De-
signing and implementing these instruments has yielded
some realizations which we hope will help to guide the devel-
opment of new collaborative instruments. We found that by
splitting the control of these instruments into roles which
are interdependent and complementary 2, we were able to
create potential for rich and constructive interplay between
even inexperienced players, while still allowing learned mas-
tery [9]. We saw that asymmetric interfaces were highly
suited to small numbers of players, while symmetric roles
were ideal for larger groups of players. Additionally, we
showed that by incorporating visual and physical modes of
interaction, engagement among both performers and audi-
ence members was increased dramatically.
Such many-person instruments allow us to explore new as-
pects of musicianship, where no individual player has com-
plete control over the output of their instrument. This
calls into question the very deﬁnition of an instrument, and
whether an ensemble is itself an instrument. Our approach
could be seen in a negative light as diminishing the con-
tribution of each individual musician, but we see it instead
as increasing the importance of communication and trust
between the musicians. We look forward to further explor-
ing this class of instrument to bring more people together
through creative cooperation, and hope that this form of
collaboration might eventually ﬁnd its way into more tradi-
tional musicmaking contexts.
5. REFERENCES
[1] T. Blaine and S. Fels. Contexts of collaborative
musical experiences. NIME 2003, pages 129–134,
2003.
[2] S. Fels and L. Kaastra. Evolving tooka: from
experiment to instrument, 2004.
[3] S. Fels and F. Vogt. Tooka: Explorations of two
person instruments. NIME 2002, 2002.
[4] S. Ferguson, E. Schubert, and C. Stevens. Movement
in a contemporary dance work and its relation to
continuous emotional response. NIME 2010, pages
481–484, 2010.
2These properties can perhaps be seen as analagous to
the relationship between the strings and soundboard of an
acoustic guitar.
Figure 4: Barrel instrument schematic.
[5] S. Gresham-Lancaster. The aesthetics and history of
the hub: The eﬀects of changing technology on
network computer music. Leonardo Music Journal,
8(1):39–44, 1998.
[6] C. Jacquemin and S. de Laubier. Transmodal
feedback as a new perspective for audio-visual eﬀects.
NIME 2006, pages 156–161, 2006.
[7] S. Jord` a. Instruments and players: Some thoughts on
digital lutherie. Journal of New Music Research , 33,
2005.
[8] S. Jord` a. Multi-user instruments: models, examples
and promises. In Proceedings of the 2005 conference
on New interfaces for musical expression , NIME ’05,
pages 23–26, Singapore, Singapore, 2005. National
University of Singapore.
[9] T. Murray-Browne, D. Mainstone, N. Bryan-Kinns,
and M. D. Plumbley. The medium is the message :
Composing instruments and performing mappings.
NIME 2011, pages 56–59, 2011.
[10] J. Oh, J. Herrera, N. J. Bryan, L. Dahl, and
G. Wang. Evolving the mobile phone orchestra. NIME
2010, pages 82–87, 2010.
[11] P. O’Keefe and G. Essl. The visual in mobile music
performance. NIME 2011, pages 191–196, 2011.
[12] P. Oliveros, S. Weaver, M. Dresser, J. Pitcher,
J. Brasch, and C. Chafe. Telematic music: Six
perspectives. Leonardo Music Journal, -:95–96,
2012/02/07 2009.
[13] G. Wang. The ChucK Audio Programming Language:
An Strongly-timed and On-the-ﬂy Environ/mentality .
PhD thesis, Princeton University, 2008.
[14] G. Wang, N. Bryan, J. Oh, and R. Hamilton.
Stanford laptop orchestra (slork). In International
Computer Music Conference, Montreal, August 2009.
[15] G. Weinberg. Interconnected musical networks:
bringing expression and thoughtfulness to collaborative
group playing. PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, 2003. AAI0805598.
[16] G. Weinberg, R. Aimi, and K. Jennings. The beatbug
network: A rhythmic system for interdependent group
collaboration. NIME 2002, pages 107–111, 2002.
APPENDIX
A. VIDEO LINKS
Barrel: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y2BSJuDZ234
Feedbørk: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ADF-7pcjqp4