The Actuated Guitar: Implementation and User Test on 
Children with Hemiplegia 
 
 
Jeppe V. Larsen 
Aalborg University  
Sofiendalsvej 11 
9200 Aalborg SV 
Denmark 
jvl@create.aau.dk 
 
 
Dan Overholt 
Aalborg University 
  A. C. Meyers Vænge 15, B4 
2450, København SV 
Denmark 
dano@create.aau.dk 
 
 
Thomas B. Moeslund 
Aalborg University 
Sofiendalsvej 11 
9200 Aalborg SV 
Denmark 
tbm@create.aau.dk 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
People with a physical handicap are often not able to engage and 
embrace the world of music on the same terms as normal functioning 
people. Traditional musical instruments have been refined over the 
last centuries, developing highly specialized and powerful interfaces; 
but nearly all require two functioning hands. In this study we try to 
enable people with Hemiplegia to play a real electrical guitar, by 
modifying it in a way that allows people with Hemiplegia able to 
actually use the instrument. We developed a guitar platform utilizing 
sensors to capture the rhythmic motion of alternate fully functioning 
limbs, such as a foot, knee or the head to activate a motorized fader 
moving a pick back and forth across the strings . This approach 
employs the fle xibility of a programmable digi tal system which 
allows us to scale and map different ranges of data from various 
sensors to the motion of the actuator, thereby making it easier to 
adapt to individual users. To validate and test the instrument platform 
we collaborated with the Helena Elsass Center in Copenhagen, 
Denmark during their 2013 Summer Camp, to see if we actually 
succeeded in creating an electrical guitar that children with 
Hemiplegia could play. The initial user studies showed that children 
with Hemiplegia were able to play the actuated guitar by producing 
rhythmical movement across the strings, enabling them to enter a  
world of music they so often see as closed. 
 
Keywords 
Interactive performance systems; Interfaces for sound and 
music; Music and robotics; Social interaction in sound and 
music computing; Actuated instruments; Actuated guitar; 
Musical instruments for the disabled. 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Music is a big part of human culture. Music is consumed, 
performed and enjoyed by nearly everyone in every layer of 
society. But the feat of performing music is more of a challenge 
to some than others. Those of us living without disabilities can 
just pick and choose an instrument of our liking and start 
learning. Some people succeed and actually learn to play an 
instrument, but many give up along the way when they realize 
what it takes in time and effort to actually learn to play a 
musical instrument well. People with disabilities might not be 
able to use a n arm or a leg , and thereby are unable to use the 
instrument. 
 In this work, we continue the development of the Actuated 
Guitar [1] that began to addres s these issues via development of 
a solution for people with one side of their body paralyzed  – for 
example, those with  Cerebral Palsy Hemiplegia or stroke 
victims – to start learning to play the guitar or regain the ability 
to play. While it is still likely that they will be unable to reach 
the instrument's full potential, just enabling them to actually 
play a guitar that otherwise would be out of reach is viewed as  
a huge accomplishment.  
 The focus of this research is to use technology in combi nation 
with existing instruments to enable alternative methods of 
playing the guitar for people with cerebra Palsy Hemiplegia. By 
using small  linear actuators, feedback systems, and flexible  / 
adaptive interaction design techniques , we  present a novel 
design optimized for easy customization.  
 In terms of therapy , playing music can be a good activity for 
"Forced Hand Use" training [2]. This method encourages those 
with Cerebral Palsy or stroke patients, for example, to use their  
affected arm, with the aim that they will begin using that arm 
more in daily life or regain control with the arm or hand.  
1.1 Related Work 
A wide range of approaches to either customizing existing 
instruments, or designing entirely new music interfaces exists . 
These range from simple mechanical aids [3] to advanced 
bioelectric controllers allowing users to produce computer -
generated music [4]. Many of the customized instruments focus 
on percussion-like input modalities, such as  simple tap -pad 
interfaces developed for disabled users . One such example is 
the TouchTone  [5]. However, our research focus es on stringed 
instruments, in this case the electric guitar, not percussion, 
wind, or other families of musical instruments. 
 The work described here involves creating a semi -robotic 
musical instrument. A historical view of robotic musical 
instruments is included in [6]. Robotic instruments focused on 
the guitar include the League of Electronic Musical Urban 
Robots (LEMUR’s) GuitarBot  [7], among others. While the 
GuitarBot is much more capable of completely automating the 
motions needed to play a guitar than our current work, it 
discards any affordances of direct human playing skills, due to 
a design that places each string on a separate ‘neck’. We 
purposefully aim our development at traditional guitar bodies, 
thus enabling users to develops skills that are as close to the 
normal techniques as possible. This also follows in some of the 
author’s related past work with actuated instruments  [8]. 
2. METHODS 
Playing a guitar traditionally requires the use of both hands. 
The right hand does the strumming and the fingers of the left 
hand are used for fretting the strings. As stated in the 
introduction, the scope for this research is to enable or re -
enable people who are not able (or lost the ability), to play the 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on 
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME’14, June 30 – July 03, 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
60
guitar. This approach focuses on the right hand's strumming 
motion, and how i t interacts with the guitar. The are some 
common and complex interactions of the right hand that have 
been divided into three stages:  
 
Stage 1: Simple strumming up and down movement  
Stage 2: Individual string picking and string skipping  
Stage 3: String muting both multiple and individual strings  
 
The research  approach has been divided into the above stages, 
based on their complexity where stage 1 is the simplest form of 
interaction and stage 3 the most difficult. We have focused on 
the strumming as the best  candidate for a proof of concept to 
investigate the possibilities , before including the other types of 
right hand interaction.  Next we describe and discuss our 
approaches to strumming a guitar when the user does not have 
full control of the right hand.  
 
2.1 Suited Body parts for Rhythmic 
Movement 
As one hand, right or left depending on the user, is occupied 
fretting the strings, possible limbs for control of our actuated 
strumming include the legs, feet, head or neck. These parts of 
the body do not offer any r ealistic means of physically 
strumming the strings in a normal playing position. One of the 
simpler main tasks of the strumming hand is moving in a 
continuous rhythmic pattern. While most  limbs can offer a 
similar type of motion , the feet or legs are likel y the best 
options, as humans are accustomed to naturally moving these 
body parts in rhythmic patters for long periods of time (e.g. 
when walking, running or dancing). For people with no control 
of their legs nor right arm, the head could also be used to m ove 
in a rhythmic pattern, but as the muscles in the neck are made 
for stabilizing the head and not for prolonged rhythmic 
movements, this is not optimal due to possible fatigue or injury. 
Nevertheless, over shorter periods of time this could still give 
such individuals the ability to strum the guitar.  
2.2 Interpreting Rhythmic Motion 
Because rhythmic movement of the suited parts of the body is 
not able to physically strum the strings in a conventional 
fashion, the system somehow needs to capture and interpret the 
motions. This can be done through the use of various sensors 
that can be mounted on the desired parts of the body , in order to 
capture the rhythmic moment made by the user. One example 
would be a user with a part ially paralyzed leg, but who can still 
stomp their foot. Mounting a sensor on the foot will translate 
that motion into input for a microcontroller, which can then 
map this input to control the actuator's full range of motion. 
This gives us the possibility of amplifying small motions to 
move the output actuators an entire strum -length, translate 
rotation motions into linear motions (if using a ngular sensors 
such as a  gyroscope), etc. Doing such by purely mechanical 
means w ould require  highly complex construction s and  be 
difficult to quickly modif y to fit different users with different 
needs. Therefore electronic sensors and actuators prove very 
useful when combined with programmable microcontrollers in 
this eontext. 
2.3 Implementation of Development Platform 
One of the most important aspects when work ing with any form 
of interaction design is latency . This is  even more important 
when you need to control the sound produced by your 
interactions. To determine which sensor was the best fit for 
realizing the construction and playability of the guitar, we ran a 
series of prototype development iterations with each sensor. 
The three initial candidates were an infrared distance sensor 
from Sharp (GP2D12), an accelerometer from  Analog Devices 
(ADXL322) and a simple momentary push button, see Figure 1. 
 For prototyping, s ensors can be fitted, with e.g. a velcro 
armband and strapped onto various parts of the body. Many 
other types of sensors can also work as input for the actuated 
guitar, such as Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs) , which 
capture orientation changes, sensors to capture blinking, etc. . 
An individual that can only rotate their head, for example, 
could use an IMU , with the orientation data translated to the 
actuator’s linear output. However, t he chosen candidates were 
used becaus e of availability and time constraints in this initial 
prototype implementation. 
 To interpret the sensor signals an Arduino Nano V.3 board 
with an ATmega328 microcontroller was used, because of its 
small form factor and simple usage . To drive the actuator, we 
used a ‘2motor’ controller board from Gravitech , Inc.,  which 
has an L298 dual H -Bridge driver on-board. For the actuator , 
we chose a Penny+Giles PGFM3200 motorized fader  due to 
it’s specification with the strongest linear force we could find . 
The firm ware used on the Arduino  in order to drive the  
motorized fader was inspired by the FireFader  project [3]. 
 
 
 
Figure 1: The three candidates for acquiring motion 
information from the user. To the left a Sharp GP2d12 IR 
Distance sensor, in the middle a momentary pushbutton 
and to the right the ADXL322 tilt sensor from Analog 
Devices. 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Motorized fader used as the actuator for driving 
the pick back and forth over the stri ngs of the guitar. 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
61
 
Figure 3: Top, the Arduino Nano V. 3. Bottom, the 2Motor 
controller. 
 
 
2.3.1 Linear Mapping and sensor selection 
The accelerometer  (see Figure 1) was tested in a first iteration 
with a simple linear mapping between its tilted position and the 
fader’s position. When the accelerometer pointed straight up , 
the actuator was at one of its extremes and when the 
accelerometer pointed straight down the actuator was at its 
other extreme. A problem bec ame apparent right away , which 
is the inability of an accelerometer to separate accelerations due 
to dynamic motion from accelerations due to gravity (tilt 
angle). While an IMU would have solved this issue, we did not 
have easy access to one – so we moved on to the next prototype 
iteration, even though filtering of the raw sensor data was 
attempted. Filtering did solve the problem  partially, but i t also 
introduced a slight latency . This was still playable, but at the 
same time noticeable and annoying. A s mentioned above,  this 
is not optimal considering the context of its use in a musical 
application. 
 The first tests using the distance sensor  (see Figure 1) showed 
that it had les s initial problems when  compared to the 
accelerometer, but still had some  needed of filtering. A simple 
linear mapping was applied  but the filtering  again introduced a 
noticeable latency , so it turned out to be difficult to do a 
difficult to play with. 
 A solution instead of the linear approach to mapping, wo uld 
be to set a threshold for actuation.  This was tried with both of 
the above described sensors. It worked in such a way that when 
e.g., the accelerometer exceeded a certain g force it would 
trigger the motor to run the fader to the opposite extreme , 
thereby strum ming the strings. The same was applied to the 
distance sensor. This worked a lot better  in terms of playing,  
and seemed a lot more stable. However, these two sensors were 
still prone for accidental activation of the fader , which resulted 
in unwanted output. This threshold approach is really similar to 
a simple binary trigger, which led us to consider the next sensor 
type.. 
 The last prototyping test used a simple push button. There are  
of course  two types of buttons, latching and momentary. The 
latching type hold its state until changed again and momentary 
only changes state while being pressed. Momentary behavior is 
appropriate in this context, as there is simply no need for 
latching 
 The motorized fader itself is driven by a rubber band to pull 
the fader back and forth. However, the rubber band is able to 
stretch a bit, which results in a small overshoot of the fader’s 
position on the linear potentiometer. This feedback is what tells 
the microcontroller its current position, so this needs to be 
taken in to consideration in the final implementation.  
 
2.3.2 Final Development Platform 
The final development platform ended up consisting of an 
Epiphone SG Standard electrical guitar, the Arduino Nano V.3 
board, "2motor" controller board from Gravitech as described 
in section 2.3, a 3D printed foot pedal pushing a momentary 
button, see Figure 9 and a 3D printed mount used for mounting 
the Penny+Giles PGFM3200 motorized fader, see Figure 5. 
 
 
 
Figure 4: The guitar used for this project is a n Epiphone 
SG. [12] 
 
 
 
Figure 5: The finished system with the actuator mounted in 
the customized mount on top of the guit ar body. 
 
 
The Arduino Nano sits on top of the 2motor board, both of 
which are plugged into a simple breadboard that is adhered 
inside the guitar's body (part of the control cavity ). The foot 
controller is connected to the microcontroller's input pin via 
connectors mounted in the existing holes (where the volume 
and tone knobs sat ). An external power supply is plugged into 
the guitar body, again through one of the spare holes, which 
powers the Arduino, motor board and the motorized slider. The 
USB port on the Arduino is still accessible and allows for quick 
data access and easy upload of software to the Arduino during 
development. With a few simple modifications, the system 
could also be battery powered. The electronics are all protected 
by covering them with the original backplate on the guitar . This 
makes the system robust enough for testing purposes. 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
62
 
Figure 6: The Arduino and motorcontroller mounted on a 
breadboard inside the guitar’s empty control cavity for 
protection (but still providing easy access to the electronics ). 
 
 
2.3.3 Dataflow 
When a  user presses the foot pedal ’s momentary button, the 
signal is sent to the Arduino. The microcontroller then reads the 
current position of the pick by checking the value of the fader’s 
potentiometer. Depending on the position , it reverses the 
direction of the motor and drives the pick the opposite direction 
across the strings. The microcontroller continues  reading the 
potentiometer’s value as it moves, and  stops the motor when it 
reaches the othe r end. Once there, it waits on further messages 
via interaction from the user. An illustration of the data flow 
throughout the system is shown in Figure 7. 
 
 
 
Figure 7: Simple dataflow throughout the syste m. 
 
 
2.4 Test method 
The user test was conducted at the Helena Elsass Center in 
Charlottenlund, Copenhagen, during the 2013 Summer Camp . 
This is an annual week-long camp for children with Cerebral 
Palsy. The goal of the summer camp is for the kids to challenge  
themselves through various activities , proving that they can be 
more physically capable than they  might think. The test was not 
an actual part of the summer camp , but was conducted when 
the staff and children could find enough time in the busy 
schedule. 
 The test tried to investigate if children with Hemiplegia 
Cerebral Palsy were able to play the actuated guitar. It was 
expected that the children have no previous experience with 
playing traditional musical instruments; this was of course 
verified by askin g them as well . The success criteria was two 
fold. The first success criteria was if they could sit with the 
guitar, position their hand and fingers of their non-paralyzed 
side on the guitar neck, fret a chord and press the foot switch 
producing some sound  (it was not needed or expected to be 
pristine sounding ). The second and more demanding criteria 
was if they were able to take it a step further and produce a 
continuous rhythmic motion, which might indicate an inherent 
musicality. 
 For testing these crite ria, a qualitative method was used. It 
included observations using video and sound recording s for 
later in-depth observation and analyses. The observation s were 
followed by semi-structured interview s that were used to 
investigate the children’s familiarity  and use of music . E.g., 
have they taken guitar or piano lesson s, or if and how they 
listen to and use music , or if they have ever imagined/dreamed 
of themselves performing music and if  so, what song they 
would like to perform. 
 The guitar was tuned in an open-G tuning for easier fretting  
of chords. This means that if you do not fret any strings and 
strum all strings you play a G -Major chord , and if you want to 
fret another Major chord you simply press all the strings on the 
same fre t. F urther simplify chor ding and fretboard navigation , 
the neck was color-coded with stickers beneath the strings to 
indicate certain chords. The color-coding was combined with a 
sheet of paper telling the children how to play “Sweet Home 
Alabama” by Lynyrd Skynyrd, which was chosen because of its 
simplicity. It only contains three Major Chords : D, C and G. 
 
3. RESULTS 
The children attending the Summer Camp were  between 11 and 
13 years old. They had different types of Cerebral Palsy, but 
mainly Hemiplegia. Because of the tight schedule and planning 
of the summer camp , there was only enough time for testing 
with five children, from ages 11-13, all with Hemiplegia, but in 
different sides of the body and severity stages. The semi-
structured interview focused on three main areas: The 
children’s knowledge about their own condition, their musical 
experience, and their own and their family’s use of music in 
their every day life. All of the children except for one didn’t 
know what type of paralysis they had but simply responded: “I 
just know I  have Cerebral Palsy.” This was a bit  problematic, 
because then they were not able to answer on what level they 
were according to the Gross Motor Function Classification 
System – Expanded and Revised (GMFCS - E&R) that ranges 
from Level 1, best functioning  to Level 5, worst functioning  
[11]. Based on observation s during the Camp and the user tests, 
the children attending the Summer Camp and the test were 
either level 1 or 2. 
 None of the children had attended any prior instrument 
lessons, b esides the mandatory music lesson at the ir schools. 
Four of the children had a desire to start learning to play a n 
instrument, and when asked what type it ranged from guitar, 
piano, and  drums to tambourine. None of the test participants 
came fr om homes where their parents or siblings played any 
instruments. O nly o ne ha d a mother that  had attended some 
piano lessons when she was younger. When asked if they 
listened to music , they all responded ‘yes’, and two  said that 
they listened to music quite a lot. When asked how they used 
the music (to see if it was something that the whole family 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
63
used), most answers were “just in my room, on my iPad, on 
youtube,” etc. Only one said “on the radio and in the car”. 
 The children were introduced to the actuated gjuitar with a 
brief explanation on how the instrument worked, and how they 
could operate the it. They got the sheet music showing the 
simplified view of  how many times they should play a color to 
play Sweet home Alabama (1 x Green, 1  x Yellow, 2  x Blue) 
The instrument was place d so that their good side operated the 
guitar’s neck for fretting the strings  and pressing the   pedal. 
One of the children insisted on doing the opposite and using his 
weakened side. He was also by far the least affected child in t he 
test, and had nearly the same strength in both sides . 
 From notes during the test and review of the recordings,  it 
became clear that all of the test participants are able to interact 
with the guitar. The y could fret the guitar and press the foot 
pedal to produce sound. It was obvious that it would take time 
to gain speed along the fret board and foot, hand and eye 
coordination (to lower the time between fretting and striking 
the strings , etc.) , but nothing more substantial than normal 
children have when they interact with a new and unfamiliar 
instrument. One child stood out in the test. He was actually the 
most severely paralyzed. He had never played a normal 
instrument before, but was able to play Sweet Home Alabama 
by following the color-coded chart. Af ter the test he  said his  
mind was blown. In his wildest fantasies, he had never 
imagined that he w ould be able to play guitar and even actually 
able to play a song . Compared to the others  rhythmic 
tendencies, he seemed to have an inhere nt musicality or tal ent. 
This does not mean that the other children couldn’t maintain 
consistent rhythms, but that they maybe needed a bit more 
convincing. Overall, t he test has shown that these children are 
able to produce rhythmic motion , and would be able to start 
learning basic chords by going to regular guitar lessons like 
normal children. 
 
 
 
Figure 8: A user with Hemiplegia  Cerebral Palsy playing 
the guitar for the first time. It can be seen that the user is 
partially paralyzed in his right side. 
 
4. DISCUSSION 
There are many possible directions for future work that would 
be interesting to pursue , following this initial research . One 
example would be to experiment further with  different types of 
sensors. It is likely  worth pursuing Inertial Measureme nt Units 
(IMUs) that combines data from an accelerometer, gyroscope 
and magnetometer to provide a more precise estimation of 
orientation and motion . This would  allow us to remove the 
coupling effects between gravity and dynamic motion  
experienced in the in itial test with the accelerometer. 
Commercial sensor options such as e.g. the Leap Motion 
device, could also be interesting . This could be mounted in 
various locations, because if its small size, to capture player 
inputs.  
 The current implementation of the guitar  foot pedal, using the 
momentary push button, does not facilitate coarse motor control 
exercises of paralysed limbs  (unless it happens to be that leg) . 
Using the pushbutton approach also limits the range of motion 
which might be unwanted in a rehab ilitation perspective. In 
fact, therapeutic use may purposefully require larger motions 
for successful interaction. However, the system at this stage is 
very flexible and can easily be adjusted to accommodate many 
diiferent styles of interaction that might  be more focused on 
training and rehabilitation of the paralysed or affected limb. 
This could e.g. be done with the alternative sensors as 
suggested in the interaction methods in section 2.3 or above. 
 When customizing the actuated guitar for people with various 
disabilities, our digital approach attempts to make it easy to 
perform the necessary mapping of data from various input 
sensors (simple filtering, scaling and offset operations) to  give 
control of the strumming actuator.  This is especially true when 
compared to the wide variety of mechanical approaches that 
would be needed for different scenarios and users. At the 
moment, these changes are managed in the firmware of the 
micro-controller that our system uses, but these par ameters 
could also be changed graphically via a simple GUI presented 
via a small screen or a laptop running visual programming 
environments such as MaxMSP  or PureData . This approach, 
which could easily be based on the FireFader system [9] would 
likely be preferable for individuals who wish to modify the 
system themselves. 
 
 
 
Figure 9: The 3D printed foot pedal used to activate the 
actuator strumming the strings of the guitar. The print is 
fitted with a momentary button that is connected through 
wires to the Arduino inside the guitar. 
 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
64
4.1 Limitations 
The fine motor control of a normal  functioning human arm, 
hand and fingers will be extremely difficult if not impossible to 
replicate via this low-cost approach. A human hand can move 
in almost every direction of the wrist. Fingers can stretch, bend 
and move sideways  and the hand can bend and rotate at the 
wrist. Furthermore, we receive sensory feedback from our 
hands and fingers  that help immensely when touchi ng or 
operating objects . As we are  still in the initial stages of this 
research, and in this installment only focuses on strumming  
(coarse movements),  it is  clear that custom actuators would 
need to be designed  and implemented , if more advanced and 
hand-like interaction should be possible  (finger-picking or other 
playing styles). 
 It is also worth noting that we are working with an electrical 
guitar for this prototype, and that the actuator we are using can 
cause electrical noise in form of a electromagneti c field and 
audible motor noise to bleed from the motor into the guitar’s 
pickups. This occurs due to the proximity of the electrical 
guitar pickup, be it single coil or humbucker design, near the 
plucking location on the strings (a position required to best 
capture the sound). This noise problem can be substantially 
circumvented by running the pulse -width modulation (PWM) 
signal that controls the motorized fader at a frequency higher 
than normal human hearing (more than 20kHz). While an 
acoustic guitar wou ld not have this problem, the more fragile 
body makes it somewhat difficult to mount actuators on the 
guitar’s body without damaging it, or compromising its ability 
to produce a good acoustic sound.  
 
5. CONCLUSION 
The results clearly points in a direction tha t children or adults 
with Hemiplegia can play an actuated guitar, potentially even  
bringing it to a traditional guitar teacher and start learning basic 
chord shapes  with their good hand (with standard tuning) . In 
the prototype’s current state – where string skipping and muting 
is not possible – it has to be limited to things possible only with 
strumming. Nonetheless, is it a huge step for people with 
disabilities to simply be able to play a real guitar. It is also 
possible to use it as a training and rehabilitation instrument for 
the affected arm as a therapeutic tool with a few more iterations 
of prototype development.  Using the motivating factor that 
playing guitar and learning new tunes can be fun possibly leads 
to more consistent training the affected ar m, and thereby 
hopefully increase the dexterity of the affected limb  more 
quickly. 
 
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Funding for this work was provided in part by grants from 
Ludvig og Sara Elsass Fond in Charlottenlund, Denmark. 
 
7. REFERENCES 
[1] J. V. Larsen, D. Overholt, T. B . Moeslund, “The Actuated 
Guitar: A Platform Enabling Alternative Interaction 
Methods”, in Proceedings of SMC Sound and Music 
Computing Conference, p. 235 –238 (2013) 
 
[2] M.D. Crocker, M. MacKay -Lyons, and E. McDonnell, 
“Forced Use of the Upper Extremity in Cerebral Palsy: A 
Single-Case Design,” American Journal of Occupational 
Therapy Volume 51, November 1997 pp. 824 -833. 
 
[3] J. P. Snedeker, “Adaptive Engineering for Musical 
Instruments,” in Medical Problems of Performing Artists: 
Volume 20 Number 2: Page 89 (June 2005). 
 
[4] R. Benjamin Knapp and Hugh S. Lusted, “A Bioelectric 
Controller for Computer Music Applications,” in 
Computer Music Journal, Vol. 14, No. 1, New 
Performance Interfaces 1 (Spring, 1990), pp. 42-4, MIT 
Press. 
 
[5] S. Bhat, “TouchTone: an electronic mus ical instrument for 
children with hemiplegic Cerebral Palsy,” in Proceedings 
of the fourth international conference on Tangible, 
embedded, and embodied interaction (TEI '10) . ACM, 
New York, NY, USA, 305 -306. 
[6] A. Kapur, “A History of Robotic Musical Instr uments,” in 
Proceedings of the International Compu ter Music 
Conference. Barcelona, Spain, September 2005.  
 
[7] E. Singer, K. Larke, and D. Bianciardi, “LEMUR 
GuitarBot: MIDI robotic string instrument,” in 
Proceedings of the 2003 conference on New interfaces for 
musical expression (NIME '03).  National University of 
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 188 -191. 
 
[8] D. Overholt, E. Berdahl and R. Hamilton, “Advancements 
in Actuated Musical Instruments” in Organised Sound, 16, 
p. 154 – 165 (2011) 
 
[9] E. Berdahl and A. Kontogeor gakopoulos, “The FireFader 
Design: Simple, Open -Source, and Reconfigureable 
Haptics for Musicians”, in Proceedings of the ninth Sound 
and Music Computing Conference , p.90-98 (2012) 
 
[10] E. Berdahl, J. Smith III and G. Niemeyer, “Mechanical 
Sound Synthesis: And the new application of force -
feedback teleoperation of acoustic musical instruments” in 
Proceedings of the 13th int. Conference on Digital Audio 
Effects (September 2010) 
 
[11] Palisano, R., Rosenbaum, P., Bartlett, D., & Livingston, 
M. (2007). GMFCS - E & R. C anChild Centre for 
Childhood Disability Research  
 
[12] http://www.gibson.com  
 
[13] http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RlNKix43ULY 
 
 
 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
65