Exposing the Scaffolding of Digital Instruments with
Hardware-Software Feedback Loops
Andrew P . McPherson
Centre for Digital Music
Queen Mary University of London
London, United Kingdom
a.mcpherson@qmul.ac.uk
Victor Zappi
Media and Graphics Interdisciplinary Centre
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC, Canada
victor.zappi@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
The implementation of digital musical instruments is of-
ten opaque to the performer. Even when the relationship
between action and sound is readily understandable, the
internal hardware or software operations that create that
relationship may be inaccessible to scrutiny or modiﬁca-
tion. This paper presents a new approach to digital in-
strument design which lets the performer alter and subvert
the instrument’s internal operation through circuit-bending
techniques. The approach uses low-latency feedback loops
between software and analog hardware to expose the in-
ternal working of the instrument. Compared to the stan-
dard control voltage approach used on analog synths, al-
terations to the feedback loops produce distinctive and less
predictable changes in behaviour with original artistic ap-
plications. This paper discusses the technical foundations of
the approach, its roots in hacking and circuit bending, and
case studies of its use in live performance with the D-Box
“hackable instrument”.
Author Keywords
Feedback, circuit bending, hacking, analog circuits, low la-
tency, embedded hardware
ACM Classiﬁcation
H.5.5 [Information Interfaces and Presentation] Sound and
Music Computing—Methodologies and techniques, C.3 [Special-
Purpose and Application-Based Systems] Real-time and em-
bedded systems, H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presen-
tation] User Interfaces—Input devices and strategies.
1. INTRODUCTION
The implementation of an instrument matters. For the de-
signer, the exact selection of materials, circuits or code may
be primarily a means to an end, a way of achieving a partic-
ular sound. For the performer, though, the subtle idiosyn-
cracies and limitations of how the instrument behaves can
become powerful sources of creative inspiration, giving rise
to new playing techniques and even new styles of music.
For example, in early guitar ampliﬁers, distortion was an
engineering limitation until guitarists discovered the mu-
sical value in pushing the device beyond its limits. The
ampliﬁer’s internal construction matters just as much as
its nominal action of making the guitar louder: tubes and
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’15,May 31-June 3, 2015, Louisiana State Univ., Baton Rouge, LA.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
transistors produce roughly equivalent results in linear am-
pliﬁcation, but their sound when pushed into distortion is
noticeably di↵erent, such that tube ampliﬁers remain dom-
inant despite cost and practical shortcomings.
Similarly, in the 19th century, the high-tension steel strings
in the piano were the means to an end of creating loud
and sustained tones, but the design also makes possible
John Cage’s prepared piano, the bowed ensemble pieces of
Stephen Scott, and electromagnetic actuation techniques [3,
14]. A hypothetical digital piano which perfectly emulated
the sound and feel of an acoustic grand would nonetheless
be more restrictive than the original, since these and other
interventions would be impossible.
1.1 Implementation of Digital Instruments
The internal implementation of a digital musical instrument
(DMI) is often a black box. Even when the nominal rela-
tionship between action and sound is obvious, the software
and hardware processes that create that relationship may be
inaccessible to the performer. This inaccessibility can pre-
vent the kinds of creative misuses and modiﬁcations which
are common on acoustic instruments [20].
This paper presents a new method of exposing the inter-
nal operations of DMIs, allowing performers to modify or
subvert the original design for creative purposes. The aim
is not to explain or demonstrate the instrument’s nominal
mapping to the performer or audience, but rather to make
the implementationof the instrument open to repurposing.
1.2 Appropriation, Modiﬁcation and Hacking
In an earlier study [21], we showed how even very simple
instruments were appropriated by performers for use in un-
expected ways. Surprisingly, our results suggested that per-
fomers saw instruments withfewer degrees of freedom as
richer, and that tight constraints provided greater incen-
tives to develop creative use cases.
This techniques in this paper widen our study of appro-
priation to include modiﬁcations to the instrument’s inter-
nal operation, while retaining the essential simplicity of the
instrument. Speciﬁcally, our techniques aim to:
• Expose the internal state of an instrument’s software
(not just sensor inputs) to modiﬁcationin hardware.
• Do not limit the allowable modiﬁcations to choosing
from predeﬁned options created by the designer.
• Make modiﬁcations interesting: the instrument should
not crash or go silent, and the behaviour when modi-
ﬁed should include unusual but repeatable e↵ects.
Our approach is inspired by circuit bending practice (Sec-
tion 2.4). The technical implementation uses low-latency
feedback loops between software and hardware which pro-
duce unique characteristic e↵ects when altered. To state
the goal more compactly:Make the instrument simple,
but make it break in interesting ways.
162
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
2. BACKGROUND
The concept ofmodularityhas been an important factor
in the development of electronic instruments, but it is not
the only approach to modiﬁability. This section examines
analog control voltages (CVs) and their inﬂuence on DMI
mapping before considering limitations and alternatives.
2.1 Dominance of the Control Voltage
Hugh LeCaine’s Electronic Sackbut (1945-48) is widely seen
as the ﬁrst voltage-controlled synthesizer [19]. Its keyboard
features pitch and volume control from lateral and down-
ward pressure, respectively, while a set of pressure sensors
played with the left hand control various aspects of timbre.
The modular synths of Moog and Buchla in the 1960’s and
70’s established control voltages as the dominant paradigm
for analog synthesis [17].
The advantage of the CV lies in its conceptual clarity
and interconnectability: by describing each musical param-
eter with a single continuous variable, any signal source can
conceivably be attached to any destination with predictable
results. Physical patch cords for routing CVs are a staple
of analog modular synths, but modular approaches can be
found whether or not cords are literally present, for example
in modulation matrices or switches for reassigning control
parameters. Recent kits such as littleBits and Patchblocks1
have also featured interconnectable hardware modules.
2.2 Digital Musical Instrument Mapping
Mapping in DMIs refers to the assignment of control (sen-
sor) inputs to instrument outputs (audio, visual, haptic).
Many mapping strategies have been proposed, including
one-to-one and many-to-many relationships [10], multi-layer
approaches [1], and dynamic performer-adjustable mappings
[12]. Machine learning is increasingly used for creating map-
pings [8, 11, 5]. Recent e↵orts have also focused on making
mappings understandable to the audience [2, 16].
Mapping, particularly in its more direct forms, can be
seen as a digital extension of the CV: musical parameters
are associated with one or more continuous or discrete vari-
ables, which are then assigned to various sensors or other
signal generators. Like CVs, conceptual clarity and recon-
ﬁgurability are advantages: the e↵ect of making particular
assignments can often be predicted in advance or (using su-
pervised learning) implicitly created by training examples.
2.3 Limitations
A major DMI limitation occurs when theabstractionbe-
comes more important than theimplementation. The pi-
ano action is not just a tool for creating decaying musical
tones: it is also a combination of steel, wood and felt which
can be manipulated in ways unrelated to its original func-
tion. Likewise, an analog CV is not only a representation
of a musical parameter, it is also an electrical signal with
ﬁnite impedance and bandwidth, susceptible to noise and
interference. The synth designer might seek to minimise
these e↵ects, but the performer could choose to accentuate
them by ﬂoating or shorting cables, using skin conductance
to manipulate them, or injecting unrelated electrical signals
into the circuit.
No such possibilities are available in CV-inspired digital
mappings. Modularity is seen as a way to o↵er the per-
former more possibilities, but its design places strict limits
on the creative space. Only the patch cords (real or vir-
tual) can be manipulated, and there is no physical substrate
whose properties can be exploited for unexpected e↵ects.
1http://littlebits.cc and http://patchblocks.com
Most familiar instruments have undergone many gener-
ations of testing and reﬁnement, often incorporating what
were originally unexpected usage techniques (e.g. fuzz boxes).
The limitations opaque DMIs impose on the performer may
thus end up a↵ecting their future development.
2.4 Modularity versus Circuit Bending
Circuit bending [6] rejects the black box model of digital
electronic devices, working directly with the circuits and
signals inside. Modularity is irrelevant, since any trace on
the board that is physically accessible can become part of a
modiﬁcation. Some objects become prized circuit bending
targets precisely because of their implementation. The TI
Speak and Spell(1978) has been used in dozens of hacks
to produce new sound e↵ects [9]. A smartphone emulation
of the device would hold no interest for circuit bending;
arbitrary modiﬁcations would lead to a crash or damage to
the device rather than creating interesting e↵ects.
It is rare to see a circuit bender working with a latest-
generation DMI, other than one they have created. We
thus argue for a new approach to DMI design which min-
imises opaque software processes and exposes as much of
the substrate as possible to modiﬁcation by the performer.
2.5 Feedback in Musical Instruments
Feedback in performance dates back to the 1960’s [18], with
examples including amp-to-pickup on electric guitar, Tu-
dor’sMicrophone(1973) and other works, Di Scipio’sAu-
dible Ecosystems[7], Collins’ 1974Pea Soup, Nakamura’s
1997 No-Input Mixing Board[18], and Bowers and Haas’s
“hybrid resonant assemblages” [4]. Feedback through skin
conductance features in Waisvisz’sCracklebox.2
In comparison to previous work, this paper explores feed-
back as a control mechanism within a larger DMI rather
than as a direct audio output. It also demonstrates the
construction of loops between software and analog electron-
ics whose e↵ects could not be created with either modality
alone. Finally, it demonstrates a circuit-bending methodol-
ogy for modifying feedback loops to alter the behaviour of
a primarily software-driven instrument.
3. TECHNICAL FOUNDATIONS
The techniques in this paper form the modiﬁable core of the
D-Box “hackable instrument” (Figure 1) [20]. The D-Box is
designed to appear simple and limited at ﬁrst but allow
wide-ranging creative exploration through modiﬁcations to
a network of analog circuits within the case.
3.1 Ultra Low-Latency Audio and Sensors
BeagleRT [15] is a new ultra-low-latency embedded audio
platform created speciﬁcally for the D-Box. It is based on
the BeagleBone Black single-board computer which features
a 1GHz ARM Cortex-A8 processor and 512MB of RAM.
BeagleRT uses the Xenomai hard real-time Linux kernel
extensions to run audio I/O at a higher priority than the
kernel itself. This means that other activity on the system
does not a↵ect the timing of audio calculations, enabling
extremely small bu↵er sizes which cannot be achieved on
any other Linux-based audio platform.
Using a bu↵er size of 2 audio samples, a latency of under
100µs from input to output can be achieved with no un-
derruns. The D-Box uses a bu↵er size of 4 audio samples,
which is more CPU-e cient, with a latency of 184µs.
A hardwarecape (expansion board) features 8 channels
each of 16-bit ADC and DAC in addition to stereo audio
2That the Cracklebox will only work with 1970’s-vintage
externally compensated op amps and not with modern chips
shows again the importance of the internal implementation.
163
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
Figure 1: The D-Box, a hackable digital instru-
ment. Circuits on the breadboard form feedback
loops with the internal software, and changing these
circuits alters the behaviour of the instrument.
input and output. The ADC and DAC are sampled auto-
matically at half the audio sample rate (22.05kHz), result-
ing in jitter-free alignment of sensor data with respect to
the audio signal. 1W ampliﬁers onboard the cape can drive
8-ohm speakers; a mono speaker is used inside the D-Box.
3.2 D-Box Sensors and Mapping
The D-Box uses two capacitive touch sensors derived from
[13]; one sensor contains a pressure sensor underneath. In
its initial conﬁguration, touch position on the ﬁrst sensor
controls pitch of a stored sample reconstructed by oscillator
bank, and pressure controls volume. Location on the other
sensor applies a bandpass ﬁlter e↵ect. New samples can be
loaded onto the instrument by SD card.
The synthesis is further described in [20]. The mapping
is deliberately simple: there are several further parameters
not a↵ected by the sensors in any way, including choice of
sample, playback speed, wavetable (timbre) of the oscilla-
tors, and loop points within the sample. The software is
open source [15], but the study in this paper focused only
on hardware modiﬁcations.
3.3 The Matrix
In the D-Box, the 8 analog inputs and outputs on the Bea-
gleRT cape are connected to a breadboard here called the
matrix for its network of connections between inputs and
outputs. The matrix is the substrate on which the internal
operation of the instrument is exposed, and the basis for
the feedback loops described in the next section.
In the initial conﬁguration of the D-Box, the matrix is
prepopulated with a standard circuit containing several re-
sistors and capacitors (Figure 2). Notably, modiﬁcation to
the matrix is not limited to patch cords or selection amongst
discrete options; any electrical components can be used.
4. FEEDBACK AS CONTROL STRATEGY
In most DMIs, signals ﬂow in one direction, from sensor
inputs through a mapping layer (usually software, often
opaque) to sound outputs. There is an implicit form of feed-
back in the performer’s reactions to the instrument, but less
commonly is feedback found internally in the instrument.
By contrast, the D-Box contains several internal hardware-
software feedback loops. A signal generated by software is
sent to a DAC channel, whereupon it is acted on by a net-
work of analog components. The output of the network is
read by an ADC channel and processed again by the soft-
Figure 2: The matrix, a breadboard of hackable ana-
log circuits within the D-Box. DAC outputs at top,
ADC inputs at bottom.
ware. Either positive or negative feedback can be used, and
the signal processing can be either linear or nonlinear. Pos-
itive feedback tends to create oscillators; negative feedback
can help pull a control signal toward a desired value.
Rather than using the loop as a direct audio signal gen-
erator, features are extracted from the signal that emerges
which then become part of the instrument’s mapping. Al-
terations to the loop produce e↵ects which behave di↵er-
ently to CV control: changes are less linear, more chaotic,
include time-variant e↵ects, and often exhibit an interesting
boundary between stability and chaos.
The following sections demonstrate several examples of
how feedback is used in the D-Box.
4.1 Adaptive Pitch Control
Pitch on the D-Box is controlled by ﬁnger location on a
touch sensor. Though this mapping could be performed
entirely in software, this o↵ers no opportunity to alter its
response. Instead, touch position generates an analog volt-
age from the DAC. This voltage runs through a resistor
network which shifts and scales it, before it is read by the
ADC (Figure 3).
Changing resistor values changes the pitch range, and
portamento e↵ects can be obtained by including a capac-
itor in the circuit. Alternatively, the ADC input can be left
ﬂoating which makes the pitch highly sensitive to nearby
stray signals, or cross-wired to other circuits (Section 4.4).
A separate DAC output uses negative feedback to pull
the pitch toward the nearest semitone. At samplen, the
ADC input is compared to the nearest value which would
DAC+touch location
 ADCpitch
Vcc
GND-
difference from nearest semitone
optional
Figure 3: Software-hardware signal ﬂow for control-
ling pitch. Circuit in the middle can be changed.
164
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
produce an equal-tempered semitone, and the di↵erence is
calculated. At samplen + 1, a fraction of the di↵erence
is subtracted from the DAC output, such that the pitch
gradually converges to equal temperament.
4.2 Phase-Shift Oscillator: Waveform Control
The phase-shift oscillator is a classic analog design consist-
ing of three ﬁrst-order lowpass ﬁlters in a closed loop. At
the frequency where the total phase shift reaches 180 de-
grees, the system will self-oscillate.
The D-Box implements a hybrid analog-digital phase shift
oscillator (Figure 4), using the fact that a constant delay
produces a linear phase shift with respect to frequency. The
DAC output passes through a ﬁrst-order RC network and is
read by the ADC. In software, the ADC signal is high-pass
ﬁltered to remove DC o↵set and sent back to the DAC. The
RC phase shift plus the bu↵ering delay produce 180 degrees
of shift at some frequency, at which the system will oscillate.
The oscillator does not feed directly into the D-Box au-
dio output. Instead, the waveform of the oscillation is ex-
tracted, stretched to occupy 1024 samples, and used as the
waveform for each oscillator of an oscillator bank synthe-
sizer. Because of nonlinearities and limited voltage range,
the waveform is never perfectly sinusoidal, with smaller ca-
pacitors providing a square-like oscillation (Figure 5). Chang-
ing the circuits therefore changes the timbre of the instru-
ment. If the RC network is disconnected entirely, the oscil-
lation stops. To prevent the instrument from going silent,
a sine wavetable is used when no oscillation is detected.
Changing circuit elements can produce distinctive tran-
sient behaviour (Figure 5d), including unstable oscillation
patterns or ramps in oscillation amplitude. Suddenly re-
moving the capacitor from the network can trigger one of
several high-frequency oscillations (Figure 5b-c). The same
DAC ADC
High-pass 10Hz
extract waveformosc. bank
184µs delayFigure 4: Software-hardware phase-shift oscillator
controlling oscillator bank wavetable.
Figure 5: Phase shift oscillator waveforms. Yel-
low plot (top) = DAC, green (bottom) =
ADC. (a) quasi-sinusoidal oscillation (R=3.3k,
C=10µF); (b,c) two results when capacitor removed
(R=180k); (d) transients on circuit change.
action, executed multiple times, can produce di↵erent oscil-
lation patterns (hence di↵erent timbres), but interestingly,
each pattern appears to be stable once it has been initiated.
4.3 Relaxation Oscillator: Playback Speed
Relaxation oscillator circuits have been used since the ear-
liest days of electronics. In a typical implementation, a
comparator with hysteresis (Schmitt trigger) is used with
feedback through an RC network. The output of the com-
parator can have two states (high and low), neither stable:
a high output causes the capacitor to charge, eventually
ﬂipping the output to the low state, after which the pro-
cess repeats in reverse. Relaxation oscillators produce non-
sinusoidal outputs, in this case a square or triangular wave
depending on which point in the circuit is probed.
The D-Box creates a hybrid feedback loop where the com-
parator with hysteresis is implemented in software, but the
RC network in hardware (Figure 6). The oscillator fre-
quency determines the rate of playback of the stored sample,
within a range of 0.1x to 10x normal speed. With default
component values, the network oscillates at 160Hz, corre-
sponding to 1x speed. Changing either the resistor or capac-
itor changes the oscillation frequency (Figure 7). Alterna-
tively, other time-varying signals could be fed into the ADC
input from which the playback speed would be derived.
4.4 Cross-Wiring Feedback Circuits
The parameters these feedback loops control– pitch, wave-
form, playback speed– could easily be controlled entirely
in software or using analog CVs. The unique value in the
feedback loop approach comes from the unorthodox ways in
which these circuits can be manipulated and subverted.
All the voltages on the breadboard “matrix”, including
the speaker output, take the range 0-5V. Voltages from any
part of the matrix can thus be attached to any other part.
For example, the speaker output can be fed back to any of
the feedback networks, creating a chaotic result with di↵er-
ent sound qualities depending on which network is chosen
(Figure 8, also Section 5.4). One major motivation for us-
ing feedback is in part that the designer doesnot specify
the complete range of possible e↵ects. Many side-e↵ects of
changing the feedback networks will be unstable or unpre-
dictable, yet repeatable and far from random.
DAC ADCmeasure frequencyplayback speed
184µs delay
hysteresis comparator -Figure 6: Software-hardware relaxation oscillator
controlling sample playback speed.
Figure 7: Relaxation oscillator waveforms. Yellow
(top) = DAC, green (bottom) = ADC. (a) standard
setting (R=33k, C=0.1µF); (b) no capacitor.
165
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
Figure 8: Chaotic result of pitch input when cross-
wired to the speaker.
5. USER STUDY
We conducted an extended user study with the D-Box to see
how performers would make use of its modiﬁable circuits.
The reaction of any given musician towards the D-Box and
its hackable design is not easily predictable, depending on
diverse factors such as musical background, electronics ex-
pertise or rehearsal context. We gathered 14 volunteer per-
formers, a heterogeneous group ranging from experienced
circuit benders to classical instrumentalists with no knowl-
edge of electronic components. Each performer received an
identical D-Box in its original circuit conﬁguration, along
with an identical bag of components to use for hacking. We
met each performer separately and asked them not to talk
to one another about the D-Box during the study.
Participants were asked to prepare two solo performances
over a period going from 20 to 62 days, according to their
availability. (Due to personal circumstances, only 10 of 14
performers completed the study.) The ﬁrst performance was
a private recording, while the second one gathered all the
participants in front an audience (80+ people), who voted
for the best act. Both the performances were followed by
an interview session. As incentive to participate, performers
could keep their D-Boxes at the end of the study.
Participants were not required to modify the D-Box, but
8 out of 10 applied substantial hacks on the matrix and on
the body of the instrument. In the next subsections, we
analyse some of the most interesting hacks featured during
the two performances, speciﬁcally focusing on the usage of
feedback loops. Aside from showing di↵erent technical ap-
poraches, these use cases suggest how the hackable design
of the instrument could a↵ect musicianship, also in relation
to performers’ skills and backgrounds.
5.1 Adaptive Pitch Hack
Participant ID 5 (P5), a guitar and piano player, decided
to build his performances around a main melody and sing
along with it. Despite his limited familiarity with electron-
ics, he intuitively used an adjustable trimmer to modify the
pitch circuit and adapt the instrument’s pitch range to his
needs. This allowed to ﬁnd what he called a“sweet spot”,
i.e. a value granting the pitch extension needed for the com-
posed melody and a comfortable note distribution over the
sensor to play it. Eventually, he added marks to the instru-
ment’s top plate which highlight the exact position of notes
over the sensor, e↵ectively acting as visual guitar frets.
After recording the ﬁrst performance, P5 literally hacked
his own modiﬁcations. While probing the matrix, he inad-
vertently connected the circuit responsible for sample se-
lection to the pitch trimmer, by means of two buttons and
a Light Dependent Resistor (LDR). The resulting circuit
generates a bidirectional feedback between pitch and sam-
ple selection: when only one button is pressed, the sample
remains unchanged and the LDR can be used to manipu-
late the pitch. When both buttons are pressed, the second
sample is activated and its attack is enhanced by an abrupt
pitch shift, acting as a fast envelope. These features, discov-
ered by serendipity, inspired the addition of rhythmic and
non-melodic sections to the piece.
P5 modiﬁed some constraints of his D-Box to play it as
a familiar instrument and preserve his approach to music
making. However, P5 declared that the unexpected be-
haviour of his hacks pushed him to experiment with new
interaction techniques and musical genres he was not ac-
customed to, enlarging his creative horizons.
5.2 Skin Conductance and Audio Feedback
For the ﬁrst performance, P3 prepared his D-Box to allow
for chaotic control of sound texture through his own skin
conductance. To do so, he detached the wires belonging to
pitch and sample selection circuits from the cape’s ADCs.
While triggering the samples with one hand, he rhythmi-
cally touched, bent and twisted these ﬂoating wires with the
other one. The sonic outcome of these interactions remark-
ably varied according to touch area, pressure and duration,
and to the speciﬁc part of the wire where the manipulation
occurred (e.g., the metallic tip, the centre of the plastic
body, the end closer to the ADC). The performer made use
of these bizarre techniques to control transitions between
unpredictable sonic states of the system.
While rehearsing for the second performance, P3 com-
pletely discarded matrix and touch sensors from interaction.
Instead, he focused on the two piezo microphones the D-Box
is equipped with [20]. He detached the microphones from
the inner plates of the instrument, moving them freely to
play with audio feedback generated by varying the distance
between the microphones and speaker.
Di↵erently from P5, P3 found the instrument unique in
its genre and did not try to capitalise his performances on
known familiar schemes. Instead, he enjoyed a deep free
exploration of the instrument, that led to the discovery
of hidden a↵ordances made available by the hardware and
software interconnections of the D-Box. This is a strong
example of instrument appropriation, far from the paths
originally intended by the designers [21].
5.3 Cross-Wired Oscillator
P8’s piece capitalises on di↵erent usages of the relaxation
oscillator. He started focusing on playback speed control, by
means of changing on the ﬂy the capacitor in the oscillator
circuit. He deﬁned a set of discrete speed steps by pre-
selecting capacitors of di↵erent sizes from the given bag of
components. Then, to facilitate the swapping operation, he
added an LED to light up the interior of the instrument.
In the second part of the piece, P8 rewired the circuit to
make the pitch oscillate according to the playback speed.
To introduce a further degree of control, he connected to
the oscillator the signal coming from one of the two piezo
microphones, attached on a side plate. Whenever the per-
former taps on the side plate, the abrupt voltage transient
detected by the microphone freezes the oscillator circuit,
slowing down the playback speed by 10 times. This state
persists until the oscillator’s capacitor is removed and repo-
sitioned, or changed with a di↵erent one.
The ﬁnal conﬁguration of P8’s instrument included sev-
eral other modiﬁcations, carefully chosen to support a per-
sonal playing style. For instance, he used pressure to quickly
select sample and designed an original mapping using po-
sition on the second touch sensor to control loop points.
Overall, the complexity of his hack was a real surprise, con-
sidering that the performer had no knowledge of electronics
at all. The interview revealed that this ﬁne tuning pro-
cess helped P8 master the instrument in only few weeks of
practice, and compose and perform a very original piece.
His virtuosity was recognised by the audience as well, who
selected P8 as best performer.
166
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
5.4 Additional Feedback Loops
P10 is an experienced hacker and circuit bender.He attached
4 potentiometers on top of a cardboard plate, conﬁgured as
variable resistors (i.e. using just 2 terminals). One end of
each potentiometer is ﬁxed to a speciﬁc part of the matrix:
the relaxation oscillator, the phase-shift oscillator, the sam-
ple selection circuit and the ampliﬁed audio output. The
other end of each potentiometer can be connected anywhere
on the matrix by means of crocodile clips.
P10’s performance revolved around the indeterminacy trig-
gered by wiring unrelated parts of the matrix on the ﬂy
and modulating the resulting feedback by means of the po-
tentiometers. This generated additional oscillating circuits
and unexpected software/hardware loops triggering time-
varying and highly unstable electrical/sonic conﬁgurations.
Unlike the hacks previously introduced, this instrument
is characterised by a remarkable degree of self-agency. The
performer has almost no instantaneous control over the sys-
tem state. The consequences of interaction are often non-
linear and, even when interaction itself is suspended, sound
output constantly evolves in search of a stable conﬁguration.
P10 modiﬁed his D-Box using classic circuit bending tech-
niques and tools, and during performances maintained a
sonic register typical of this kind of practice. We gladly ac-
knowledged that, for the ﬁrst time, the performer managed
to use his hacking skills to probe and modify a DMI, rather
than cheap/old instruments and electronic toys.
6. DISCUSSION
The D-Box, though it presents a very simple interface to
the performer, is a complex instrument internally, imple-
menting oscillator bank resynthesis of sampled sounds with
the potential for many degrees of freedom: pitch, volume,
ﬁltering, oscillator waveform, detuning, sample selection,
playback speed, and loop points. Our previous study [21]
suggests that breaking all these dimensions out to separate
controls risks undermining the clarity of the instrument and
reducing the motivation for discovering personal use cases.
On the other hand, having all extra parameters locked
inside a complex piece of software limits the performer’s
ability to discover new sounds and techniques. Even if edit-
ing the code is possible, it lacks the immediacy and the ex-
ploratory value of pulling wires and swapping components.
Several participants in our user study, including those with-
out electronics expertise, rewired the D-Box live in perfor-
mance, showing not only the immediacy but also the trust
they placed in this modiﬁcation process.
Compared to CV-based modular synths, instruments built
on feedback loops will be inherently idiosyncratic. Feedback
loops are not transferrable between one part of the instru-
ment and the other, as di↵erent loops are implemented on
di↵erent principles. There is also no guarantee that a small
change an input produces a correspondingly small change in
output: in certain regions, chaotic e↵ects can emerge [18].
Modiﬁcations, however, are repeatable, with conﬁgurations
that are reliably stable and others that are reliably chaotic.
These results align with our goals to design a distinctive
form of instrument control whose space of possibilities is
not pre-scripted by the designer, nor by the musician. As
suggested by the experience of the performers, this scenario
is likely to beneﬁt music variety, creativity and virtuosity.
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by EPSRC grants EP/K032046/1
and EP/K009059/1. Thanks also to London Music Hackspace
for their support and collaboration.
8. REFERENCES
[1] D. Arﬁb, J. Couturier, L. Kessous, and V. Verfaille.
Strategies of mapping between gesture data and
synthesis model parameters using perceptual spaces.
Organised Sound,7 ( 2 ) : 1 2 7 – 1 4 4 ,2 0 0 2 .
[2] F. Berthaut, M. T. Marshall, S. Subramanian, and
M. Hachet. Rouages: Revealing the mechanisms of
digital musical instruments to the audience. InProc.
NIME,2 0 1 3 .
[3] P. Bloland. The electromagnetically-prepared piano
and its compositional implications. InProc. ICMC,
2007.
[4] J. Bowers and A. Haas. Hybrid resonant assemblages:
Rethinking instruments, touch and performance in
new interfaces for musical expression. InProc. NIME,
2014.
[5] B. Caramiaux, N. Montecchio, A. Tanaka, and
F. Bevilacqua. Adaptive gesture recognition with
variation estimation for interactive systems.ACM
Transactions on Interactive Intel ligent Systems
(TiiS),4 ( 4 ) : 1 8 ,2 0 1 4 .
[6] N. Collins. A solder’s tale: Putting the “lead” back in
“lead users”.Pervasive Computing,7 ,2 0 0 8 .
[7] A. Di Scipio. A constructivist gesture of
deconstruction. sound as a cognitive medium.
Contemporary Music Review,3 3 ( 1 ) : 8 7 – 1 0 2 ,2 0 1 4 .
[8] R. Fiebrink.Real-time human interaction with
supervised learning algorithms for music composition
and performance. PhD thesis, Princeton Univ., 2011.
[9] R. Ghazala.Circuit Bending: Build Your Own Alien
Instruments.W i l e y ,2 0 0 5 .
[10] A. Hunt and M. Wanderley. Mapping performer
parameters to synthesis engines.Organised Sound,
7(2), 2002.
[11] C. Kiefer. Musical instrument mapping design with
echo state networks. InProc. NIME,2 0 1 4 .
[12] J. Malloch, S. Sinclair, and M. M. Wanderley.
Libmapper:(a library for connecting things). InProc.
CHI Extended Abstracts,2 0 1 3 .
[13] A. McPherson. TouchKeys: capacitive multi-touch
sensing on a physical keyboard. InProc. NIME,2 0 1 2 .
[14] A. McPherson and Y. Kim. The problem of the
second performer: building a community around an
augmented instrument.Computer Music Journal,
34(4), 2012.
[15] A. McPherson and V. Zappi. An environment for
submillisecond-latency audio and sensor processing on
BeagleBone Black. InProc. AES 138th Conv.,2 0 1 4 .
[16] O. Perrotin and C. d’Alessandro. Visualizing gestures
in the control of a digital musical instrument. InProc.
NIME,2 0 1 4 .
[17] T. J. Pinch and F. Trocco.Analog days: The
invention and impact of the Moog synthesizer.
Harvard University Press, 2002.
[18] D. Sanﬁlippo and A. Valle. Feedback systems: An
analytical framework.Computer Music Journal,
37(2):12–27, 2013.
[19] G. Young.The Sackbut Blues: Hugh Le Caine,
Pioneer in Electronic Music. National Museum of
Science and Technology, 1989.
[20] V. Zappi and A. McPherson. Design and use of a
hackable digital instrument. InProc. Live Interfaces,
2014.
[21] V. Zappi and A. McPherson. Dimensionality and
appropriation in digital musical instrument design. In
Proc. NIME,2 0 1 4 .
167
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 