Principles for Designing Computer Music Controllers  
Perry Cook 
Department of Computer Science (also Department of Music) 
35 Olden St.    Princeton, NJ 08544 USA 
+1 609 258 4951 prc@cs.princeton.edu
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper will present observations on the design, artistic, 
and human factors of creating digital music controllers.  
Specific projects will be presented, and a set of design 
principles will be supported from those examples. 
Keywords 
Musical control, artistic interfaces. 
INTRODUCTION 
Musical performance with entirely new types of computer 
instruments is now commonplace, as a result of the 
availability of inexpensive c omputing hardware, o f new 
sensors for measuring physical parameters such as force 
and position, and o f new software for r eal-time sound 
synthesis and manipulation. Musical i nterfaces that we 
construct are influenced greatly by the type of music we 
like, the music we set out t o make, the instruments we 
already know how to play, and the artists we choose to 
work with, as well as the a vailable sensors, computers, 
networks, etc.  But the music we create and enable with our 
new instruments can be even more greatly influenced by 
our initial design decisions and techniques. 
Through designing and constructing controllers over the 
last 15 years, the author has developed some principles and 
a (loose) philosophy.  These a re not assumed to b e 
universal, but are rather a set of opinions formed as part of 
the process of making many musical i nterfaces.  They 
relate to p ractical i ssues for the modern instrument 
craftsperson/hacker.  Some relate to human factors, others 
are technical.  This paper will endeavor to bring those 
principles to light, through a set of examples of specific 
controllers and related art projects.  To set the tone for the 
rest of the paper, the principles will be listed here, and will 
be highlighted in bold when they are reinforced by the 
examples in the text. 
Some Human/Artistic Principles 
1) Programmability is a curse 
2) Smart instruments are often not smart 
3) Copying an instrument is dumb,  
 leveraging expert technique is smart 
4) Some players have spare bandwidth, some do not 
5) Make a piece, not an instrument or controller 
6) Instant music, subtlety later 
Some Technological Principles 
7) MIDI = Miracle, Industry Designed, (In)adequate 
8) Batteries, Die (a command, not an observation) 
9) Wires are not that bad (compared to wireless) 
Some Other Principles 
10) New algorithms suggest new controllers 
11) New controllers suggest new algorithms 
12) Existing instruments suggest new controllers 
13) Everyday objects suggest amusing controllers 
 
Winds:  Cook/Morrill Trumpet 1986-89      HIRN 1991    
Constructed with Dexter Morrill of Colgate University, as 
part of an NEA grant to create an interface for trumpeter 
Wynton Marsalis, the Cook/Morrill trumpet controller 
project led to a number of new interface devices, software 
systems [1][2], and musical works [3].  Sensors on the 
valves, mouthpiece, and b ell enabled fast and accurate 
pitch d etection, and extended computer control for the 
trumpet player.  Trumpet players lie squarely in the “some 
players have spare bandwidth” category, so attaching a 
few extra switches and sliders around the valves proved 
very successful.  Figure 1 shows the interface window. 
Initially it was thought that a musically interesting scheme 
would be to allow the brass player to use the switches to 
enter played notes into loops, and later trigger those loops.  
This proved a miserable failure, b ecause of the mental 
concentration n eeded to keep track of which loop was 
where, what the loop contents were, syncing the recording, 
triggering, etc.  Eventually a set of simple, nearly stateless 
interactions were devised.  The switches were used to 
trigger pre-composed motifs, n avigate forward and 
backward through sections, and capture pitch information 
from the horn, which was then u sed to seed fairly 
autonomous compositional algorithms. 
 
Figure 1   Interface panel for the Cook/Morrill Trumpet 
NIME01-03
Proceedings of the CHI'01 Workshop on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-01), Seattle, USA
Another project, the HIRN wind controller, sensed rotation 
and translation in both hands, arm orientation, independent 
control with each finger, breath pressure, and even muscle 
tension in the lips [4].  Mappings from these controls to the 
parameters of the WhirlWind meta-wind-instrument 
physical model allowed exploration of new “spaces” of 
acoustical processes, and the HIRN also was investigated 
as a c ontroller f or FM and other synthesis techniques.  
Negative lessons from the HIRN project indicated that 
huge control bandwidth is not necessarily a good thing, and 
that attempting to bu ild a “super instrument” with n o 
specific musical composition to directly drive the 
project (principle 5) yields interesting research questions, 
but with no real product or future direction.   One positive 
lesson from the project is that the co-design of synthesis/ 
processing algorithms with controllers can benefit both. 
 
Figure 2:  The HIRN Meta-Wind Controller 
Voice:  SPASM  1988-94    
Research on physical modeling of the voice resulted in the 
construction of the SPASM/Singer voice synthesizer  [5] 
[6] (see Figures 3 and 4).  The SPASM system was capable 
of real time synthesis, but had well over 40 continuously 
controlled p arameters.  Work to improve the graphical 
interfaces and add control via MIDI fader boxes [7] proved 
that the voice is a truly difficult “instrument” to control 
(principles 3 & 4).  Recent work in real-time vocal model 
control will be discussed in the SqueezeVox Section. 
  
            
  
Figure 3   SPASM         Figure 4   Few-to-Many Mappings 
 
PhISEM Shaker Percussion: 1996-1999    
The PhISEM (Physically Inspired Stochastic Event 
Modeling) project [8][9] provided support for the “new 
algorithms lead to new controllers lead to new 
algorithms … ” principles.  This work on the synthesis of 
particle-type percussion and real-world sounds led to a set 
of new instruments, not only for control of shaker/scraper 
sounds and sound effects, bu t also for algorithmic 
interactive music.  For example, the Frog Maraca (Figure 
5) sends MIDI commands to control a simple algorithmic 
fusion jazz combo of bass, piano, and drums.  The success 
with both adults and children [10] of the Frog Maraca 
came from its simple interface (just shake it), the fun of 
making fairly complicated music with such a simple and 
whimsical l ooking device, and the fact t hat it only 
performed on e function (and always performed that 
function when turned on).  A related shaker percussion 
instrument controller was a Tambourine that could also 
compose algorithmic modal marimba solos when shaken.   
 
Figure 5   PhISEM controllers.  
Constructing the PhISEM controllers provided rich 
evidence that “Programmability is a curse,” a nd a 
correlary: “Smart instruments are often n ot smart.”  
What t hese principles are meant t o address is that t he 
programmability of computer-based musical systems often 
make them too easy to configure, redefine, remap, etc.  For 
programmers and composers, this provides an infinite 
landscape for experimentation, creativity, writing papers, 
wasting time, and n ever actually completing any art 
projects or compositions.  For normal humans, being able 
to pick up an instrument with a simple obvious interaction 
and “play it” only makes logical sense.  That t he 
instrument is “learning from their play and modifying its 
behavior” often does not make any sense at all, and can be 
frustrating, paralyzing, or offensive.  PhISEM controllers 
have a single embedded microcontroller, programmed for 
one or two functions (selectable by the state of a button on 
power-up), and they put out standard General MIDI 
signals.  Except for the need to replace batteries (Die 
Batteries Die!!), these controllers have a strong possibility 
of working perfectly as designed in 10 (perhaps 20) years.  
Those who craft complex systems using custom hardware, 
multiple computers, and multiple operating systems, can 
make no such claims. 
 
Foot, Hand, Kitchen Wear/Ware  1997-2000 
Spurred b y the success of the PhISEM controllers, the 
notion o f simple, MIDI b ased, fixed single function 
controllers was continued, but based on objects that are not 
NIME01-04
Proceedings of the CHI'01 Workshop on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-01), Seattle, USA
specifically associated with music.  Figure 6 shows the 
TapShoe, constructed at Interval Research as part of Bob 
Adams’ Expressions Project.  This shoe used force sensing 
resistors and accelerometers attached directly to a DSP 
board running PhISEM s haker algorithms and a small 
rhythmic loop.  The algorithm generated a basic “groove” 
to which the wearer of the shoe could add accents and 
dynamics, in addition to their own tapping sounds.  The 
success of the system came from giving the TapShoe 
wearer that feeling that they were actually performing the 
music, though the algorithmic loop would play a relatively 
boring tapping sound even if the shoe sat unworn (“Instant 
music, subtlety later”). 
The Pico Glove (see Figure 7) was designed as a single 
composition, called “Pico I for Seashells and Interactive 
Glove” [11].  The idiomatic gesture of moving the hand in 
and out of the shells was enhanced by a tilt sensor in the 
glove.  This was used to steer fr actal note-generation 
algorithms in real time, to accompany the blown shells. 
   
  
Figure 6  Digital Tapshoe                Figure 7 PicoGlove 
The JavaMug (Figure 8) was designed for a 
transcontinental MIDI jam session held in 1997 between 
Tokyo and Columbia University [12].  Being one of the 
author’s favorite objects, the coffee mug fits comfortably 
into the hand, and pressure sensors beneath the fingers, a 
tilt sensor, a pot and two bu ttons allow control of an 
algorithmic techno-latin band.   The principle of “Instant 
music, subtlety later” is dominant in this instrument.  
Simply picking up the JavaMug and squeezing it yields 
attractive a nd (fairly) deterministic music, b ecause 
algorithmic randomness is increased b y decreasing 
pressure on the sensors.  After playing the instrument for a 
while, neophytes grow to more expert levels by realizing 
that t he music gets more varied and interesting if they 
experiment with the relative pressures and tilts.  Note that 
this is also an example of the “Smart instruments are 
often not smart” principle, in that the instrument doesn’t 
change at all, but rather trains the user to use more gentle 
and subtle manipulations of the sensors.  Other kitchen-
related interfaces include the “Fillup Glass,” which plays 
minimalist music loops (via MIDI) controlled by sensors 
in a water glass, and “P-Ray’s Café: Table 1” which allows 
the control of a melodic percussion group by movement of 
common table-top items (sugar, salt shaker, etc) over the 
surface of a small table.  These objects s howed that 
“Everyday objects suggest amusing controllers.” 
 
Figure 8   P-Ray’s Café, with Fillup Glass and Java Mug 
 
Violins/Strings:  BoSSA, the Nukelele    1998-99 
Stringed instruments have a rich h istorical m usical 
tradition.  They also have a rich tradition of electronic 
interfaces, bo th commercially and experimentally with 
many electrified, MIDI, and pu re digital violins and 
guitars.  Work with Dan Trueman at Princeton University 
began with a sensor-enhanced violin bo w called the 
“RBow,” and the NBody project which worked to study 
and model the directional radiation properties of stringed 
instruments[13].  Dan continued and expanded this work, 
yielding BoSSA (The Bowed Sensor, Speaker Array, 
Figure 9) [14].  Lessons learned and reinforced by the 
BoSSA project include “ Existing instruments s uggest 
new controllers”, and “Copying an instrument is dumb, 
leveraging expert technique is smart.” Other principles 
reinforced are “ Some players have spare bandwidth, 
some do not,” (violin players generally have their hands 
completely occupied, so a successful interface must exploit 
interesting remappings of existing gestures),  and “Wires 
are not that bad (compared to wireless)” (the BoSSA is 
played sitting by a player who often plays electric violin, so 
the increased complexity of wireless was not justified). 
The Nukelele (thanks to Michael Brooke for the name) was 
constructed in Bob Adams’ Interval Research Expressions 
project.  While collaborating on other Expressions projects 
such as “the Stick” and the “ Porkophone,” the Nukelele 
was a personal experiment to design, implement, and test a 
new controller as rapidly as possible.  The Nukelele was 
intended to match the expressiveness of a true stringed 
instrument, by using audio directly from a sensor to drive a 
plucked string physical model.  Two sandwiched linear 
force sensing resistors under the right hand served to 
provide pluck/strike position information, along with the 
audio excitation for the string model. 
  
   
  
    Figure 9   BoSSA         Figure 10, the Nukelele 
NIME01-05
Proceedings of the CHI'01 Workshop on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-01), Seattle, USA
The Voice (again): SqueezeVox    2000 
The SqueezeVox p roject [15] with Colby Leider of 
Princeton has revisited the difficult issue of devising a 
suitable c ontroller f or models of the human voice.  
Breathing, pitch, and articulation of vowels and consonants 
must be controlled in a vocal model, so  the accordion was 
selected as a natural interface (principle 10).  Pitch via the 
keyboard, vibrato aftertouch, and a linear strip for f ine 
pitch and vibrato are c ontrolled with the right hand.  
Breathing is controlled by the bellows, and the left hand 
controls vowels and consonants via buttons (presets), or 
continuous controllers such as a touch pad, plungers, or 
squeeze interface. 
      
  
Figure 11 Squeezevox Lisa                      and Bart 
FUTURE WORK  and CONCLUSIONS 
Work and d evelopment continues on the SqueezeVox 
project, with a self-contained version (Santa’s Little 
Helper, with onbo ard DSP synthesis), and a small 
concertina version (Maggie) currently under construction.  
Work also continues on the kitchen/common ob jects 
project, and given the variety of such objects, much rich 
interface and music design lies ahead. 
Musical interface construction proceeds as more art than 
science, and possibly this is the only way that it can be 
done.  Yet many of the design principles put forth in this 
paper have held true in multiple projects, and many have 
been verified in talking with o ther digital i nstrument 
designers.  Some of the technological i ssues might go 
away, but not completely or not necessarily very quickly.  
Many of the human/artistic issues are likely to be with us 
as long as musical instruments have been. 
 
DEMONSTRATIONS 
During the workshop, the PhISEM controllers, the 
JavaMug, the TapShoe, the Nukelele, and the SqueezeVox 
will be demonstrated.  Soundfiles, large pictures, and video 
clips of the instruments discussed in this paper are 
available at:  http://www.cs.princeton.edu/~prc/CHI01.html 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Specific thanks to Dexter Morrill, Dan Trueman, Bob 
Adams, and Colby Leider.  General thanks to all those at 
CCRMA, Princeton, and Interval Research for wonderful 
collaborations.  This work was funded by CCRMA and the 
CCRMA Industrial Affiliates Program, Interval Research, 
Intel, and the Arial Foundation. 
REFERENCES 
 
1. Morrill, D.,  and Cook, P.R,. "Hardware, Software, and 
Compositional Tools for a Real-Time Improvised Solo 
Trumpet Work," Proceedings of the International 
Computer Music Conference, (ICMC), 1989. 
2. Cook, P.R,, Morrill, E., and Smith, J.O., "A MIDI 
Control and Performance System for Brass 
Instruments," Proc. ICMC, 1993. 
3. Morrill, D., “Works for Saxophone,” Centaur Records 
CRC 2214, 1994. 
4. Cook, P.R, "A Meta-Wind-Instrument Physical Model, 
and a Meta-Controller f or Real Time Performance 
Control," Proc ICMC, 1992. 
5. Cook, P.R, "Identification of Control Parameters in an 
Articulatory Vocal Tract Model, With Applications to 
the Synthesis of Singing," Electrical Engineering PhD 
Dissertation, Stanford University, 1991. 
6. Cook, P.R, "SPASM: a Real-Time Vocal Tract Physical 
Model Editor/Controller and Singer: the Companion 
Software Synthesis System," Computer Music Journal, 
17: 1, pp 30-44, 1992. 
7. Cook, P.R, "New Control Strategies for the Singer 
Articulatory Voice Synthesis System," Stockholm 
Music Acoustics Conference, 1993. 
8. Cook, P.R, "Physically Informed Sonic Modeling 
(PhISM): Percussive Synthesis," Proc ICM, 1996. 
9. Cook, P.R, "Physically Informed Sonic Modeling 
(PhISM): Synthesis of Percussive Sounds," Computer 
Music Journal, 21:3, 1997. 
10. Agora98: European Children’s Television Workshop, 
Cyprus, Greece, 1998. 
11. Cook, P.R, "Pico I", for Seashells and Interactive 
Electronics, International Mathematica Symposium, 
Rovaniemi, Finland, 1997.  
12. Goto, M. “Internet RemoteGIG”, Concert #3 
USA/Japan Intercollegiate Computer Music 
Conference, 1997. 
13. Cook, P.R and Trueman, D., "Spherical Radiation from 
Stringed Instruments: Measured, Modeled, and 
Reproduced," Journal of the Catgut Acoustical Society, 
1999. 
14. Trueman, D. and Cook, P.R,, "BoSSA: The 
Deconstructed Violin Reconstructed," International 
Computer Music Conference, Beijing, October, 1999.  
revised for Journal of New Music Research, Fall, 2000. 
15. Cook, P.R and Leider, C., "SqueezeVox: A New 
Controller for Vocal Synthesis Models," Proc. ICMC, 
2000.
NIME01-06
Proceedings of the CHI'01 Workshop on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-01), Seattle, USA