Augmenting the Acoustic Piano with Electromagnetic
String Actuation and Continuous Key Position Sensing
Andrew McPherson
Electrical & Computer Engineering
Drexel University
3141 Chestnut St.
Philadelphia, PA 19104
apm@drexel.edu
Y oungmoo Kim
Electrical & Computer Engineering
Drexel University
3141 Chestnut St.
Philadelphia, PA 19104
ykim@drexel.edu
ABSTRACT
This paper presents the magnetic resonator piano, an aug-
mented instrument enhancing the capabilities of the acous-
tic grand piano. Electromagnetic actuators induce the strings
to vibration, allowing each note to be continuously con-
trolled in amplitude, frequency, and timbre without exter-
nal loudspeakers. Feedback from a single pickup on the
piano soundboard allows the actuator waveforms to remain
locked in phase with the natural motion of each string. We
also present an augmented piano keyboard which reports
the continuous position of every key. Time and spatial res-
olution are suﬃcient to capture detailed data about key
press, release, pretouch, aftertouch, and other extended ges-
tures. The system, which is designed with cost and setup
constraints in mind, seeks to give pianists continuous con-
trol over the musical sound of their instrument. The in-
strument has been used in concert performances, with the
electronically-actuated sounds blending with acoustic in-
struments naturally and without ampliﬁcation.
Keywords
Augmented instruments, piano, interfaces, electromagnetic
actuation, gesture measurement
1. INTRODUCTION
The acoustic piano is among the most versatile of instru-
ments, capable of complex polyphony and rapid passage-
work across an extremely wide register. Yet in comparison
with most other acoustic instruments, the piano has a sur-
prising limitation: once a note is struck, the performer has
virtually no ability to modulate its sound before it is re-
leased. Building a keyboard instrument with the ability to
continuously shape each note is an age-old problem: In the
15th century, Leonardo da Vinci devised an instrument us-
ing rosined wheels to selectively sound a bank of strings;
later, the late 18th and early 19th centuries saw a prolif-
eration of new instruments attempting to bring indeﬁnite
sustain and continuous modulation to the keyboard [6].
With modern electronic synthesizers, inﬁnite sustain and
real-time note shaping are no longer challenging. Yet de-
spite decades of improvement, many performers ﬁnd that
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME2010, 15-18th June 2010,Sydney, Australia
Copyright 2010, Copyright remains with the author(s).
electronic instruments still do not match the richness and
nuance of their acoustic counterparts; very few pianists
would choose even the most sophisticated synthetic piano
over any acoustic grand of reasonable quality.
This paper presents the magnetic resonator piano, which
seeks to unify the ﬂexibility of synthesis with the richness of
the acoustic piano by electronically augmenting an acoustic
grand piano. Electromagnetic actuators directly induce the
strings to vibration, bypassing the piano’s percussive ham-
mer mechanism and allowing continuous control over the
sound of each note. Continuous position sensing of each
piano key allows the performer to control parameters of
actuation in real time without impeding traditional piano
technique, while an optional second keyboard can be used
to control the actuators without engaging the mechanical
action. All sound is produced by the piano strings, with-
out loudspeakers, facilitating integration with other acous-
tic instruments in a concert hall. Vocabulary of this hybrid
acoustic-electronic instrument includes indeﬁnite sustain,
crescendos from silence, harmonics on each piano string,
and new timbres which combine the warmth and resonance
of the acoustic piano with an ethereal purity often associ-
ated with electronic synthesis.
2. PREVIOUS WORK
Electromagnetic piano string actuation has been recently
explored by Bloland, Berdahl et al. [1, 3]. Their system, the
Electromagnetically-Prepared Piano, uses twelve solenoid
magnets placed over selected strings. Signals are generated
in Max/MSP and can include periodic waveforms, ﬁltered
noise, and prerecorded samples. The resulting sounds are
quite compelling, blending the warmth of the piano with a
uniquely electronic purity.
Electronic actuation has also been applied to the electric
guitar, both in commercial technologies such as the EBow
[9] and using more comprehensive feedback approaches [2].
Work by Boutin and Besnainou explores active control of a
violin bridge [5] and xylophone bar [4]. Stable active con-
trol of acoustic mechanisms requires very low processing
latency, and is often accomplished using specialized digital
signal processing hardware. Dozio and Mantegazza [7] pro-
vide guidance for the implementation of real-time control
systems using general-purpose microprocessors; Lee et al.
[10] present one such system achieving latency as low as
24µs at a 40kHz sampling rate.
Separately, keyboard controllers have been developed which
report the continuous position of each key. Freed and Avizie-
nis [8] demonstrate a keyboard capable of continuous key
position sensing, including high-speed communication with
a host computer to transmit high-bandwidth position data.
A keyboard controller by Moog [12] also permits horizontal
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
217
motion of each key and touch sensitivity on the key surface.
These interfaces build on established keyboard technique to
allow control of more complex musical processes.
2.1 Comparison with Previous Work
Our electromagnetic actuation system operates on the
same principle as the Electromagnetically-Prepared Piano
[1], but we present an implementation which allows cover-
age of the entire range of the piano at reasonable cost. We
also employ a feedback-based control strategy that can be
implemented without the requirement of ultra low latency
or separate pickups for each string. In comparison to eﬀorts
which focus on actuation or keyboard sensing in isolation,
we seek to tightly integrate both elements deeply into the pi-
ano, fusing traditional (hammer-actuated) piano technique
and electronic control into a single augmented instrument
that acts as a natural extension of the acoustic piano.
3. ELECTROMAGNETIC ACTUATION
The design of the actuator system is explained in detail
in an article currently in press [11]. The major features of
the hardware and software design are outlined below.
3.1 Hardware Design
Figure
1: The magnetic resonator piano. Top: com-
plete system. Top inset: electromagnetic actuators
above the strings. Bottom: Brackets holding actu-
ators for four octaves of strings.
Figure 1 shows a picture of the electromagnetic actuation
system, which can be installed in any acoustic grand piano
without modiﬁcation to the instrument. A block diagram
is shown in Figure 2. Actuation works on the principle of
ferromagnetic attraction, whose application to piano strings
is detailed in [1]. One custom-wound solenoid electromag-
net is used for each note of the piano, up to 88 notes total
(48 in the current prototype). Actuators are suspended
above the string by an aluminum bracket which rests on
the steel beams of the piano frame. Though the actuators
must initially be adjusted to the speciﬁc geometry of a pi-
ano, removal and reinstallation are as simple as lifting and
replacing the aluminum brackets.
Each actuator is driven by a dedicated ampliﬁer opti-
mized for low cost and parts count. Ampliﬁer input signals
are generated by computer, but it would be prohibitively
expensive to use a separate DAC channel for each note of
the piano. Instead, each ampliﬁer input is attached to a 16-
channel multiplexer which dynamically selects an available
DAC channel. A microcontroller maintains a mapping from
DAC channels to ampliﬁers, receiving MIDI Control Change
messages to make and break connections. In this way, 88
actuators can be covered using an inexpensive commercial
audio interface, with the maximum polyphony determined
by the number of DAC channels.
3.2 Signal Processing
The strongest tones are obtained when the actuator wave-
form remains locked in phase to the motion of the string.
On the other hand, recording the motion of each string faces
several obstacles, including EM interference from the elec-
tromagnets and substantial digital buﬀering delays which
make precise feedback control impossible1.
We have developed an intermediate approach which uses
a single piezo pickup on the piano soundboard to record
the sum of all string vibrations. Bandpass ﬁlters isolate
the fundamental frequency of each note (or, optionally, the
ﬁrst several harmonics). These ﬁltered signals drive phase-
locked loops which synthesize new waveforms that remain
in phase with the ﬁltered signal (Figure 3). Mechanical de-
lays and digital buﬀering produce a phase lag between the
motion of the string at the point of its interaction with the
actuator and the pickup signal. This lag is unknown but
time-invariant; therefore, the PLL includes an adjustable
phase oﬀset ∆ φ, calibrated by ear, which allows the ac-
tuator signal to remain precisely locked in phase with the
motion of each string.
K 1 + !s
ss2+ 2"#ns + #n
2
High-Q bandpass Loop filter
VCO 1 VCO 2
to DAC
$%
vo1 vo2
%f
fcenter
vadc %ivi2"#ns
Figure
3: Input ﬁlter and PLL system for one active
note.
3.3 Measurements
A piano string can be induced to vibration at any of
its harmonics (and very weakly in between), with response
falling oﬀ with increasing frequency due to actuator induc-
tance and mechanical losses. Figure 4 compares the am-
plitude of electromagnetic and hammer-actuated tones on
middle C (C4). Electronically-actuated tones show compa-
rable amplitude to standard piano notes, but with a slower
1Deplo
ying the ultra-low latency feedback systems of Sec-
tion 2 on a scale to cover the entire piano would face sub-
stantial hurdles in cost and complexity.
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
218
PLL
!"1
ADC
Piezopickup
(soundboard)
BPF
f1
PLL
!"15
BPF
f15
.......
DAC
....
....
mux mux
...
Note Controller
f1 f15f2 f3
.....
MIDI
MCU
Atmel AVR
ATtiny2313
Computer
shift reg.
Vdac1, ..., 15
shift reg.
ctrl1
ctrl2
ctrl1 ctrl2 ctrl3 ctrl4
(4 bits each)
Vin1
. . .
Iout1
Vin2
Iout2
Driver
Coils
...
... ..
.
1 global input maximum 15 active notes up to 88 output channels
(over strings)
Level Shifters
....
Vshift1, ..., 15
Figure 2: Block diagram of the magnetic resonator piano.
attack time and extended sustain 2. Figure 4 also shows
that the use of feedback produces stronger, more consistent
tones.
Musically speaking, electromagnetic tones exhibit a pure,
ethereal tone quality that remains mellow even at loud dy-
namics. The musical qualities reﬂect their spectral content
(Figure 5) which, in comparison to the piano, emphasizes
the fundamental frequency but contains less energy in the
higher partials. Figure 5 shows that a variety of spectra
(and correspondingly, a variety of timbres) can be generated
by varying the harmonic content of the actuator waveform,
though limited high-frequency performance of the electro-
magnets makes replication of brighter piano timbres diﬃ-
cult. Future work will explore ampliﬁer and electromagnet
designs with stronger high-frequency performance.
0 5 10 15
ï55
ï50
ï45
ï40
ï35
ï30
ï25
ï20
ï15
ï10
ï5
0
Time (sec)
Amplitude (dB)
Electromagnetic actuation versus traditional piano on middle C (C4)
 
 
Actuator with feedback
Actuator without feedback
Piano
Figure 4: Amplitude of electromagnetic actuation
on middle C (C4) versus a piano note played ap-
proximately forte. Actuator tones last 5 seconds.
3.4 Control Parameters
The actuator system is not merely a source of new sounds.
Its principal goal is to provide the performer with a means
of continuously shaping the sound of the piano. It is impor-
tant, then, to highlight the controllable parameters of each
actuator:
2Figure 4 shows the result of driving the string at constant
amplitude. Arbitrary dynamic envelopes are possible by
varying the amplitude of the actuator signal.
100Hz 1kHz 10kHz
−80
−60
−40
−20
0
Frequency
Amplitude (dB)
Piano note, forte, after 1 second
100Hz 1kHz 10kHz
−80
−60
−40
−20
0
Frequency
Amplitude (dB)
Sine wave
100Hz 1kHz 10kHz
−80
−60
−40
−20
0
Frequency
Amplitude (dB)
Harmonics 3 and 5
100Hz 1kHz 10kHz
−80
−60
−40
−20
0
Frequency
Amplitude (dB)
White noise
Figure 5: Spectra for actuation with several wave-
forms compared with a standard piano note, C4.
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
219
• Amplitude (and amplitude envelope)
• Frequency (relative to string fundamental)
• Phase (relative to existing string motion)
• Spectrum (harmonic content plus noise sources)
Together, these parameters deﬁne themusical vocabulary
of the instrument, including dynamics, articulation, timbre
and tone quality. Correlations between acoustic features
and subjective musical attributes are often diﬃcult to quan-
tify, and are nearly always more subtle than simple one-to-
one mappings (e.g. amplitude to dynamic, frequency to
pitch, etc.). Ultimately, the human performer should have
the ability to shape the instrument’s acoustic parameters to
his or her taste. To that end, we have created a new per-
formance interface which intuitively extends the keyboard
to allow continuous expression.
4. CONTINUOUS KEYBOARD SENSING
Mechanically, the piano oﬀers very few dimensions of con-
trol: the only aspect of keyboard performance that aﬀects
the sound is the velocity with which a hammer strikes a
string. On the other hand, pianists describe their instru-
ment in far richer terms, discussing a wide palette of tone
colors and sometimes swearing by gestures that would seem
to have little acoustic relevance, including angle of approach
to the keyboard or force on the keys after note onset. We
hypothesize, then, that pianists transmit much more ex-
pressive data to the instrument than a simple onset-release
approach would reveal (or a MIDI controller would record).
Capturing this additional expressive data has exciting po-
tential to modulate the sound of the piano in a musically
intuitive manner.
4.1 Hardware Design
We have developed an interface which continuously records
key position on the acoustic piano using a modiﬁed Moog
Piano Bar [13]. The Piano Bar uses optical reﬂectance sen-
sors on each white key and interruption sensors on each
black key (Figure 6). Though it was developed as a MIDI
controller, internal pads on the circuit board provide access
to the continuous analog light levels for each key. 88 sen-
sors are multiplexed over 12 lines such that white keys can
be measured at a rate of 600Hz and black keys at 1.8kHz.
A digital signal provides a falling edge at the beginning of
each cycle of keys, allowing synchronized data capture.
Our data capture system uses two 6-channel, 12-bit ADCs
[15] attached to an Atmel AVR microcontroller [14] which
behaves as a USB audio device. Data is transmitted in a
raw, packed 12-bit format and decoded by the host com-
puter to extract the position of each key. The system is
calibrated after installation, recording minimum and max-
imum values on each key to compensate for variations in
sensitivity and mechanical sensor position.
4.2 Measurements
Figure 7 shows a short excerpt recorded on a Steinway D
grand piano with continuous key position sensing, demon-
strating several important points:
1. The sampling rate is suﬃcient to capture several points
during the short interval of a key press. MIDI velocity
can thus be calculated (as the Piano Bar does inter-
nally), but theshape of key press events can also be
measured, which may suggest speciﬁc types of perfor-
mance technique. Key release can be measured in a
similar manner. As an example, Figure 8 shows the
LEDphoto-
diode
piano key (white)
LEDphoto-
diode LEDphoto-
diode
piano key (black)
Figure 6: Disassembled view of Moog Piano Bar
showing optical sensors, and diagram of sensor op-
eration.
continuous velocity of each key for an excerpt of Fig-
ure 7.
2. Force on the keys after onset creates a compression
of the felt pads underneath the keyboard, resulting in
slight key displacement. In particular, the long note
(F4) in Figure 7 shows a decreasing force over the
course of the note.
3. Partial key-press gestures (either intentional or inad-
vertent) which do not create a sound are recorded.
4. Properties of the keyboard itself are revealed, includ-
ing mechanical ringing on key release resulting from
an underdamped system.
This sensor system can be used to study traditional pi-
ano technique at new levels of detail. Equally compelling,
though, is its ability to capture a range of extended key-
board gestures, each of which can be mapped to distinct
actuator behavior:
• Deliberate aftertouch and vibrato
• Pre-touch and partial key presses
• Very slow, controlled motion of each key
• Light sweeps across the keyboard
• Lifting and shaking keys between thumb and foreﬁn-
ger
Figure 9 shows an example of several of these gestures
performed on a single key.
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
220
p f p p f p
G = 55 5 B 5 = 55 5 B 5
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Time (seconds)
Key Position (1 = fully depressed)
Continuous Position of Four Keys: C4 (blue), D4 (red), E4 (green), F4 (black)
Figure
7: Continuous position of four keys for a
short musical phrase.
4.6 4.8 5 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8 6 6.2 6.4 6.6
ï2.5
ï2
ï1.5
ï1
ï0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
x 10
ï3
Time (seconds)
Key Velocity (positive = press)
Continuous Velocity of Four Keys: C4 (blue), D4 (red), E4 (green), F4 (black)
Figure
8: Continuous key velocity for excerpt of
previous ﬁgure.
5. MUSICAL IMPLICATIONS
The preceding sections demonstrate augmentation of both
interface and sound production aspects of the piano. To
create a truly expressive musical instrument, data from the
keyboard must be mapped in a meaningful way to parame-
ters of string actuation. The following sections discuss past
experiences and future directions.
5.1 Concert Performance
The magnetic resonator piano was used in a concert per-
formance November 2009 in Philadelphia, featuring music
composed for it by Andrew McPherson 3. Two pieces were
performed: Secrets of Antikythera, which was performed by
a single pianist on magnetic resonator piano, and d’Amore,
which employed pitch tracking on a viola soloist to selec-
tively induce vibrations in the piano strings, creating a res-
onant harmonic glow behind the viola.
This concert predated the continuous keyboard sensor.
Instead, in Secrets of Antikythera, two keyboards were used
to control the actuators: the piano keyboard with a Moog
Piano Bar and a secondary MIDI keyboard (see Figure 1),
which was used in situations where hammer action was
undesirable. Timbres and time-varying parameters were
programmed in advance and selected like MIDI programs.
Although this arrangement falls short of the goal of con-
tinuous performer control, the instrument was nonetheless
easily playable by the pianist, and the resulting sounds
blended naturally with both traditional piano and viola.
Electromagnetically-actuated sounds were particularly ef-
fective in quieter, sparser sections employing the pedal,
where the piano resonance could be explored without its
customary percussive character. [11] provides further re-
ﬂection on this concert.
5.2 Implications of Continuous Sensing
The continuous keyboard sensing described in Section 4
profoundly changes the performance experience. On nearly
every keyboard instrument, regardless of the dynamic level,
complete key presses are required to produce sound. Deriv-
ing performance data from subtle variations in key position
gives rise to a new technique based on light touch, freeing
the ﬁngers from fully engaging the comparably heavy me-
chanical lever system. Nonetheless, even small deﬂections
of the keys provide haptic feedback to the performer. Pas-
sages of great delicacy and rapidity can be played without
engaging the hammers, and it is straightforward to transi-
tion between light technique and standard piano playing.
3A
demonstration video can be found at: http://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=WDTaH_d8s8c
0 5 10 15 20
ï0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Time (seconds)
Key position (1 = fully depressed)
Position of key C4 responding to several extended keyboard gestures
Short, light taps Partial key ïpress tremolo Vibrato on depressed key Variable force aftertouch
Figure
9: Continuous position measurement of several extended keyboard gestures.
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
221
The secondary MIDI keyboard, when used, presents a
more traditional performance experience, since it is not
equipped with continuous sensing. (It would be possible, of
course, to use an enhanced controller like the Moog Multiply-
Touch-Sensitive Keyboard [12] in its place.) The controller
software seamlessly handles simultaneous performance on
both keyboards, the only constraint being the need to phys-
ically lift the piano dampers with the pedal in order to ef-
fectively use the upper keyboard.
5.3 Gesture-Sound Mapping
The potential for completely new keyboard techniques is
exciting, but we also aim to develop approaches which aug-
ment existing piano technique, building on the extensive
training of skilled pianists. Ongoing work explores map-
pings between gestural data and sound production. These
quantities are inherently coupled in acoustic instruments,
and maintaining the illusion of tight coupling is critical to
producing an expressive electronic instrument. Tight cou-
pling requires both low latency and design choices that align
with the performer’s physical intuition. For example, heavy
force on the keys should correlate with stronger sounds, vi-
brato actions should result in acoustic vibrato eﬀects, and
light key touches should produce soft, airy sounds.
We plan to explore these couplings in collaboration with
pianists. First, we intend to use continuous key sensing
to study traditional piano performance in greater detail,
identifying common physical gestures and their correlation
with the performer’s expressive intent. Second, we will use
lessons learned from this study to generate mappings from
sensor data to sound production that extend the possibili-
ties of the piano in an intuitive manner, soliciting feedback
from performers on the perceived expressivity of each choice
of mapping.
5.4 Final Remarks
The magnetic resonator piano opens up new creative op-
portunities for both pianists and composers by allowing con-
trol of the piano sound both within and across notes. De-
sign decisions were made with cost and setup eﬃciency in
mind, resulting in a system which is installable in any grand
piano and controllable with standard computer hardware.
We look forward to future collaborations with composers
and performers to fully explore the musical potential of this
instrument.
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This material is based upon work supported by the Na-
tional Science Foundation under Grant # 0937060 to the
Computing Research Association for the CIFellows Project.
7. REFERENCES
[1] E. Berdahl, S. Backer, and J. Smith. If I had a
hammer: Design and theory of an
electromagnetically-prepared piano. In Proc. ICMC
2005.
[2] E. Berdahl, G. Niemeyer, and J. Smith. Active
control of a vibrating string. In Proc. Acoustics ’08.
[3] P. Bloland. The electromagnetically-prepared piano
and its compositional implications. In Proc. ICMC
2007.
[4] H. Boutin and C. Besnainou. Physical parameters of
an oscillator changed by active control: Application
to a xylophone bar. InProc. DAFx 2008.
[5] H. Boutin and C. Besnainou. Physical parameters of
the violin bridge changed by active control. In Proc.
Acoustics ’08.
[6] E. Dolan. E. T. A. Hoﬀmann and the ethereal
technologies of “nature music”. Eighteenth-Century
Music, 5(1):7–26, 2008.
[7] L. Dozio and P. Mantegazza. General-purpose
processors for active vibro-acoustic control:
Discussion and experiences.Control Engineering
Practice, 15(2):163–176, 2007.
[8] A. Freed and R. Avizienis. A new music keyboard
featuring continuous key-position sensing and
high-speed communication options. InProc. ICMC
2000.
[9] G. Heet. String instrument vibration initiator and
sustainer. U.S. Pat. 4,075,921, 1978.
[10] N. Lee, E. Berdahl, G. Niemeyer, and J. O. Smith.
Practical implementation of low-latency DSP for
feedback control of sound. InProceedings of the
Acoustics ’08 Conference, Paris, France, 2008.
[11] A. McPherson. The magnetic resonator piano:
Electronic augmentation of an acoustic grand piano.
Journal of New Music Research. In press.
[12] R. A. Moog and T. L. Rhea. Evolution of the
keyboard interface: The B¨ osendorfer 290 SE
recording piano and the Moog
multiply-touch-sensitive keyboards. Computer Music
Journal, 14(2):52–60, Summer 1990.
[13] Piano Bar. Products of interest. Computer Music
Journal, 29(1):104–113, 2005.
[14] PJRC. Teensy USB development board.
http://www.pjrc.com/teensy/.
[15] Texas Instruments. 500kHz, 12-bit, 6-channel
simultaneous sampling analog-to-digital converter.
http://focus.ti.com/docs/prod/folders/print/
ads7864.html.
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
222