The ‘Interactive Music Awareness Program’ (IMAP)  
for Cochlear Implant Users 
 
 
Benjamin R. Oliver 
University of Southampton 
Department of Music, Highfield, 
Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK 
B.Oliver@soton.ac.uk 
 
Rachel M. van Besouw 
University of Southampton 
ISVR, Highfield, 
Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK 
rvb@isvr.soton.ac.uk 
 
David R. Nicholls 
University of Southampton 
Department of Music, Highfield, 
Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK 
D.R.Nicholls@soton.ac.uk 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
There is some evidence that structured training can benefit 
cochlear implant (CI) users’ appraisal of music as well as their 
music perception abilities. There are currently very limited 
music training resources available for CI users to explore. This 
demonstration will introduce delegates to the ‘Interactive Music 
Awareness Program ’ (IMAP) for cochlear implant users, which 
was developed in respons e to the need for a client -centered, 
structured, interactive, creative, open -ended, educational and 
challenging music (re)habilitation resource.  
 
Keywords 
music, coc hlear implants, perception, rehabilitation, auditory 
training, interactive learning, cli ent-centred software 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
CI technology has exceeded the early expectations of many 
with regard to providing severely or profoundly deaf people 
with the ability to perceive speech in quiet listening 
environments, yet current devices are poor at conveying the 
temporal and spectral cues that are necessary for the accurate 
perception of pitch and timbre, and have limited dynamic range 
[1]. Many CI users express a desire to hear music again but are 
dissatisfied by the sound quality of music as perceived through 
their implant [2, 3]. However, certain features of music are 
known to be more readily accessible to CI users; music with 
simple, repetitive structures and arr angements, a clear melody 
and strong beat is reported to be preferred post -implantation 
[2]. 
 There is some evidence to suggest that structur ed training can 
benefit CI users’ appraisal of music as well as their music 
perception abilities, particularly for melodic contour and timbre 
recognition [4, 5]. However, availability of au ral rehabilitation, 
especially for adults, is pat chy at best [6]. Computer -based 
perceptual training could provide a cost -effective solution, 
potentially leading to increased partici pation in music related 
activities and improvement in quality of life [7].  
 Evidence-based research into the efficacy and efficiency of 
musical (re)habilitation training is much needed [6 ]. In a review 
of issues relating to cochlear implantation, Zeng con cluded that 
there were no structured (re)habilitation programs and protocols 
for cochlear implant recipients that have been field -tested and 
proven effective [8]. Since this review a number of computer 
assisted training programs for speech perception have been 
produced or further developed from existing materials [5]; 
however, there remains a particular need for music training 
programs [9].  
 The need for a structured music (re)habilitation resource 
aimed at CI users was the incentive for the development of  the 
University of Southampton’s ‘Inter active Music Awareness 
Program’ (IMAP). This demonstration will introduce delegates 
to the full functionality of the IMAP, allowing them to: 
experiment with specifically designed Max/MSP standalone 
applications; watch  tutorial videos that introduce the bespok e 
software; and explore the HTML -based template used to 
structure the twenty-four half-hour sessions.  
2. AURAL (RE)HABILITATION 
PROGRAM DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 
A number of recommendations relating to the development of  
aural rehabilitation programs have proved pertinent to the 
development of the IMAP. Sweetow and Sabes [10] propose 
that training should be interactive, practical and accessible, 
difficult enough to maintain interest and yet easy enough to 
minimize frustra tion and fatigue. They also advocate the use of 
a bottom up and top down approach to facilitate enhancement 
of both peripheral auditory and central processing, stating that 
performance ‘must be measur able’ with ‘feedback provided on 
a [regular] basis’. With these criteria in mind the software 
applications developed for the IMAP employ accessible and 
clear GUI designs, and allow users with varying hearing 
experiences the opportunity for practical experimentation and 
interaction with music. Many of the applic ations provide 
immediate feedback to help users develop their own techniques 
and strategies for deciphering music through their CI.  
 In addition to Sweetow and Sabes’ recommendations, we 
propose that a client -centered approach is essential to develop 
successful aural rehabilitation programs and protocols. This 
proposal is by no means new; Hull states that ‘assessment of 
the impact of the hearing deficit on individual clients is … 
critical for formulating a viable aural rehabilitation program 
based on the client’s needs’ [11]. In order to actively involve CI 
users in the development of the IMAP a series of consultation 
meetings and music exploration workshops were organized. 
The workshops involved a range of different musical activities 
including: practical m usic making; listenin g exercises; 
educational talks; and trialing of Max/MSP standalone 
application prototypes. Feedback from the consultation sessions 
and workshops suggested that the music rehabilitation program 
should be interactive, creative, open -ended, educational and 
challenging.  
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted witho ut fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.  
NIME’12, May 21-23, 2012, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.  
Copyright remains with the author(s).  
 
3. IMAP STRUCTURE AND CONTENT 
The IMAP is housed on a USB stick that can be used at home 
on either Windows or Apple platforms. The user is guided 
through the twenty -four half -hour sessions by means of an 
HTML-template that lin ks to the Max/MSP standalone 
applications. The software applications are introduced by text -
based and video instructions, which provide tasks and 
challenges. Each session concludes with either an online 
listening task, which encourage users to discover music on 
YouTube, or a ‘Test -Yourself’ application focused on testing 
the users’ abilities in: pulse detection; melodic contour 
perception; or instrument differentiation. These ‘Test -Yourself’ 
applications allow users to track their musical development by 
providing scores out of ten. The main bulk of the IMAP, 
however, is concerned with the interaction with six key 
interactive standalone applications, which encourage users to 
create, manipulate and play with music in creative and open -
ended ways. The following  overview of these applications 
describes the functionality and purpose of the software:  
3.1 The Timbre Player 
‘The Timbre Player’ allows CI users to choose the melody and 
instrument they want to hear (from closed sets), with or without 
a rhythm track and with the ability to change the speed and 
pitch. The pitch controls are particularly important as they 
allow the user to find a pitch range that suits them. The 
melodies currently available are ‘God Save the Queen’, 
‘Somewhere over the Rainbow’ and a new melody , ‘Ben’s 
Tune’. ‘Ben’s Tune’ features large pitch jumps in order to try 
and stimulate different CI electrodes, affording the possibility 
of experiencing a more perceptible difference in pitch. A range 
of visual cues are provided to help decipher the melodic 
contour including: videos of the performers; a piano -roll; stave 
notation; and graphic representations of the sound (‘goat 
animation’ and a spectrogram). It is hoped that this software 
will help CI users to discover which instruments they can 
perceive better through their implant. 
3.2 The Tapsters 
‘The Pulse Tapster’ and ‘The Rhythm Tapster’ help users 
develop their sense of pulse and ability to replicate rhythms 
through challenging rhythm tasks. Rhythm is one of the most 
accessible aspects of music through a  CI, so it is hoped that 
rhythm-based activities will prove encouraging and motivating 
for users. The applications provide immediate feedback about 
how successfully the user is able to us e the QW ERTY 
keyboard to tap a  pulse of a musical extract or replicat e a short 
rhythmic pattern. It is hoped this software will lead to a 
tangible improvement in the user’s musical skills, and to further 
understanding of the accessibility of rhythmic structures.  
3.3 The N-Machines 
The ‘N-Machines’ are simple graphical mixers th at allow the 
user to control the instrumental/vocal mix, pitch and speed of  
songs. Artists currently featured include Philip Selway 
(Radiohead); Robin Grey;  Madelaine Hart;  and Blueswerver. It 
is hoped that allowing CI users to piece together the different  
instrumental/vocal lines will aid the appreciation of the music, 
assist in the understanding of how musical textures are 
constructed, and help users work out which particular 
combinations of instruments sound best.  
3.4 The AVP 
Many CI users have reported to us that they find backgroun d 
music in television program  and films distracting and  even 
annoying. ‘The AVP’ (Audio Visual Player)  allows CI users to 
work creatively by controlling and combining various video 
and audio fragments in order to see how the different pieces of 
music change the emotion, drama, sense of time or setting, or 
mood of short films. This software allows CI users to use music 
creatively and expressively, combining systematic and creative 
thinking to create something new.  
3.5 The ERM 
Some CI users avoid listening to music, or find it off -putting 
because they feel a pressure to be able to differentiate particular 
musical instruments or sounds, which can be rather difficult 
through a CI. ‘The ERM’ (Environmental Rhythm Machine) 
aims to alleviate  this pressure by allowing users to interact 
musically and playfully with everyday sounds; sounds that they 
will have most likely have become used to hearing through 
their CI already. This may help avoid the disappointment that 
can stem from finding it pro blematic to recognize traditional 
musical instruments.  ‘The ERM’ is a simple environmental 
sound drum machine, which encourages users to adapt preset 
rhythmic loops, and to compose new rhythmic structures. It 
allows CI users to take control of what they ar e hearing, and to 
work creatively with sound.  
4. THE FUTURE 
A controlled, randomi zed crossover trial of the IMAP is 
currently underway at the South of England Cochlear Implant 
Centre in the UK. Measures of music perception and 
appreciation at the beginning, h alf way through and end of the 
trial will be used establish the efficiency and efficacy of the 
materials. Following feedback from the trial the IMAP will be 
made available online in order to enable CI users worldwide to  
benefit from the program.  
5. REFERENCES 
[1] Looi, V. The effect of cochlear implantation on music 
perception. Otorinolaringol, 58 (2008), 169-190. 
[2] Gfeller, K., et al. Musical backgrounds, listening habits, 
and aesthetic enjoyment of adult cochlear implant 
recipients. J. Am. Acad. Audiol., 11 (2000), 390-406 
[3] Lassaletta, L., et al. Musical perception and enjoyment in 
post-lingual patients with cochlear implants. Acta 
Otorrinolaringol Esp., 59, 5 (2008), 228-234. 
[4] Gfeller, K. et al. Effects of training on timbre recognition 
and appraisal by postlingual ly deafened cochlear implant 
recipients. J. Am. Acad. Audiol. , 13, (2002), 132-145. 
[5] Fu, Q.-J.m and Galvin III, J.J. Perceptual learning and 
auditory training in cochlear implant recipients. Trends 
Amplif., 11, 3 (2007), 193-205. 
[6] Sweetow. R.W., and Palmer, C.V. Efficacy of individual 
auditory training in adults: A Systematic Review of the 
Evidence. J. Am. Acad. Audiol., 16 (2005), 494-504. 
[7] Boothroyd, A. Adult aural rehabilitation: what is it and 
does it work? Trends Amplif., 11, 2 (2007), 63-71. 
[8] Zeng, F-.G. Trends in cochlear implants. Trends Amplif., 
8, 1 (2004), 1-34. 
[9] Looi, V., She, J. Music perception of cochlear implant 
users: a questionnaire, and its implications for a music 
training program. Int. J. Audiol.,  49 (2010), 116-128. 
[10] Sweetow, R.W., and Sabes, J.H. Technologic advances in 
aural rehabilitation: applications and innovative methods 
of service delivery. Trends Amplif., 11, 2 (2007), 101-111. 
[11] Hull, R.H.: Aural Rehabilitation. Chapman & Hall, 
London (1992), 11.  
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This research project is supported by the UK Arts & 
Humanities Research Council grant no. AH/H039392/1.  