Ten-Hand Piano: A Networked Music Installation
Á lvaro Barbosa 
Research Center for Science and Technology of the Arts (CITAR)
Portuguese Catholic University – School of the Arts 
Rua Diogo Botelho 1327, 4169-005 Porto, Portugal 
+351 22 616 62 91
abarbosa@porto.ucp.pt
ABSTRACT
This paper presents the latest developments of the Public Sound 
Objects (PSOs) system, an experimental framework to implement 
and test new concepts for Networked Music. The project of a 
Public interactive installation using the PSOs system was 
commissioned in 2007 by Casa da Musica , the main concert hall 
space in Porto. It resulted in a distributed musical structure with 
up to ten interactive performance terminals distributed along the 
Casa da Musica ’s hallways, collectively controlling a shared 
acoustic piano. The installation allows the visitors to collaborate 
remotely with each other, within the building, using a software 
interface custom developed to facilitate collaborative music 
practices and with no requirements in terms previous knowledge 
of musical performance. 
Keywords
Network Music Instruments; Real-Time Collaborative 
Performance; Electronic Music Instruments; Behavioral Driven 
Interfaces; Algorithmic Composition; Public Music; Sound 
Objects;  
1. INTRODUCTION
The Public Sound Objects (PSOs) project consists of the 
development of a networked musical system, which is an 
experimental framework to implement and test new concepts for 
on-line music communication. It not only serves a musical 
purpose, but it also facilitates a straight-forward analysis of 
collective creation and the implications of remote communication 
in this process. 
The project was initiated in 2000 [1] [2] at the Music Technology 
Group (MTG) from the Pompeu Fabra University in Barcelona, 
and most developments since 2006 have been undertaken by the 
Research Center for Science and Technology of the Arts (CITAR) 
at the Portuguese Catholic University in Porto. 
The PSOs system approaches the idea of collaborative musical 
performances over a computer network as a Shared Sonic 
Environment aiming to go beyond the concept of simply using 
computer networks as a channel to connect performing spaces. It 
can run entirely over WWW, and its underlying communication 
protocol (Hypertext Transfer Protocol - HTTP), in order to 
perform over a regular Internet Connection and achieve the sense 
of a Public Acoustic Space where anonymous users can meet and 
be found performing in collective Sonic Art pieces. 
The system itself is an interface-decoupled Musical Instrument, in 
which a remote user interface and a sound processing engine 
reside with different hosts, given that it is possible to 
accommodate an extreme scenario where a user can access the 
synthesizer from any place in the world using a web browser. 
Specific software features were implemented in order to reduce 
the disruptive effects of network latency [3], such as dynamic 
adaptation of the musical tempo and dynamics to communication 
latency measured in real-time. 
In particular, the recent developments presented in this paper, 
result from a commission in 2007 of an Interactive Sonic Art 
Installation form Casa da Musica , the main concert hall space in 
Porto. The resulting Setup is a distributed musical structure with 
up to ten interactive performance terminals distributed along the 
Casa da Musica ’s hallways, collectively controlling a shared 
acoustic piano. 
It Includes: 
x The adaptation of the Original synthesizer (a Pure-Data  
[4] sound Engine) to a Yamaha Disklavier Piano [5] 
x Redesign of the interactive sound paradigm in order to 
constructively articulate multiple instances of 
experimental users to an ongoing musical piece in real 
time. 
x Introduction o an Ethersound [6] acoustic broadcast 
system for the clients musical feed-back 
x Design of a physical infrastructure, coherent with the 
Casa da Musica  a r c h i t e c t u r e ,  t o  s u p p o r t  t h e  c l i e n t  a n d  
server terminals. 
2. BACKGROUND TOPICS 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for pr ofit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on ser vers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME08, June 4-8, 2008, Genova, Italy 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
2.1 Sound Objects 
Community-driven creation, results in a holistic process, i.e., its 
properties cannot be determined or explained by the sum of its 
components alone [7]. A community of users involved in a 
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
9
creation process, through a Shared Sonic Environment, definitely 
constitutes a Whole in Holistic sense.  
According to Jan Smuts (1870-1950), the father of Holism 
Theory, the concept of a Whole implies its individual parts to be 
flexible and adjustable. It must be possible for the part to be 
different in the whole from what it is outside the whole. In 
different wholes a part must be different in each case from what it 
is in its separate state.
Furthermore, the whole must itself be an active factor or influence 
among individual parts, otherwise it is impossible to understand 
how the unity of a new pattern arises from its elements. Whole 
and parts mutually and reciprocally influence and modify each 
other.
Similarly, when questioning object’s behaviors in Physics it is 
often by looking for simple rules that it is possible to find the 
answers. Once found, these rules can often be scaled to describe 
and simulate the behavior of large systems in the Real World. 
This notion applies to the Acoustic Domains through the 
definition of Sound Objects as a relevant element of the music 
creation process by Pierre Schaeffer in the 1960’s. According to 
Schaeffer, a Sound Object is defined as: 
“Any sound phenomenon or event perceived as a coherent whole 
(…) regardless of its source or meaning ” (Schaeffer, P., 1966). 
Sound Object (I’object sonore), refers to an acoustical object for 
human perception and not a mathematical or electroacoustical 
object for synthesis. One can consider a sound object the smallest 
self-contained particle of a Soundscape [8]. Defining a universe of 
sound events by subsets of Sound Objects is a promising approach 
for content-processing and transmission of audio [9], and from a 
psychoacoustic and perceptual point of view it provides a very 
powerful paradigm to sculpt the symbolic value conveyed by a 
Soundscape.
In an artistic context the scope for the user’s personal 
interpretation is wider. Therefore such Sound Objects can have a 
much deeper symbolic value and represent more complex 
metaphors. Often there is no symbolic value in a sound, but once 
there is a variation in one of its fundamental parameters it might 
then convey a symbolic value.  
All these ideas about Sound Objects and the Holistic nature of 
community music are the basis for the main concept behind the 
Public Sound Objects System. In fact, in PSOs raw material 
provided for each user, to create his contribution to a shared 
musical piece, is a simple Sound Object. These Sound Objects, 
individually controlled, become part of a complex collective 
system in which several users can improvise simultaneously and 
concurrently. 
In the system a server-side real-time sound synthesis engine (a 
Disklavier Piano in the case of the Casa da Musica installation)
provides an interface to transform various parameters of a Sound 
Object, which enables users to add symbolic meaning to their 
performance.
2.2 About Networked Music 
In his Keynote Speech from ICMC 2003 Roger Dannenberg 
mentioned “Networked Music” as one of the promising research 
topics and at least four papers [2], [10] and [11] were centered on 
this topic, even though they were scattered over different panels, 
instead of one distinct session.
Since then the term Networked Music has become increasingly 
consensual in defining the area, and according to Jason Freeman’s 
definition [12]: it is about music practice situations where 
traditional aural and visual connections between participants are 
augmented, mediated or replaced by electronically-controlled 
connections.
In order to have a broad view over the scientific dissemination of 
Networked Music research I present some of the most significant  
Landmarks in the field over the last decade: 
2.2.1 Summits and Workshops 
The ANET Summit (August 20-24, 2004) 
The summit was organized by Stanford University’s Center for 
Computer Research in Music and Acoustics (CCRMA) and held 
at the Banff Center in Canada, was the first Workshop event 
addressing the topic of High quality Audio over Computer 
Networks. The guest lecturers were Chris Chafe, Jeremy 
Cooperstock, Theresa Leonard, Bob Moses and Wieslaw 
Woszczyk. A New edition of the ANET Summit is planed for 
April 2008 
The Networked Music Workshop at ICMC (September 4, 2005). 
This Workshop was held in Barcelona and resulted from 
experience in previous ICMCs, which called for the need to 
realize such an event. Guest Lecturers were: Álvaro Barbosa 
(Pompeu Fabra University, MTG), Scot Gresham-Lancaster 
(Cogswell College Sunnyvale, CA), Jason Freeman (Georgia 
Institute of Technology), Ross Bencina (Pompeu Fabra 
University, MTG). 
2.2.2 PhD Dissertations 
These are some relevant dissertations published on the topic: 
2002 Golo Föllmer “Making Music on the Net, social and 
aesthetic structures in participative music” [13]; 2002 Nathan 
Schuett “The Effects of Latency on Ensemble Performance” [14]; 
2003 Jörg Stelkens “Network Synthesizer” [15]; 2003 Gil 
Weinberg “Interconnected Musical Networks: Bringing 
Expression and Thoughtfulness to Collaborative Music” [16]; 
2006 Álvaro Barbosa “Displaced Soundscapes” [17] 
2.2.3 Journal Articles
There is a number of Survey and partial overview articles on the 
topic of Networked Music  [18], [19], [20] [21] and [22] however 
a special issue of the journal Organised Sound from 2005 [23], 
edited by Leigh Landy, specifically focused on the topic of 
Networked Music and includes many of the relevant references in 
this area. 
3. THE PSOs INSTALLATION 
Casa da Musica  i s  t h e  m a i n  c o n c e r t  v e n u e  i n  t h e  c i t y  o f  P o r t o ,  
and it has a strong activity in what concerns contemporary and 
experimental forms of Music. The commission for the Public 
Sound Objects Installation had the underlying idea of bringing 
music to the hallways of the house of music, so that the visitors 
could actually interact with it. 
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
10
Fig.1 Casa da Musica Building1
The final implementation consists of a Disklavier Piano controlled 
via MIDI by s server that simultaneously can be used as a 
terminal, located at the main foyer of Casa da Musica. This server 
accepts incoming control data generated by 10 client computers 
located in diverse points of the hallways of a scenic route of the 
building. Incoming data is transmitted over the building’s IP 
Network using Open Sound Control [24]. 
Fig. 2 The PSOs Server connected to the Disklavier Piano and 
two of the clients which remotely control the same Piano 
The sound generated at the Servers site conveys the overall 
performance of every user and is streamed back to each client 
using an ETHERSOUND [6] system, which produces latencies 
under 100 ms on the building’s LAN. 
Fig. 3 A PSOs Client with the ETHERSOUND Hub, Speakers 
and Keyboard concealed on the structure. 
All the computer hardware for the server and clients has been 
cloaked by a metal structure created in coherence with the 
building’s unique architecture (a project by Rem Koolhaas), so 
that the users only access a one key mouse and a screen, or in 
case of the server a touch screen. 
                                                                
1 I m a g e  S o u r c e  “ H o u s e  o f  M u s i c  O p e n i n g  D a y ”  W i k i p e d i a  C o m m o n s  
under the license GFDL (GNU Free Documentation License) 
3.1 The User Interface 
The graphical user interface is based on a bi-dimensional 
graphical metaphor of an ever-going bouncing ball enclosed in a 
square shape box. Each time the ball hits one of the walls a piano 
key is triggered by the server according to a pitch defined by the 
value of a stylized fader that frames the Box (each fader 
determines the pitch of a sound triggered in its adjacent wall). 
Fig. 4 PSOs Client interface showing the representation of 5 users 
Each of the clients actuating at a given moment are visually 
represented in real-time by grey balls while the user himself 
controls a distinctive orange ball. The user can also add a trail to 
his ball producing an arpeggio sound (or a chord if the trail 
extension is zero), given that the scale of notes each client can 
produce was anticipated to create a harmonic soundscape when 
different sound overlap in time. 
The PSOs system integrates several features to overcome 
Network Latency issues already published in [3]. Nonetheless, in 
this version a new Latency tolerance feature was implemented to 
improve the perceptive correlation between an impact and a 
triggered sound, using a simple sound panorama adjustment at the 
sound server and consequently adding consistent sound panning 
with the object’s behavior at the graphical user interface. 
't 2
Time't 1
't 3
R
L
t 1 t 2 t 3
Fig. 5 Representation of Impacts VS Triggered Sound with sound 
panorama adjustment in the presence of latency ('t)
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
11
The basic idea consists of only transmitting a sound object trough 
the Right Channel of the streamed Soundscape stereo mix, when a 
ball hits the right wall, transmitting only through the Left Channel 
when a ball hits the left wall and transmitting in booth channels 
(L+R) if the ball hits the top or bottom wall. 
Sound Panorama Adjustment adds an extra cue to perception in 
temporal order of triggered Sound Objects and respective 
correlation to ball impacts. 
4. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The PSOs Installation at  C a s a  d a  M u s i c a  allows a piano to be 
controlled by 10 instances simultaneously (Ten Hands!) in a 
coherent and constructive manner, which would hardly be 
possible to do in a traditional way. 
Even though the interface is radically different than the normal 
control paradigm of a piano it is based on the same fundamental 
musical facets (Rhythm, Pitch, Timbre and Dynamic) and 
therefore it is an engaging experience, since the users recognize a 
familiar result achieved trough a totally different way. 
The interface is simple enough to achieve a musical soundscape 
with zero learning time and without any previous musical practice 
experience, which made the system very accessible and popular 
for the average 500 daily visitors of the Casa da Musica. 
Controlling a popular acoustical instrument brings the users closer 
to the musical experience and in this sense we would like to 
further develop this system adding a pool of instruments to the 
piano, such as wind, string and percussion instruments controlled 
by Robotics. 
5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author would like to thank the people that collaborated in this 
project: Jorge Cardoso (UCP), Jorge Abade (UCP) and Paulo 
Maria Rodrigues (Casa da Musica). 
6. REFERENCES
[1] Barbosa, A. and Kaltenbrunner, M. Public Sound Objects: A shared 
musical space on the web.  2002.  IEEE Computer Society Press.  
Proceedings of International Conference on Web Delivering of 
Music (WEDELMUSIC 2002) - Darmstadt, Germany 
[2] Barbosa, A., Kaltenbrunner, M. and Geiger, G. Interface Decoupled 
Applications for Geographically Displaced Collaboration in Music.
2003.  Proceedings of the International Computer Music Conference 
(ICMC2003) 
[3] Barbosa, A., Cardoso, J. and Geiger, G. Network Latency Adaptive 
Tempo in the Public Sound Objects System.  2005.  Proceedings the 
International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression 
(NIME 2005); Vancouver, Canada.  
[4] Puckette, M. Pure Data.  269-272. 1996a.  International Computer 
Music Association.  Proceedings of the International Computer 
Music Conference, San Francisco (ICMC96) 
[5] Yamaha Disklavier Piano: 
http://www.yamaha.co.jp/english/product/piano/product/europe/dl/dl
.html  (Cunsulted 2008/01/30) 
[6] ETHERSOUND:
http://www.ethersound.com/ (Cunsulted 2008/01/30) 
[7] Smuts, J. Holism and Evolution.  1926.  Macmillan, London UK 
[8] Schaeffer, P., Traité des Objets Musicaux., Le Seuil, Paris, 1966 
[9] Amatriain, X. and Herrera, P. Transmitting Audio Content as Sound 
Objects.  15-6-2002.  Proceedings of the AES22 International 
Conference on Virtual, Synthetic and Entertainment Audio 
[10] Stelkens, J. peerSynth: A P2P Multi-User Software with new 
techniques for integrating latency in real time collaboration.  2003.  
Proceedings of the International Computer Music Conference 
(ICMC2003) 
[11] Obu, Y., Kato, T. and Yonekura, T. M.A.S.: A Protocol for a 
Musical Session in a Sound Field Where Synchronization between 
Musical Notes is no garanteed.  2003.  International Computer Music 
Association.  Proceedings of the International Computer Music 
Conference (ICMC2003), Singapore 
[12] Freeman, J. The Networked Music Workshop at ICMC 2005, 
Barcelona (September 4, 2005) 
[13] Föllmer, G. 2002 Making Music on the Net, social and aesthetic 
structures in participative music. Ph.D. Thesis, Martin Luther 
Universität Halle-Wittenberg – Germany 
[14] Schuett, N. 2002 The Effects of Latency on Ensemble Performance.
Ph.D. Thesis, Stanford University, California – USA 
[15] Stelkens, J. 2003 Network Synthesizer. Ph.D. Thesis,  Ludwig 
Maximilians Universität, München – Germany 
[16] Weinberg, G. 2003 Interconnected Musical Networks – Bringing 
Expression and Thoughtfulness to Collaborative Music Making.
Ph.D. Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Massachusetts 
– USA 
[17] Barbosa, A. 2006 Displaced Soundscapes: Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work for Music Applications. Ph.D. Thesis, Pompeu 
Fabra University, Barcelona – Spain 
[18] Sergi Jordà, S. 1999 Faust Music On Line (FMOL): An approach to 
Real-time Collective Composition on the Internet, Leonardo Music 
Journal, Volume 9, pp.5-12 
[19] Tanzi, D. 2001 Observations about Music and Decentralized 
Environments, Leonardo Music Journal, Volume 34, Issue 5, pp.431-
436
[20] Barbosa, A. 2003 Displaced Soundscapes: A Survey of Network 
Systems for Music and Sonic Art Creation, Leonardo Music Journal, 
Volume 13, Issue 1, pp.53-59 
[21] Weinberg, G. 2005 Interconnected Musical Networks: Toward a 
Theoretical Framework, Computer Music Journal, Vol. 29, Issue 2, 
pp.23-29 
[22] Traub, P. 2005 Sounding the Net: Recent Sonic Works for the 
Internet and Computer Networks, Contemporary Music Review, Vol. 
24, No. 6, December 2005, pp. 459 – 481 
[23] Landy, L. 2005 Organised Sound 10 (Issue 3), Cambridge University 
Press, U.K. (OS: ISSN: 1355-7718) 
[24] Wright, M. and Freed, A. 1997 Open Sound Control: A New 
Protocol for Communicating with Sound Synthesizers,  proceedings 
of the International Computer Music Conference
[25] Nella, M. J. Constraint Satisfaction and Debugging for 
Interactive User Interfaces. Ph.D. Thesis, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA, 1994. 
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
12