Digital Instruments and Players:  
Part I –  Efficiency and Apprenticeship 
 Sergi Jordà 
Music Technology Group, 
Audiovisual Institute, Pompeu Fabra 
University 
Ocata 1 
08003 Barcelona, Spain 
+34 93 542 21 04 
sergi.jorda@iua.upf.es 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
When envisag ing new digital instruments , designers do not 
have to limit themselves to their sonic capabilities (which can 
be absolutely any), not even to their algorithmic power; they 
must be also especially careful about the instruments’  
conceptual capabilities, to t he ways instruments impose or 
suggest to their players new ways of thinking, new ways of 
establishing relations, new ways of interacting, new ways of 
organizing time and textures; new ways, in short, of playing 
new musics. This article explores the dynamic relation that 
builds between the player and the instrument, introducing 
concepts such  as efficiency, apprenticeship and learning curve 
It aims at constructing a framework in which the possibilities 
and the diversity of music instruments as well as the 
possibilities and the expressive freedom of human music 
performers could start being evaluated. 
Keywords 
Musical instruments design, learning curve, apprenticeship , 
musical efficiency. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Music instruments are used to play and to produce music, 
transforming the actions of one or  more performers into sound. 
New digital instruments design is a quite broad subject, which 
includes highly technological areas (e.g. electronics and sensor 
technology, sound synthesis and processing techniqu es, 
computer progr amming…), human related disciplines 
(associated with psychology, ergonomics and many human -
computer interaction components) , plus all the possible 
connections between them (e.g. mapping techniques…) . Low-
level and focused research that tries to solve indep endent parts 
of the problem is clearly essential for any real progression in 
this field, but it is also clearly insufficient. Integral studies and 
approaches, which consider not only ergonomic but also 
psychological, philosophical and obviously musical issues, even 
if non-systematic by definition, are also needed; but the fact is 
that very few attempts are being made at studying the design of 
new musical instruments -tools for playing and making music - 
as a conceptual whole.  
2. WHERE ARE WE? 
New instruments p ossibilities are endless. Anything can be 
done and many experiments are being carried out. Yet, current 
situation and results can hardly be considered awesome. 
• The list of new instrument virtuosi and/or professional 
musicians who use them as their main ins trument is 
surprisingly small ( Michel Waisvisz , Laetitia Sonami, 
Nicolas Collins, Atau Tanaka, Richard Boulanger…).  
• Being that live electronics and laptop music is so 
widespread [ 5] it is symptomatic and frustrating that so 
many performers prefer to still rely on the mouse, or at the 
most, on generic and dull midi fader boxes. 
• Commercially available new instruments are scarce and 
hardly imaginative and groun d-breaking (e.g. Korg 
KAOSS Pad1). 
• A new standard electronic instrument is yet to arrive. 
In effect, not any recent electronic instrument has attained 
the reduced popularity of the Theremin or the Ondes 
Marthenot, invente d respectively in 1920 and 1928 [2] . 
Successful new instruments exist, but they are not digital, not 
even electronic. The latest winner,  the turntable, became a real 
musical instrument in the early eighties, when it started being 
played in a radically unorthodox and unexpected manner. It has 
since then developed its own musical culture, techniques and 
virtuosi [ 6][14][21]. The fact that so  many digital turntables 
simulators do already exist [1][15], some of them like Stanton’s 
Final Scratch2, even quite successful commercially, gives us as 
many clues on the turntable wealth, as it does on the new 
instruments design sterility. And if commerc ial success is a 
complex subject that we may better obviate, all the previous 
complaints can still be summarized in one critical sentence:  
Many new instruments are being invented. Too little striking 
music is being made with them. 
We need useful, playable , thought -provoking enjoyable 
instruments, capable of interesting, surprising, enjoyable music. 
How can we create these “good” instruments? What is a good 
music instrument, anyway? Are there instruments better than 
others? While it is true that each cultur e and epoch has praised 
several music instruments over others 3, some instruments are 
indeed more powerful, flexible or versatile than others. Some 
are vocationally ‘generic’ and others highly specialized. Some 
take years to master, while others can be play ed by amateurs or 
even by complete novices.  
3. WHAT IS A GOOD MUSICAL 
INSTRUMENT? 
At the opening of the  NIME02 conference in Dublin, 
keynote speaker Tod Machover launched several questions of 
                                                                 
1 http://www.korg.com 2 http://www.finalscratch.com 
3 If we consider Western culture for example, from Classical 
Greece to the XX th century, favoritism has switched several 
times between strings and winds for varied religious, 
philosophical or acoustical reasons. 
which I here retain two: “How do we create controls and 
interactions that feel inevitable to expert and amateur users?”, 
“how do we create interactive situations that stimulate rather 
than placate, leading the participant beyond the surface and into 
thoughtful consideration of rich, expressive, meaningful 
experiences?”. According to Machover, the last two decades 
have seen successful designs of controllers capable of virtuosity 
and subtlety, and also of controllers that “hook” novice users, 
but in this last case, very few systems have been nourishing as 
well, capable of encouraging deeper exploration and continued 
discovery and creativity [11]. And t his is a feeling shared by 
many computer music instrument designers and computer music 
performers. 
In this article we will try to define and study concepts such 
as efficiency, apprenticeship, learning curve, scalability, 
concepts all them that help to describe and identify the dynamic 
relation existing between the player and the instrument. We will 
not be able to give magic formulas on how to better attain 
certain assets, but we will discuss what these properties may be, 
how they can affect the relation between the player and the 
instrument, and what may constitute the essential  needs for 
different types of musicians.  
3.1 Nothing is perfect: Anything can get 
better (and worst!) 
Humans have been playing music for thousands of years, 
but sudden innovations in human performance, even in 
millenary experienced areas seem indeed possible. Good 
examples can be found on sports, by far the most advanced and 
sophisticated area concerned with human responsiveness and 
techniques: the crawl stroke swimming style and the Fosbury 
jumping are XIX th and  XXth centuries techniques, invented 
from scratch after millennia of humans swimming 4 and 
jumping! 
Acoustic musical instruments as we know them now are  
also the fruit of centuries or even millennia of evolution; they 
have settled into canonical forms. But as we will see , that does 
not necessarily imply that these instruments are perfect or that 
they all excel at whatever parameter we evaluate. 
4. INTRODUCING THE ODD QUARTET 
For the following discussion we will pick four instruments, 
the kazoo, the kalimba, the piano and the violin (an odd quartet 
for sure!), and try to figure out some of the aspects that make 
some instruments more enjoyable than others. 
4.1 Balance (Challenge, Frustration, 
Boredom…)  
Many traditional instruments are quite frustrating for the 
beginner. The violin, for instance, can hardly be taken as a toy 
(whereas even the piano could). Some instruments are definitely 
harder to play than others. Wind instruments, for instance, are 
frequently hard to blow; the absolute novice cannot produce 
any controllable sound (there are exceptions, such as the 
recorder family). Fretless string instruments are impossible, for 
a novice, to play in tune. And with fretted ones, if 
multistringed, the novice may have a hard way deciding what 
string to use between all the possible options, in order to obtain 
                                                                
 
4 The crawl stroke was in fact dev eloped around the turn of 
XIXth century by English and Australian swimmers who 
copied techniques used by native peoples in Australia and 
Ceylon. 
a desired pitch. Keyboard instruments seem more direct : they 
produce sound easily, and there is a bijective relat ion between 
pitches and keys. And while piano music can be the most 
complex music (and therefore the hardest to play) it can also be 
quite simple though, and an absolute non-musician can still 
improvise some beautiful piano music. 
Music instruments must st rike the right balance between 
challenge, frustration and boredom: devices that are too simple 
tend not to provide rich experiences, and devices that are too 
complex alienate the user before their richness can be extracted 
from them [10]. The kazoo is easy to master, but its possibilities 
are quickly exhausted. We should be able to design well 
balanced instruments that can appeal to both professionals and 
dilettanti; instruments that like the piano, can offer a low entry 
fee with no ceiling on virtuosity [7][25]. 
4.2 Playability, Progression and 
Learnability  
In our odd quartet, we will discard the violin because it 
needs a will of iron  (not the best feature for initiat ing digital 
instruments proselytism!). We also discard the kazoo because it 
cannot go that f ar. With the remaining two instruments things 
get more delicate. The piano definitely offers no ceiling on 
virtuosity, while a Westerner may lodge some doubts about the 
kalimba. But what happens during their learning path? An  
absolute non-musician can stil l improvise some beautiful piano 
music, we argued, but still, the piano is a really intimidating 
instrument and the kalimba is no t [8] . At the risk of sounding 
too hazardous I will suggest that, at least at their first stage, the 
kalimba is a more efficient instrument than the piano. 
4.3 The Learning Curve 
The learning curve is a widespread concept, systematically 
used in all areas that involve any aspect of apprenticeship, and 
vaguely interpreted as the graphical representation of the 
progress in learning. The  term is also widely used in music 
education and in new controllers studies ( improve the learning 
curve, steeper learning curve, better learning curve…)  e.g. 
[16][17][23][24]. But was does “learning curve” exactly mean? 
Is there a way of measuring it? 
Learning curve
: A graph showing some measure of the cost 
of performing some action against the number of times it has 
been performed. The term probably entered engineering via the 
aircraft industry in the 1930s, where it was used to describe 
plots showing the cost of making some particular design of 
aeroplane against the number of units made.  The term is also 
used in psychology to mean a graph showing some measure of 
something learned against the number of trials. The psychology 
graphs normally slope upwards whereas the manufacturing 
ones normally slope downward but they are both usually steep 
to start with and then level out.  Marketroids often misuse the 
term to mean the amount of time it tak es to learn to use 
something ("reduce the learning curve") or the ease of learning 
it ("easy learning curve"). The phrase "steep learning curve" is 
sometimes used incorrectly to mean "hard to learn" whereas of 
course it implies rapid learning. (From hyperdictionary5). 
This definition does not fit too well within our musical 
scheme. First because we do not want to evaluate the cost of a 
given fixed action, as we intuitively assume that as the learning 
curve evolves, the musical actions undertaken can be more and 
                                                                
 
5 Hyperdictionary: http://www.hyperdictionary.com/ 
 
more ambitious. Second, even if we consider ed variable, 
increasingly complex actions, how could we evaluate their cost? 
Since we are considering real -time scheduled activities, these 
can hardly be measured in time (i.e. the time it takes to 
accomplish the task), as the common practice is.  
In a musical context, Levitin [10] describes the learning 
curve as the amount of time it takes to a novice to gain enough 
skill with an instrument so the experience of playing it becomes 
rewarding. Essential as it is, this concept does obviously not 
define a curve but a (very important) point of  this curve, we 
could call the ‘rewarding point’. Wanderley and Orio [24] when 
studying the usability of different controllers, define learnability 
as the time needed to learn how to control a performance with a 
given controller. A time, they suggest, longer than ten years for 
most traditional instruments [9]. This statement defines 
therefore another important point of the curve that we could call 
the ‘mastering point’.  
We intuitively grasp the learning curve concept; we know it 
can tell us a lot of information about the relation between a 
player and an instrument, on how the relation  starts and 
evolves, but we do not know how to clearly define this concept, 
much less how to eva luate it. Could we, in order to compare 
different instruments, compare their learning curves? We can 
compare their learning curves shapes and tendencies, but we 
cannot evaluate their asymptotes or their inflexion points since 
we do not know the ordinates absolute value s, not even what 
they represent.  A serious attempt at defining the music 
instruments learning curve concept falls outside the pretension 
of this article, but that will not dismiss us from trying to manage 
the concept more intuitively.  
The piano has a steeper (i.e. better!) learning curve that the 
violin. The kalimba has an even steeper learning curve, 
although its asymptote may remain lower. The learning curve of 
the kazoo is almost a straight horizontal line, very low when 
compared to the other three asymptotes (since the abscissa of its 
‘mastering point’  is very close to the time origin , and the 
ordinate is also close to cero given the reduced capabilities of 
the instrument). All these approximate criteria are suggested in 
Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1. Approximate learning curve for the (a) kazoo, (b) 
kalimba, (c) piano and (d) violin, within a period of 10 years. 
 
5. EFFICIENCY OF A MUSIC 
INSTRUMENT 
We ended up section 4.2 claiming that the kalimba could be 
considered a more efficient instrument than th e piano, without 
saying a word about what we should consider by efficiency of a 
music instrument. In engineering, the te rm ‘efficiency’  is 
commonly understood as the ratio of useful energy output to 
energy input. Timoshenko and Young [ 22] define for exampl e 
the efficiency of a machine , as the ratio of the useful work 
performed to the total energy expended.  
Input
OutputEfficiency =
 
Macleod el al . [ 12] studied  efficiency in a Human -
Computer-Interaction context (HCI), affirming that in a system 
in which a human i s interacting with a computer, the 
effectiveness with which the user and the computer working 
together successfully complete a task, is a measure of the useful 
work performed, or the output. The nature of the output being 
in this case quite different from the input, no adimensional ratio 
is possible . According to the authors, this does not imply 
however that we are not able to express the efficiency of task 
performance numerically; it simply means that efficiency 
measures will be now expressed in some units. After which they 
quantify the amount of effort input from a user's viewpoint, as 
the mental/physical effort required to complete it: 
Effort
essEffectiveniencyHumanEffic =
 
Our context is not that different. We will start with a  quite 
similar and simple quotient (with quit e fuzzy terms , we must 
admit!) that will allow us to roughly estimate the efficiency of a 
music instrument according to the following ratio: 
tyutComplexiControlInp
ityputComplexMusicalOutiencyumentEfficMusicInstr =
 
The ‘Musical output complexity ’ of a music instrument 
depends on all its available sound aspe cts and variability 
properties; it should include  for example, both the microsonic 
richness of the violin and the mid-sonic richness of the piano , 
plus all the potential macrostructural complexities that could be 
managed by any kind of intelligent instrument. This term can be 
related to the ‘musical range ’ defined by Blaine and Fels [3] 
and to the ‘expressive range ’ described by Settel and Lippe 
[19].  
The ‘Control input complexity’, depends on factors like the 
degrees of freedom of control, the correlation between these 
controls and the convenience of the applied mapping. It could 
also be linked to Orio [13] ‘explorability’, which is defined as 
the number of different gestures and gestural nuances that can 
be applied and rec ognized, and which relates  to cont roller 
features such as precision and range and also to the mapping 
strategy. 
Under different names and with slightly diverse approaches, 
both concepts are clearly being studied. In particular, a 
thorough understanding of the control input complexity would  
lead us to areas associated with engineering psychology, closely 
related to the work of Rubine [ 18] or Wanderley [24] and other 
researchers, and completely out of the scope of this exposition. 
The point is that the idea of ‘music instrument efficiency’ -a 
term that to our knowledge, has never been used outside of the 
acoustic domain - as vague as it still remains, could constitute, 
when plotted vs. studying or practicing time, a better -than-
nothing first approximation for describing the learning curve.  
As a performer learns to play an instrument, the attainable 
output complexity increases (while staying below the 
theoretically limited maximum complexity the instrument is 
capable of outputting). Meantime, control complexity can also 
augment, which explains why after a certain period of time, 
efficiency does not necessarily follow a clear ascending curve. 
It happens in fact, that after a long period of studying (e.g. 10 
years), the input cost needed for maintaining a high-valued 
output becomes so elevated that m any professionals -to-be 
decide to abandon their instrument. This new approach to 
efficiency will also constitute an essential guideline for the 
remainder of this exposition. 
5.1 Playing [with] Music? 
Bongers and Wanderley among others, describe interaction  
in sound installations as a context where one or more persons’ 
actions are sensed to provide input values for an audio 
generating system. They state that since users do not know 
precisely how to interact and that no special skills are required, 
the primary goal of the interaction is not necessarily the 
expression of some information [4][24]. While these conditions 
are generally true, we should not forget the cases in which 
novice users are allowed to take more time to investigate and to 
learn. Interactive hardware-based music toys as well as software 
music games, either off-line or on-line, could perfectly illustrate 
this category. 
In ancient Greece, the kithara was usually played by 
professional musicians as it required some kind of 
exhibitionism and virtu osity that could be considered vulgar 
and not adequate for free -born men. The lyra instead, was 
commonly played by amateurs, and was, according to Plato, a 
well suited instrument for free citizen [26]. Before the advent of 
the radio and recorded music, fam ilies who could afford it, 
tended to have an instrument at home (often a piano) and some 
of the family members were enough talented to become 
‘animated interactive CD players’ every evening.  
Considering that the best way to understand and appreciate 
any d iscipline, whether artistic or not, and music is no 
exception, is by doing and being part of it, we do seriously need 
more efficient instruments in which the basic principles of 
operation are easy to deduce, while, at the same time, 
sophisticated expressio ns are possible and mastery is 
progressively attainable. 
5.2 The Art of Making Music Made Easy (?) 
It's true, making music is an Art, traditionally demanding 
years of study and practice to be successful. -- until now! Enter 
the new Suzuki Omnicord. If you can read this text, you can 
play the Omnicord, and play it well. There's no need for lessons 
or years of study to play and sing your favorite songs right 
now! Just press a chord button and strum the SonicStrings. It's 
that easy. (from Suzuki’s Omnicord publicity6) 
Is this what we are talking about? Is it there where we are 
willing to go? Computer aid interactive music systems can have 
many applications; each of them perfectly licit and with its own 
place in the market, but it is not the aim of this article to 
trivialize creation. To insist on this essential point and to try to 
make it clearer, let’s augment our odd quartet with a fifth 
member, the CD player. It is an instrument very simple to use, 
yet capable of all the imaginable music variety and complexity; 
an instrument that allows everyone to play Répons as effectively 
as Boulez “playing” it with the Ensemble Intercontemporain 7. 
According to our previous formula, the CD player is probably 
the most efficient instrument we can imagine! 
The CD player example cl early parodies the [non -at-
all]interactive music system situation. Satirical as it may sound, 
this tricky illusion is used indeed in many of the current 
interactive sound installations : seeking to guarantee a complex 
or predefined musical output, many of t hese installations do not 
                                                                
 
6 http://www.suzukimusic.co.uk/suzuki_omnichord.htm 
7Répons, Pierre Boulez and the Ensemble Intercontemporain 
DG 457 605 2, 1999.  
give to their interactors more than a couple of bits to play with 8. 
We could add that this is not only frequent in sound or music 
installations; faked or useless interactivity is the blot of 
contemporary Interactive Arts! 
To penal ize these poorly interactive situations we will 
introduce into our formula an additional term, we will call 
‘PerformerFreedom’, in such a way that when th is 
‘PerformerFreedom’ tends to zero so does ‘Efficiency’; a n 
ideological correction that destroys the illusory potential of the 
Omnicord or of the CD player. 
tyutComplexiControlInp
reedomPerformerFytComplexitMusicOutpuEfficMusicInstr correct
×=
 
How could this performer freedom be evaluated? Once the 
CD is on the trail, the regular user does not have so many 
options: zapping tracks, fast -forward listening, volume 
modifications…  In general, w e can mainly distinguish between 
two primary types of freedom: (1) what the performer can do, 
the ways s/he can express and communicate with the 
instrument, which we could define as freedom of movement and 
(2) what the performer , by means of these actions,  can ask the 
instrument to do , which could be summarized as freedom of 
choice..  
hoicePerfFreedCovementPerfFreedMreedomPerformerF
×=  
The ‘performer freedom of movement’ is directly related to 
the performer’s output potential, which depends on the degrees 
of freedom available to the performer and the range of each of 
these degrees. Its evaluation could probably be quite simple, 
based only in information theory concepts [20 ], since it does 
not rely on the ergonomy of the controls or on the mapping 
applied to them. 
The ‘performer freedom of choice’ may be more difficult to 
evaluate. It obviously relates with the performer not being the 
instrument’s slave; with the possibilities the performer has to 
affect the instrument’s output. A good instrument should not 
impose its music to its player. A good instrument should not be 
able to produce only good music! (What is good music 
anyway?) A good instrument should also be able to produce 
“terribly bad” music, either at the player’s will or at the player’s 
misuse9. 
Both typ es of freedom seem essential for an instrument to 
appeal to professional musicians as well as to complete novices, 
and for allowing performers to play music and not only to play 
with music . Because the performer freedom of movement  is 
probably too correlat ed, or even implicitly included in  the 
control input complexity  that appears on the denominator, in 
                                                                
 
8 That does not prohibit the CD player from becoming  a 
wonderful musi c instrument , when played by imaginative 
musicians such as Yasunao Tone ( e.g. Solo for Wounded CD , 
CD Audio , Tzadik #7212 , 1997 ) or Nicolas Collins ( e.g. It 
Was a Dark and Stormy Night, CD Audio , Trace Elements, 
1992). The same could be said of the Suzuki O mnicord, an 
incredible surprise when played by the  German improviser 
Joker Nies ( The Art of Circuit Bending, 
http://www.klangbureau.de/ cb_E.html). 
9 ‘Misuse’ should not be inter preted here with ideological, 
moral or esthetical connotations. What we suggest is that, 
only when a performer is capable of relating unwanted results 
(effects) with the actions taken (causes), this performer will 
be able to learn and to effectively progress. 
further studies we will co ncentrate in the term freedom of 
choice, trying to  refine it by  seeking deeper into the musical 
output diversity of the instrument and on how the per former is 
able to control and affect this diversity. 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
This constitutes only a starting point. We have  just 
scratched possible ways to evaluate the performer’s freedom . 
We have introduced concepts such as efficiency and 
learnability, but have given no clues on how the goals could be 
better attained (e.g. how do we build more effici ent or learnable 
instruments?). We have not yet considered any time aspect 
(time responsiveness, latency, inertia…). All of these and other 
concepts will need to be studied much deeper.  
This article is an initial attempt at trying to study the 
dynamic relation that exists between a player and an instrument 
from new points of views, introducing some concepts that can 
be taken into account, and some questions that could be posed 
at the time of designing a new music instrument. Who are we 
designing the instrument for? Are we constructing a music 
instrument or a music toy? What kind of music should the 
instrument be able to play? Do we aim to construct an 
instrument that can appeal to a wide range of musicians, from 
the perfect novice to the professional? Are w e considering the 
different evolutionary steps of this possible relation? Are we 
guarantying the minimal elements that can make this instrument 
enjoyable from the beginning and potentially learnable? And 
one final reminder: music is, at the end, the final judge. Any 
instrument is worth the music it makes. 
7. REFERENCES 
[1] Andersen, T.H. (2003). Mixxx: Towards Novel DJ 
Interfaces. Proceedings of the NIME International 
Conference (NIME-03), 30-35. 
[2] Battier, M. (2000). Electronic Music and Gesture, in 
Trends in Gestural Control of Music. Paris: Wanderley, 
M. M. Battier, M. eds. Ircam - Centre Pompidou, Paris. 
[3] Blaine, T. and Fels, S. (2003). Contexts of Collaborative 
Musical Experiences. Proceedings of New Interfaces for 
Musical Expression (NIME-03). 
[4] Bongers, B. (2000), Physical Interfaces in the Electronic 
Arts –  Interaction Theory and Interfacing Techniques for 
Real-time Performance, in Trends in Gestural Control of 
Music. Paris: Wanderley, M. M. Battier, M. eds. Ircam - 
Centre Pompidou, Paris. 
[5] Cascone, K. (2000). The Aesthetics of Failure: Post-
Digital Tendencies in Contemporary Computer Music. 
Computer Music Journal, 24(4), 12-18. 
[6] Hansen, K.F. (2002). The basics of Scratching. Journal 
of New Music Research, Vol. 31, No. 4: 357-367.  
[7] Jordà, S. (2002). Improvising with Computers: A 
personal Survey (1989-2001). Journal of New Music 
Research, 31(1), 1-10.  
[8] Jordà, S. (2002). FMOL: Toward User-Friendly, 
Sophisticated New Musical Instruments. Computer 
Music Journal, Vol. 26, No.3. pp 23-39. 
[9] Lehman, A. C. (1997). The Adquisition of Expertise in 
Music: Efficiency of Deliberate Practice as a Moderating 
Variable in Accounting for Sub-Expert Performance. In 
I. Deliège and J. A. Sloboda, eds. Perception and 
Cognition of Music. Hove, east Sussex: Psycology Press, 
pp. 161-187. 
[10]  Levitin D.J. et al. (2002). Control parameters for 
musical instruments: a foundation for new mappings of 
gesture to sound. Organised Sound, 7(2), 171-189. 
[11] Machover, T. (2002). Instruments, Interactivity, and 
Inevitability. Proceedings of the NIME International 
Conference (NIME-02). 
[12] Macleod, M., Bowden, R. and Bevan, N. (1997). The 
MUSiC Performance Measurement Method. Behaviour 
and Information Technology, 16. 
[13] Orio. N. (1999). Metodi di Interfacciamento Utente-
Elboratore basati sull’Analisi del Signale Audio. PhD 
thesis, Universit`a di Padova. 
[14] Poschardt, U. (1995). Dj-Culture. London: Quartet 
Books Ltd. 
[15] Poupyrev, I, (2000). Augmented Groove: Collaborative 
Jamming in Augmented Reality. ACM SIGGRAPH 2000 
Conference Abstracts and Applications, p. 77. 
[16] Pressing, J. (1990). Cybernetic Issues in Interactive 
Performance Systems. Computer Music Journal, 14(1), 
12-25. 
[17] Rovan, J., M. M.Wanderley, S. Dubnov, and P. Depalle 
(1997). Instrumental Gestural Mapping Strategies as 
Expressivity Determinants in Computer Music 
Performance. Proceedings of the Kansei -The 
Technology of Emotion Workshop, Genova - Italy, Oct. 
1997. 
[18] Rubine, D. and McAvinney, P. (1990). “Programmable 
Finger-tracking Instrument Controllers.” Computer 
Music Journal, Vol. 14, No.1, pp.26 -42. 
[19] Settel, Z. and Lippe, C. (2003), Convolution Brother’s 
Instrument Design. Proceedings of the New Interfaces 
For Musical Expression Conference (NIME-03), pp. 
197-200. 
[20] Shannon, C. E.. A mathematical theory of 
communication. Bell Systems Technical Journal, 
27(3):379-423, July 1948. Continued 27(4):623-656, 
October 1948. 
[21] Shapiro, P. (1999). The Primer: Turntablism. The Wire, 
179: 40-45. 
[22] Timoshenko and Young (1937). Engineering Mechanics 
- Statics, McGraw-Hill. 
[23] Vertegaal, R., T. Ungvary, and M. Kieslinger. (1996). 
Towards a musician’s cockpit: transducers, feedback and 
musical function. Proc. Intl. Computer Music Conf. 
1996, 308– 311. 
[24] Wanderley, M. and Orio, N. (2002). Evaluation of Input 
Devices for Musical Expression: Borrowing Tools from 
HCI. Computer Music Journal, Vol. 26, No.3. pp 62 -76. 
[25] Wessel, D. and Wright, M. (2002). Problems and 
Prospects for Intimate Musical Control of Computers. 
Computer Music Journal 26(3): 11-22. 
[26] Winnington-Ingram, R. P. (1980). Greece, ancient. In 
The new Groove dictionary of music and musicians, ed. 
S. Sadie, vol. 7:659-72. London: Macmillan. 
 