Designing DMIs for Popular Music in the Brazilian
Northeast: Lessons Learned
Jeronimo Barbosa
IDMIL, CIRMMT,
McGill University
jeronimo.costa@mail.mcgill.ca
Filipe Calegario
IDMIL, CIRMMT,
McGill University
Centro de Informática - UFPE
fcac@cin.ufpe.br
João Tragtenberg
Centro de Informática - UFPE
jnt@cin.ufpe.br
Giordano Cabral
Centro de Informática - UFPE
grec@cin.ufpe.br
Geber Ramalho
Centro de Informática - UFPE
glr@cin.ufpe.br
Marcelo M. Wanderley
IDMIL, CIRMMT,
McGill University
marcelo.wanderley@mcgill.ca
ABSTRACT
Regarding the design of new DMIs, it is possible to ﬁt the
majority of projects into two main cases: those developed by
the academic research centers, which focus on North Ameri-
can and European contemporary classical and experimental
music; and the DIY projects, in which the luthier also plays
the roles of performer and/or composer. In both cases, the
design process is not focused on creating DMIs for a com-
munity with a particular culture - with established instru-
ments, repertoire and playing styles - outside European and
North American traditions. This challenge motivated our
research. In this paper, we discuss lessons learned during an
one-year project called “Batebit”. Our approach was based
on Design Thinking methodology, comprising cycles of in-
spiration, ideation and implementation. It resulted in two
new DMIs developed collaboratively with musicians from
the Brazilian Northeast.
Author Keywords
Practice-based research approaches/methods/criticism; Ex-
periences with novel interfaces in live performance and com-
position; Musicianship of new musical interfaces; Novel con-
trollers and interfaces for musical expression.
ACM Classiﬁcation
H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation] User Inter-
faces —Prototyping; H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Pre-
sentation] User Interfaces — User-centered design; H.5.5
[Information Interfaces and Presentation] Sound and Music
Computing.
1. INTRODUCTION
Much has been discussed regarding the design of new inter-
faces for musical expression, also known as Digital Lutherie [9].
The approaches are generally idiosyncratic and most of them
can be categorized into two main groups: One group com-
prises the projects happening on academic research centers,
concentrated in Europe, US and Canada, whose culture in-
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’15,May 31-June 3, 2015, Louisiana State Univ., Baton Rouge, LA.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
ﬂuences the associated aesthetics and the way the new in-
struments are used (mostly on speciﬁc contexts of European
and North American contemporary classical and/or experi-
mental music). Another group is based on DIY projects, in
which the DMIs are generally created for personal use, and
the roles of luthier, performer and/or composer are blended.
Figure 1: The Pandiv´ a and the Giromin
In both cases, however, luthiers are not focused on cre-
ating DMIs to communities that have their own tradition,
outside Europe and North America. We believe that these
communities o↵er interesting challenges for Digital Lutherie
because they have established: a) instruments, each one
with unique playing styles; b) repertoire; c) gestures and
accessories; d) recognized virtuoso musicians in the com-
munity, who are not often familiar with technology. Con-
sidering these points during the design might play a crucial
role on the acceptance of a DMI by these communities.
One such community can be found in Pernambuco, Brazil.
Musical movements such as the Mangue Beat [14] illustrate
the potential Pernambuco has to fuse foreign techniques and
aesthetics to local tradition, generating innovative mentali-
ties, rhythms and genres, which are ultimately incorporated
into its own identity.
How can we create DMIs to speciﬁc communities like
this one? This challenge motivates our research entitled
‘Batebit’1. We believe that this work may help inducing
the emergence of new technologies and musical aesthetics.
Our approach to Digital Lutherie was based on Design
Thinking methodology [2]. This allowed us to develop two
new DMIs (shown in Figure 1) from continuous iterations
working with the popular music community from Pernam-
buco. In this paper, we discuss: a) our motivation and re-
lated work; b) the research approach we adopted; c) an eval-
uation of the results; d) the main lessons we have learned.
1http://batebit.cc
277
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
In the context of this research, we use the term “popu-
lar music” to denote all kinds of music that: a) are outside
the scope of classical music (including contemporary) and
experimental music from Europe and North America; and
b) have roots in popular culture (non-classical). Thus, we
consider “popular music” genres such as ‘samba’, ‘frevo’,
‘maracatu’, ‘ciranda’, ‘coco’, ‘electronic’, ‘rock’, ‘folk mu-
sic’, etc. On the other hand, genres such as ‘noise music’,
‘electroacoustic music’, ‘spectral music’, ‘art sound’, among
others, are outside the scope of this research.
2. CONTEXT
In literature, we can ﬁnd several approaches towards Digital
Lutherie. Overall, these approaches are idiosyncratic and
there is no consensus on how the DMI design process should
be conducted. We can ﬁnd among them both common and
divergent characteristics.
The series of articles published by Perry Cook is an ex-
ample [4, 5]. Here, the author reﬂects about his own experi-
ence and presents some guidelines for creating new musical
controllers. For Cook, the area “proceeds as more art than
science, and possibly this is the only way that it can be
done” [4]. Similar approaches, all based on trial and er-
ror and with little consistency between one another, can be
found in literature [1, 9, 6, 7, 13].
A more general alternative approach is presented in the
book “New Digital Musical Instruments: Control and In-
teraction Beyond the Keyboard” [12]. Here, a theoretical
framework covers di↵erent views under common vocabulary
(i.e., the notion of DMIs and mapping inputs to outputs).
This resulted in a more technical view of the area, which
might reduce the weight of personal opinions.
In our case, we are interested on an approach that could
allow us to beneﬁt from the characteristics of popular music.
In academia, attempts to match popular music and Digi-
tal Lutherie are rare. One of the few cases is Ajay Kapur’s
PhD research [10]. Aiming to “digitize, analyze, preserve
and extend North Indian classical music performance”, Ka-
pur has developed musical controllers based on Indian tra-
ditional instruments, such as the Tabla and the Sitar. Re-
cently, Kapur took part in a similar research, which aimed
to extend traditional Korean music and dance [11]. As a re-
sult, three new DMIs were created. Other similar examples
can be found in the literature [3, 15].
Outside academia, there are cases of popular musicians
adopting DMIs. Examples include the Laser Harp, used
by artists like Jean Michael Jarre, the Reactable, used by
artists like Bjork and Coldplay.
In both cases, however, there is little (or no) discussion on
how the Digital Lutherie was conducted - with the exception
of Reactable [9].
3. METHODOLOGY
We used the ’Design Thinking’ methodology as a basis for
our Digital Lutherie approach. According to Tim Brown,
Design Thinking is suitable for problems that “require a
human-centered, creative, iterative, and practical approach
to ﬁnding the best ideas and ultimate solutions” [2]. It
can be divided into three steps: a) Inspiration; b) Ideation;
and c) Implementation. Each step is composed by a set of
actions, as described in the following section.
We stress that this methodology is not linear, but rather
chaotic, cyclical and iterative (e.g., some interviews were
conducted close to the end of our project, while some proto-
typing started during ﬁrst months) [2]. Additionally, some
actions can ﬁt in di↵erent steps (e.g., ‘workshops on Digital
Lutherie’ can be either in ‘Inspiration’, or in ‘ideation’).
4. INSPIRATION
This step aims to seek “circumstances that motivate the
search for solutions” [2]. In our speciﬁc case, it consisted of
the following actions:
4.1 Experiences inside local communities
In this action, we tried to better understand the relation the
local popular communities had with music. For each com-
munity, we informally analyzed: a) the main instruments
used and their respective playing styles; b) their repertoire;
c) the main gestures, accessories and tools used. In total,
we visited and analyzed four communities.
4.2 Interview with musicians
In this action, we tried to better understand themodus
operandi of virtuoso musicians from local popular music
community. We used semi-structured interviews [8] with
the following questions:
• Tools: What “tools” do you use in your work? Why
and how do you use them?
• Technical frustrations: Do you think you have any
“technical frustration” as a musician? Which one? Is
there anything you would like to do as a musician
today that you can not?
• Experimentation: Do you usually experiment with
new “tools”? Do you usually try new ways to use
old “tools”? Describe an experiment whose result you
found interesting.
In total, we interviewed 9 musicians. We chose examples
that represent the diversity of genres and styles in popular
music from Pernambuco. The interviews were recorded and
are available on the internet2.
4.3 Interview with researchers
As Digital Lutherie approaches are usually idiosyncratic,
we decided to interview researchers from the ﬁeld of DMI
design to better understand their personal approach. We
asked:
• What is your process for developing new interfaces for
musical expression? Do other people also take part in
this process? What role do they play?
• What are the main challenges in developing new in-
terfaces for musical expression?
• “The interfaces we design are not used outside the
academia”. What do you think about this statement?
In total, 31 researchers were contacted. Only 7 responded
our contact and were interviewed by email. The result is
available on the internet2.
5. IDEATION
This step aims to “generate, develop and test ideas that
may lead to solutions” [2]. In our case, we have generated
ideas, prototyped them, and tested them with musicians.
This step consisted of the following phases:
5.1 Brainstorming
In this phase, we generated ideas that could later become
new instruments. In the end, a set of nine proposals were
recorded and can be found online3.
2http://batebit.cc/processo/entrevista3http://batebit.cc/processo/ideacao
278
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
5.2 Exploratory Prototyping
In this phase, we have implemented some of the proposed
ideas. The goal was to transform sketches into something
concrete that could be tested and evaluated. Three ex-
ploratory prototypes were developed: the ‘Sandbox Wow’4,
the ‘Pulsar’5, and the ‘Chuva, Suor e Cerveja’6.
5.3 Evaluation with musicians
In this phase, we collected feedback from musicians about
the developed prototypes. Our main interest was to deter-
mine: a) What aspects of the prototype did properly work?
b) What aspects of the prototype did not work? c) General
comments and feedback. The tested prototypes were the
’Pulsar’7 and the ’Sandbox Wow’8.
5.4 Workshops on Digital Lutherie
In this phase, we aimed to interact directly with the lo-
cal community. We performed two workshops, each one
20 hours long, counting 20 participants in total (majorly,
musicians or technologists). As a result, many instruments
were collectively developed. Some examples are: the ‘Pi-
anumanu’9 and the ‘Rodas em Coit´ e’.
6. IMPLEMENTATION
This step aims to “chart a path to market” [2]. In this
project, the selected prototypes were improved with con-
stant feedback from musicians, culminating in two new in-
struments and a public performance.
6.1 Giromin
The Giromin10 is an musical instrument based on dance. It
reﬂects a strong relationship between movement and sound
that can be found in local communities and in the work of
some interviewed musicians. It is a small wooden box with
wireless connection, which could be worn between the ab-
domen and the chest, and was designed by the third author.
The instrument works as a sequencer whose notes are
triggered by the motion of the musician/dancer around the
spinal axis. Five di↵erent buttons can change the pre-
recorded sequences. Forward and backward movement con-
trol the intensity of the notes as well as manipulate a fre-
quency ﬁlter, increasing the cuto↵ frequency of a low-pass
ﬁlter. When the spine moves towards right, Giromin trig-
gers a pitch shift e↵ect. Moving towards left, it varies the
amount delay feedback. The rotation along the axis also
changes the pan, giving the impression of the sound follow-
ing the musician/dancer movement.
We evaluated the Giromin with three dancers and three
percussionists. Our goal was to collect general feedback on
our design. The speciﬁc results about the instrument is
outside the scope of this research. However, the sessions
were recorded and are available online11.
6.2 Pandivá
The Pandiv´ a12 was inspired by di↵erent instruments used
in the local community. By using the posture of a guitar
player, it allows musicians to trigger sounds using the play-
ing gestures of Pandeiro, and to control pitch by using a
4http://youtube.com/watch?v=_y1fpPwf5A45http://youtube.com/watch?v=dXx4jdW2tWQ6http://batebit.cc/prototipo/exploracao/7http://youtube.com/watch?v=PqjB0nhfHu08http://youtube.com/watch?v=42FrieWW63U9http://youtube.com/watch?v=naaHBrlJblE10http://batebit.cc/instrumento/giromin11http://batebit.cc/processo/avaliacao12http://batebit.cc/instrumento/pandiva
slide, similar to a trombone. This DMI was designed by the
second author.
The musician triggers notes by playing one of the three
pads located on the instrument body and, by moving the
slide, the pitch shifts up and down.
In this instrument, we tried to explore how gestures that
are familiar to some musicians could be transferred into a
new instrument. Our goal was to make easier for musicians
to get used to the new instrument based on gestures that
they already know.
We evaluated the Pandiv´ a with three percussionist and
one guitarist. Again, our goal was to collect general feed-
back on our design. The evaluation sessions are available
online11.
6.3 Jam Session
In this phase, we informally investigated the usage of our
instruments during one important moment in the popular
music context: the public performance. We invited musi-
cians involved with our project to take part of a public jam
session that happened in November 30th, 2014. We pro-
vided them two days in advance for rehearsals and sound
checks. In total, 9 musicians participated, with an approx-
imate audience of 300 people. The public reception was
warm. The jam was recorded and is available online13.
7. DISCUSSION & LESSONS LEARNED
Considering the adopted Digital Lutherie approach and our
initial motivation, did we fulﬁll our goals?
In the end, we developed two new DMIs based on con-
stant iterations with local popular music community. We
consider that is already a good result. However, some as-
pect regarding our approaches should be highlighted.
7.1 DMI as an unit
The continuous contact with local musicians showed us how
we should think our DMIs in a more holistic perspective.
Musicians see their instruments as an unit, which means
that timbre, gesture control interface, ergonomics and ap-
pearance are inseparable. This continuous contact allowed
us to distance ourselves from a more technical perspective
(i.e., what sensors and input technologies should we use?),
and to get closer to the reality of musicians. This has al-
ready been discussed by [1] and was the most important
lesson we have learned.
During our process, we focused more on developing the
input and mapping modules, rather than the output mod-
ule. Although understandable from a technical perspective,
this point was problematic because musicians were unable
to separate sound and interface, resulting in poor/negative
feedback. We had the same problem while evaluating the
exploratory prototypes.
Considering this, we should have prototyped since the
beginning, reducing the ‘ideation’ step and focusing more
on iteration and evaluation with musicians. We should also
have built prototypes that could had stayed with musicians
for weeks, deepening their relationship with the instruments
and resulting perhaps in more interesting musical results.
The sense of a public presentation (i.e., the Jam session)
motivated musicians to explore more musical possibilities
of our instruments. We should have focused more on this
phase (i.e., it could have happened more frequently).
7.2 Output module as composition
We also noticed that developing the output module of a
DMI is closely related to the process of composing, play-
13http://youtube.com/watch?v=n-Zs-_0pivQ
279
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
ing a crucial role in its acceptance. Developing the output
module means deﬁning in advance most of the musical pos-
sibilities of an instrument. In the end of our 2nd Workshop,
for example, participants said they were discouraged by the
output module we chose (8-bit sound synthesized on Ar-
duino), as they related the sound with video game music.
This problem could have been avoided if we had chosen the
output module more carefully.
Considering this, we should have included sound design-
ers, composers, and musicians themselves in the develop-
ment of the output module. In our process, we actually
delegated the choice to musicians by using MIDI protocol.
However, the majority of the musicians involved in our re-
search was not familiar with this choice.
7.3 Design guidelines
Finally, we also believe that our approach could have bene-
ﬁted from clear design guidelines from the beginning. The
guidelines would have been useful to guide our actions (e.g.,
they could serve as criteria for evaluations).
After our experience in this project, we suggest the fol-
lowing guidelines for people interested in designing DMIs
for a particular popular community:
• The DMIs should be somehow related to the instru-
ments (and their respective playing styles) used inside
the community;
• The DMIs should allow musicians to perform the com-
munity’s standard repertoire;
• The DMIs should allow musicians to use the commu-
nity’s standard gestures and accessories.
8. CONCLUSION
We presented the lessons we have learned during the one-
year project ‘Batebit’. The project allowed us to create a
bridge between Digital Lutherie and the popular music com-
munity of Pernambuco, situated in the Brazilian Northeast.
We used the Design Thinking methodology that comprised
cycles of ‘inspiration’, ‘ideation’ and ‘implementation’. In
the end, we developed two new DMIs based on continuous
collaboration with the local popular music community. The
entire process was fully documented and is available online
on the project website14.
There is still much to be done. As future work, we will
continue reﬁning - technically and aesthetically - the DMIs
developed in collaboration with musicians. For similar ap-
proaches in the future, we also plan to incorporate the
lessons we have learned during this project. Most impor-
tantly, greater e↵ort needs to be placed on reﬂecting on how
DMIs can be used to create new musical aesthetics and lan-
guages, which could potentially enrich and further diversify
the culture of Pernambuco.
9. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was funded by Fundo Pernambucano de In-
centivo ‘ a Cultura (Funcultura 2013, Projeto 739/13), Fun-
darpe - Funda¸ c˜ ao do Patrimˆ onio Hist´ orico e Art´ ıstico de
Pernambuco, Brazil. The authors would like to thank: the
anonymous reviewers, for their valuable comments and sug-
gestions; and Johnty Wang and John Sullivan.
10. REFERENCES
[1] B. Bongers. Electronic Musical Instruments:
Experiences of a New Luthier.Leonardo Music
Journal, 17:9–16, Dec. 2007.
14http://batebit.cc
[2] T. Brown. Design thinking.Harvard Business Review,
86(9):62–72, 2008.
[3] C. Cannon, S. Hughes, and S. O’Modhrain. EpipE :
Exploration of the Uilleann Pipes as a Potential
Controller for Computer-based Music. InNIME ’03
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces
for Musical Expression, pages 3–8, Montreal, Canada,
2003.
[4] P. Cook. Principles for designing computer music
controllers. InNIME ’01 Proceedings of the 2001
conference on New interfaces for musical expression,
Seattle, US, 2001.
[5] P. Cook. Re-designing principles for computer music
controllers: A case study of SqueezeVox Maggie. In
NIME ’09 Proceedings of the 2009 conference on New
interfaces for musical expression, pages 218–221,
Pittsburgh, PA, 2009.
[6] G. Essl and S. O’Modhrain. An enactive approach to
the design of new tangible musical instruments.
Organised Sound,1 1 ( 0 3 ) : 2 8 5 ,N o v .2 0 0 6 .
[7] S. Fels, A. Gadd, and A. Mulder. Mapping
transparency through metaphor: towards more
expressive musical instruments.Organised Sound,
7(02), Jan. 2003.
[8] U. Flick.An introduction to qualitative research,
volume 3rd edn. Sage, 2009.
[9] S. Jord‘ a.Digital lutherie: crafting musical computers
for new musics performance and improvisation. PhD
thesis, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 2005.
[10] A. Kapur.Digitizing North Indian Music:
Preservation and Extension Using Multimodal Sensor
Systems, Machine Learning and Robotics. PhD thesis,
University of Victoria, 2007.
[11] A. Kapur, D. H. Kim, R. Kapur, and K. Eom. New
Interfaces for Traditional Korean Music and Dance.
In NIME ’13 Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on
New Interfaces for Musical Expression, pages 5–8,
Daejeon, Korea Republic, 2013.
[12] E. R. Miranda and M. M. Wanderley.New Digital
Musical Instruments: Control and Interaction Beyond
the Keyboard, volume 21 ofThe computer music and
digital audio series. A-R Editions, 2006.
[13] G. Paine. Towards Uniﬁed Design Guidelines for New
Interfaces for Musical Expression.Organised Sound,
14(02):142, June 2009.
[14] P. Tesser. Mangue Beat: h´ umus cultural e social.
LOGOS 26: comunica¸ c˜ ao e conﬂitos urbanos, pages
70–83, 2007.
[15] D. Young and I. Fujinaga. AoBachi : A New Interface
for Japanese Drumming. InNIME ’04 Proceedings of
the 2004 international conference on New interfaces
for musical expression, pages 23–26, Hamamatsu,
Japan, 2004.
280
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 