Feedback Lap Steel :  Exploring Tactile Transducers as String Actuators    Jiffer Harriman ATLAS Research Institute University of Colorado 1125 18th St. #223 Boulder, Colorado 80309 harrimj@colorado.edu  
     ABSTRACT The Feedback Lap Steel is an actuated instrument that makes use of mechanical vibration of the instruments bridge to excite the strings. A custom bridge mounted directly to a tactile transducer enables the strings to be driven with any audio signal from a standard audio amplifier. The instrument can be played as a traditional lap steel guitar without any changes to playing technique as well as be used to create new sounds that blur the line between acoustic and electronic through a combination of acoustic and computer generated and controlled sounds. This introduces a new approach to string actuation using commonly available parts. This demonstration paper details the construction, uses and lessons learned in the making of the Feedback Lap Steel guitar. Keywords NIME, actuated instrument, augmented, lap steel ACM Classification H.5.5 [INFORMATION INTERFACES AND PRESENTATION] Sound and Music Computing --- Systems; C.0 [COMPUTER SYSTEM ORGANIZATION] General --- Hardware/Software Interfaces 1. INTRODUCTION The Feedback Lap Steel is based on a standard 6-string lap steel guitar (Figure 1). It uses a tactile transducer as an actuator to put energy into the strings by physically vibrating them. The transducer is mounted  in  the  body  of  the  instrument with a custom bridge mounted directly to the transducer. 
 Figure 1: Playing the Feedback Lap Steel The transducer is driven by a standard audio amplifier allowing any audio signal to easily be used  to drive  the  strings. By using the output of  the instrument as a sound source that is amplified and fed back into the bridge actuator, a feedback loop is created that is controlled and manipulated with filtering, delays and other effects. The Feedback Lap Steel demonstrates 
the potential of using tactile transducers as a string actuation technique. 2. RELATED WORK The idea of self sustained oscillation was brought to a handheld device with the EBow1. Similar devices that mount to a guitar include the Sustainiac2 and Fernandez Sustainer3. In 2008 Moog Music introduced a guitar with actuation technology built into the instrument4, they have since released several versions including a lap steel guitar.  These instruments feature a sustain mode as well as a “mute” mode that uses out of phase signals to halt the motion of the strings.   Other explorations in actuated instruments and related control theory include the Feedback Resonance Guitar [3], the Electromagnetically Prepared Piano [4], the Magnetic Resonator Piano [6] and the Electromagnetically Sustained Rhodes Piano [8]. These instruments are able to sustain notes indefinitely as well as induce sound from silence, creating swells not otherwise possible with plucked or struck stringed instruments.   The Overtone Fiddle [7] uses a tactile transducer to vibrate the body of the instrument, essentially using the body as a speaker but not inducing string vibration.  Quadrofeelia is an example of digital music instrument inspired by a lap steel guitar. [5] 3. INSTRUMENT DESIGN The Feedback Lap Steel was mostly built by hand from materials available from the hardware store.  It was based on a “Do-it-Yourself” lap steel guitar design available online5.  3.1 Building the lap steel The body of the guitar was cut from a piece of 2”x6” redwood decking material. The bridge and saddle hardware were replicas made for a Les Paul Jr. electric guitar.  The nut of the instrument and electronics panel on the front were made by cutting and bending metal plates found at the hardware store.  The fretboard of the instrument was cut from ¼” plywood.   3.2 Sound Actuator The sound actuation is created with a tactile transducer known as the “Puck”15.  This device is sold as a “bass shaker” intended to be used in home theater, gaming and auto sound applications.  These devices are basically speakers without the air moving speaker cone.  By rigidly attaching them to surfaces they essentially turn the surfaces into speakers or shakers. The actuator is powered by a 40 Watt class-T digital amplifier.                                                                       1 http://www.ebow.com/ 2 http://www.sustainiac.com/  3 http://www.fernandesguitars.com/sustainer/sustainer.html  4 http://www.moogmusic.com/products/Moog-Guitars  5 http://www.buildyourguitar.com/resources/lapsteel/  
 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. NIME’15, May 31-June 3, 2015, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA. Copyright remains with the author(s).  178
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
 Figure 2: Feedback Lap Steel Bridge mounted  to the Puck tactile transducer The bridge was laser cut out of 1/2” acrylic to mate with the top of the transducer (figure 2). The top of the bridge was scored with six cuts by the laser cutter to accommodate the strings. 3.3 External Connections The output of the instrument is routed either to a laptop or a Raspberry Pi running the Satellite CCRMA to create a standalone system[1][2].The output audio signal from the computer or embedded processor is then routed to the audio amplifier that sends a powered signal to the transducer via an RCA cable. 4. PLAYING THE INSTRUMENT Lap Steels are played with a steel bar that slides on the strings. The right hand is used to pick the strings, or in the case of the Feedback Lap Steel may be left free to control other effects. It is played with two volume pedals, one for the output and one to control the input signal.  4.1 Software and Control A typical feedback control patch will take in the signal from the guitar and perform some basic processing before sending it back out to the actuator. Without processing the feedback produces high order (screeching!) harmonics. Various techniques of controlling the feedback have been explored including filtering, pitch shifting and delays. The implementation of a low pass filter allows control over the harmonics excited in the strings. Pitch shifting produces unique results.  Shifting down an octave down, the upper harmonics remain stable. By doing micro pitch shifts slightly off the original output from the instrument beating effects are achieved that create a dense yet controllable texture not available with a traditional instrument. The feedback system can be controlled in a variety of ways, either by changing parameters or calling up presets with a computer mouse and keyboard, or better through a series of dedicated buttons and variable controls such as knobs and sliders. Both approaches have been used but the control interface is still very much in development. 4.2 More Possibilities By routing live audio from another instrument or voice through the Feedback Lap Steel, it produces sympathetic vibrations with the audio source. When this is done the player can highlight different harmonics by changing the effective tuning by moving the steel bar. By using percussive sounds (from a drum machine for instance) rhythms can be injected into the strings.  5. CHALLENGES AND LESSONS An attempt was made to acutate an existing guitar by mouting the transducer to the back of the guitar directly behind the bridge. This configuration did enable sustain but did so inconsistently and only at very high volumes.   The use of audio programming languages to process the audio produces significant latency (for a feedback control system) and can be somewhat unpredictable.  
Another limitation of this approach is the use of a single pickup and single transducer limits the amount of control available since all six strings in this case combine to create one signal. Similarly all six strings are physically coupled to the same actuator at the bridge. 6. FUTURE WORK Better characterization of the feedback system will enable more robust applications for controlling the behaviors. A current amplifier as opposed to the inexpensive audio amplifier used would provide better control of phase. Experimental development of a metal bridge is underway to experiment with different materials.  This will include various types of aluminum  and steel as an alternative to the current acrylic bridge.  The harder materials are expected to better transfer energy to the strings as well as be more durable. 7. SUMMARY This paper introduced the concept and design of the Feedback Lap Steel.  It participates and contributes to the growing field of actuated musical instruments that are “co-manipulated” by a human performer and an electromechanical system. It is an actuated lap steel guitar featuring a tactile transducer actuator to inject energy into the strings. It introduces the idea of using a bridge mounted directly to a tactile transducer as a means of mechanically inducing vibrations in a stringed instrument. Feedback occurs by sending the instruments output back into the actuator while control is achieved through various processing techniques. Additional explorations with a variety of audio input used in conjunction with this instrument are described, with many still to be explored. 8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS A big thanks is owed to Ale Palandjodglou for help fabricating the custom bridge.   9. REFERENCES [1] Berdahl, E., & Chafe, C. (2011). Autonomous New Media Artefacts (AutoNMA). Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (2011).  [2] Berdahl, Edgar, Ju, W. "Satellite CCRMA: A musical interaction and sound synthesis platform." Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression. 2011. [3] Berdahl, E., Smith, J.. "Inducing unusual dynamics in acoustic musical instruments." Control Applications, 2007. CCA 2007. IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, 2007. [4] Berdahl, E., Backer, S. Smith, J. "If I had a hammer: Design and theory of an electromagnetically-prepared piano." Proceedings of the International Computer Music Conference. 2005. [5] Harriman, J., Casey, L., Melvin, L. Repper, M.. "Quadrofeelia–A New Instrument for Sliding into Notes." Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression. (2011). [6] McPherson, A., and Youngmoo, K. "Augmenting the acoustic piano with electromagnetic string actuation and continuous key position sensing." NIME Proceedings (2010). [7] Overholt, D. (2011). The Overtone Fiddle: an actuated acoustic instrument, 30–33. NIME Proceedings, Oslo, Norway (2011). [8] Shear, G., Wright, M. "The electromagnetically sustained Rhodes piano." Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression. (2011).  
179
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 