Robust and Reliable Fabric, Piezoresistive Multitouch 
Sensing Surfaces for Musical Controllers 
 
 
Jung-Sim Roh 
Fashion Textile Center  
Seoul National University 
Korea 
simi1012@snu.ac.kr 
 
Yotam Mann 
CNMAT 
Dept. of Music 
UC Berkeley 
yotammann@berkeley.edu  
 
Adrian Freed 
CNMAT 
1750 Arch Street 
Berkeley, CA 94709 
adrian@cnmat.berkeley.edu  
 
David Wessel 
CNMAT 
Dept. of Music 
UC Berkeley 
wessel@cnmat.berkeley.edu 
ABSTRACT 
The design space of fabric multitouch surface interaction is 
explored with emphasis on novel materials and construction 
techniques aimed towards  reliable, repairable pressure se nsing 
surfaces for musical applications.   
Keywords 
Multitouch, surface interaction, piezoresistive, fabric  sensor, e-
textiles, tangible computing, drum controller  
1. INTRODUCTION 
Multitouch array sensing with flexible substrates has been 
experimented with in the last three  decades primarily for 
robotics and medical sensing applications  [ 28]. Most of the 
research has been on core sensing and materials questions . The 
novel contributions reported here primarily involve the 
integration challenges of flexible surface  sensing for musical 
controllers where reliability , repairability and  r obustness have 
to be addressed  in addition to the sensin g and materials 
challenges. These less glamorous issues have been mostly 
ignored in academic and hobbyist music controller designs that 
are rewarded more for apparent “novelty” and  potential than 
long-term viability . We suggest that the “New” in N IME also 
refers to the experience for the performer that their controllers 
perform “like new” every  time they play them –for decades to 
come. 
 We focus here on piezoresistive, multitouch sensing surfaces 
because the popular capacitive multitouch systems [15] do not 
provide sufficient taxel pressure resolution for musical 
applications. CNMAT’s work for guitar s [ 40] with Tactex 
Controls Inc. on the Kinotex [18] o ptical cavity sensing 
approach proved too difficult to scale to the high taxel counts 
required to capture nuanced musical g estures over large 
surfaces. FTIR optical surfaces have been developed with 
pressure sensitivity but they require bulky camera systems and 
have limited sensing bandwidth due to the slow frame rate of 
the cameras [32]. Systems fusing muscle se nsing with surface 
sensing show  some promise but the long reported latencies [2] 
(150ms) preclude them from most musical  applications.  
2. History of Piezoresistivity 
Piezoresistivity, the modulation of electrical resistance 
according to stress, is observed in elemental materials , 
semiconductors and composites. This property has been 
exploited in sound and musical applications for well over a 
hundred years  although it wasn’t necessarily understood as 
such in earlier times [33]. 
 A significant application of piezoresistivity in audio is  
Alexander Bell’s microphone using carbon rods under strain. 
The subsequent commercial success of the telephone resulted in 
numerous refinements of carbon- based piezoresistive 
microphones from  Edison, Berliner, Blake, Hughes, Hunnings 
and White  and others .  By the late  1800’s piezoresistive 
microphones and liquid/conductor current modulation were 
broadly understood by engineers and were techniques used 
routinely in early electronic musical instruments.  
 Singer’s 1893 patent [31] is important because its  single 
claim is a  carbon-based piezoresistive sensor for keyboard  
musical instruments. This patent signals the  use of carbon 
granules in an elastomeric substrate (rubber in this case) a 
technique still widely -employed and for which patents are still 
regularly issued , e.g., US6820502 [34] (with no less than 80 
claims).  
 The application Si nger proposes  is also congruent to 
established musical interaction design patterns [38], i.e. where 
sound dynamics are controlled by surface pressure gestures. 
 Pi
ezoresistive pressure sensing techniques can be found in  
new electronic musical in struments and controllers throughout 
the twentieth century, and to the present day where they appear 
commercially at the rate of several  products each year.  There 
isn’t enough space here to survey them all properly –a search in 
European patent listings  resulted in over 50 entries for musical 
instruments employing resistive sensing. We  should however  
mention that the expressiveness valued in the  early instruments 
of the field, the  Ondes Martenot  [ 17], Heliphon [11] and 
Trautonium [35, 36] is attributable to their use of resistive  
pressure sensing to control sound dynamics. 
 In 1982 Franklin Eventoff introduced Force Sensing 
Resistors ( FSR); printed piezoresistive sensor assemblies  
designed with musical applications in mind  [7] . His firm  
developed low-cost, high volume manufacturing techniques for 
printing conductive ink and piezo -resistive polymer matrices 
onto plastic substrates.  These devices ar e routinely used in 
NIME projects [16]. The advantage of using manufactured 
sensors is that they can be replaced from readily available 
spares instead of being repaired. This same may be said of  steel 
and nylon guitar strings, for example .  
 When the  Ondes Martenot touch key no longer performs as 
the player wishes they have to remix a new batch of a “magic” 
piezoresistive concoction (carbon and mica) that is placed in a 
leather sensing bag under the key [10]. This is an example  of 
how the  design of musical instruments assemblies involves 
deciding whether they are to be adjusted, repaired or replaced 
by the performer, a “technician”, a luthier or at a factory. The 
concept of Mean Time To Repair (MTTR)  is useful here . A 
common design pattern is to place the repair, tuning  and 
replacement of the most fragile or stressed components in t he 
hands of the performer. The oboe is an interesting case  because 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear t his notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.  
NIME’11, 30 May–1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway. 
Copyright remains with the auth or(s). 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
393
of the high skill level required to construct a ree d that is 
discarded–often after only a few hours of use. The Ondes 
Martenot touch key does not have to be replaced often but now 
there is such a small network of technicians that the 
replacement task defers to performers. 
 This paper will focus on design choices for piezoresistive 
multitouch surfaces driven  by considerations of robustness and 
repairability and consistency of performance with the intention 
of guiding the development of instruments that can be played 
and maintained for the lifetime of the performer  and beyond. 
3. Materials 
The core sensors we introduce are buil t from piezoresistive 
non-woven fabric from Eeonyx [8] and a new conductive , 
composite thread spun from silver -plated copper wire and 
polyester yarn [20-23]. 
3.1 Piezoresistive Substrate 
Conductive-polymer-infused, non-woven fabrics have been 
refined by Eeonyx to minimize hysteresis and provid e uniform 
resistivity with long -term stability. We rejected the option of 
conductor-loaded elastomeric materials (such as Zoflex  [ 19]) 
because they exhibit higher hysteresis than fabric and paper and 
the conductor-loading considerably weakens the material –a 
concern in high impact situations such as drumming. Carbon -
loaded paper has been proposed for these applications [14] with 
the idea that it so cheap that it can be simply discarded and 
replaced as needed. This may be true for a single point pressure 
sensor but it isn’t for large -taxel-count multitouch where 
connection and integration costs far outweigh material costs.  
 Although there are indications that paper sensors give 
comparable performance t o fabric, such experiments were done 
in laboratory conditions with fresh materials.  An advantage of 
fabrics is that they can be engineered from a wide variety of 
base materials to last longer and be less susceptible to 
environmental and insect damage than paper. 
 Fabrics can be stretched and compressed  making it possible 
to fit them to a broader class of surfaces  [37] than paper which 
is limited to developable surfaces (Guassian curvature 0).  
3.2 Robust, Solderable Conductive Thread 
Piezoresistive materials may be sens ed either by sandwiching 
them between two  conductors or laying them onto a 
interdigitated grids of conductors. The designs proposed here 
use the former approach rather than the latter because it scales 
well to large  taxel counts. This is because conductors  can be 
simply arranged in parallel lines in orthogonal directions on 
each side of a piezoresistive patch of fabric.  
 Numerous choices for conductors in this application have 
been explored. We have chosen to use conductive embroidery 
thread because unlike printed silver inks, for example, thread s 
can be easily repaired with readily-available tools and moderate 
skill level. With fabric and thread the core geometry of the 
instrument can be determined by the performer – just as the 
reed is customized by each oboe player.  
 This customizability is also valued in  the wearable electronics 
field. Although suit able for quick exploratory prototypes , we 
have learned we cannot directly adopt the readily available 
materials and components from the hobbyist e -textile and 
wearables community  such as the  Arduino Lilypad or silver -
plated nylon thread : the  resulting assemblies are not robust 
enough for extended use and the gesture signal processing 
performance and transmission is not fast enough. 
 The spun- metal thread we are using has  the advantage over 
silver-plated nylon thread of being less  influenced by  the 
effects of corrosion because of a higher overall metal content  of 
the silver -plated copper wire . Another important  advantage is 
that with an appropriate layout  these threads may be soldered. 
This greatly eases the challenge of reliably connecting the 
sensor array with conventional electronic circuits. With plated 
threads we have observed an alarming increase over time of the 
electrical resis tance of connections –something that does not 
occur with a spun metal thread.  
4. Implementation Topography 
We have explored four different ways of implementing the 
well-known design pattern for flexible -surface, resistive 
multitouch [5]. We have confirmed that the different 
implementations performed similarly as position and pressure 
sensing arrays. This is not surprising since the basic 
piezoresistive material, conductive threads and spacing were 
the same for all of them. However laboratory-condition sensor 
performance is just one of many important properties we need 
to evaluate for these implementations. We will discuss the 
build, repair and maintenance issues of each.   
4.1 Sandwich 
In this implementation the piezoresistive fabric is sandwiched 
between two non-conductive pieces of fabric each of which has 
parallel lines of conductive thread sewn into them. The three 
component fabrics are held together with a sparse array of light 
tension stitches. The outside fabric pieces are of course 
arranged so the threads on top and bottom are orthogonal to 
each other. 
  
Figure 1: Sandwich 
4.2 Machine Sewn 
 
Figure 2: Machine Sewn  
An ordinary sewing machine is set up with a conductive bottom 
thread and insulating top thread. As parallel lines are sewn into 
the piezoresistive fabric thread tensions are carefully adjusted 
(or “misadjusted” according to conventional sewing norms) to 
minimize the possibility of conductive thread being pulled on 
to the wrong side of the fabric. After one side is complete the 
fabric is turned over and an orthogonal array of lines is sewn in.  
 Shor
ts between the layers can be avoided by careful 
positioning of the stitches on the second side.  
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
394
4.3 Trapped Conductor 
An ordinary sewing machine is used to lay in narrow rows and 
columns of insulating zig -zag couching stitches on respective 
sides of the piezoresistive fabric. Conductive threads are then  
interlaced thr ough the couching stiches by hand. Note that a 
variety of couching stitch styles could be employed including 
straight stitches or wide patterns.  We favor the zig -zag stitch 
because interlacing the conductive threads is facilitated by the 
straight line path through them. 
 
Figure 3: Trapped Conductor  
4.4 Woven 
The woven implementation [29, 30] is the only one where the 
conductive threads periodically alternate sides of the  
piezoresistive fabric. The periods of these running stitches are 
synchronized so that orthogonal runs are always on opposite 
sides of the fabric. 
 These runs are created by hand, a process that can be sped up 
somewhat by punching or cutting an array of holes in the 
substrate fabric. 
 
Figure 4: Woven 
4.5 Discussion and Comparison of 
Construction Methods 
The sandwich construction offers advantages for large 
production volumes because the outer layers can be cut from 
long, wide rolls of pre-manufactured fabric.  
 
Figure 5: Strain-relieved cabling and solder pad  
We illustrate this in Figure 5 using a woven fabric that 
integrates stripes of conductive ya rn made by Eleksen. 
 Note the use of spun -metal thread to transition between the 
conductive yarn and soldered connections to a flat cable.  The 
sandwich construction also allows a worn or damaged 
piezoresistive patch to be easily replaced independent ly of the 
conductive components . 
 The machine -sewn construction is accessible to hob byists on 
introductory-model sewing machines  and results in a thin, one-
piece assembly . Repairs to broken or frayed threads may be 
done by hand with the appropriate equipment.  
 The trapped conductor approach is the fastest to repair 
because only a needle and thread are required to replace an 
entire row or column. 
 The woven approach lends itself to rapid hand repair but the 
regular switching from one side of the substrate fabric to the 
other is not easy to automate. This means this approach will be 
rather labor intensive for high taxel counts. However it is worth 
considering when an  application demands hand construction for 
other reasons –for example, when an array is required to match 
a non -rectangular and non -convex shape with cutouts such as 
the top plate of a guitar. Hand construction allows the density 
of sensory node points to be modulated throughout the surface 
and the integration of insulating patches to route conductors 
around holes and concavities.  
5. Sensor Data Acquisition and Gesture 
Analysis 
An important axis in the design space of touch sensing devices 
represents a trade-off between complexity of the sensing 
surface and complexity in the  data acquisition hardware and 
software systems. Capacitive multitouch [39] is popular in high 
volume consum er products because the complexity of the 
sensing challenge can be concentrated in a single integrated 
circuit that performs analog and digital signal processing, 
calibration, gesture interpretation, data formatting and 
transmission. Capacitive sensor arrays are built at low cost per 
taxel by etching or printing processes that are already well -
established for multiplexed , flat displays.  The difficulty of this 
particular point in the design space  for musical instrument 
applications is that only standardized sizes and shapes are 
available and pressure sensing performance is still poor or 
completely unavailable.  
 The 4-wire XYZ pad  [13, 26, 42 ] shows that good pressure 
and position performance  can be achieved at a range of sizes 
using fabric. These  can be assembled  in ten minutes with 
ordinary tools and skill. The basic data acquisition algorithms 
required are  also accessible to hobbyists . H owever the spatial 
precision of this device depends on  the uniformity of the 
piezoresistive fabric  and uncoupling of the interaction between  
pressure and position . This can be achieved using  algorithms 
less accessible to hobbyists  [ 27]. The touch surfaces explored 
in this paper address these difficulties by moving some of the 
complexity into the construction, increasing the number of 
conductors across the surface so that the spatial resolution is 
mostly determined by the position ing accuracy  of the 
conductive threads –not the uniformity of the piezoresistive 
substrate.  
 If gestures are assumed to be constrained to single touches in 
predetermined regions the gesture interpretation software is of 
moderate complexity and accessible to non-specialists. The full 
potential of high density arrays of pressure sensors is realized 
when force profiles of large numbers of objects placed 
anywhere on the surface  can be analyzed and  for which 
sophisticated machine vision algorithms are usually employed. 
This comple xity can be managed by partitioning the design so 
that the electronics and software integrated into the touch 
surface delivers an uninterpreted taxel image that can be 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
395
processed by a target computer system  to the desired level of 
detail. 
5.1 Multiplexed scanning of the surface 
Multiplexing is the approach available for moderate-to-large 
taxel counts. The  cost of connections is too high in these 
applications for each pressure sensing point in the array to be 
separately wired to a data acquisition channel. The main 
technical challenge  with multiplexing resistive arrays  is to 
isolate the resistance change at a particular node in the array 
from neighboring resistance changes. Many approaches to this 
are known [12] and some have been evaluated in terms of 
acquisition performance and implementati on complexity [6]. 
These older  complexity measures (that count disc rete 
components such as op -amps, drivers, analog switc hes etc.) are 
not very useful in current designs because these components are 
now integrated into embedded microcontrollers. Also 
component costs have dropped to a point where integration and 
connection costs now dominate designs. For this reason there is 
a renewed interest in data acquisition techniques that involve 
wiring the sensing array directly to the microcontroller with a 
minimum number of external components.  
 By writing software that dynamical ly changes the function of 
microcontroller pins from output s to A/D conversion inputs we 
have implemented  data acquisition without any other external 
components for both XYZ pads and multitouch arrays. 
However in the multitouch case it is difficult to  eliminate 
lateral current flows across the piezoresistive fabric without 
additional electronics to avoid  cross-talk contaminating the 
taxel pressure estimates . 
 Developers of the “UnM ousePad” [24] introduced 
anisotropicity in the conductivity of the piezoresistive materia  
(by adding conductors) to reduce crosstalk [25]. Their 
demonstrations were built with established conducti ve ink 
printing processes where these additional conductors add no 
cost. Since our sensors are embroidered their approach would 
result in an increase c ost in time and materials on the surface. 
We have found that a care ful, efficient implementation of 
current nulling approaches [9] addresses crosstalk without 
substantially increasing systems costs. A single op -amp and 
resistor are required for each of either the row or column 
conductors. An important advantage of the current nulling 
approach is that an entire row or column of taxels can be 
measured concurrently–an essential  requirement to achieve a 
high taxel frame rate (8kHz) for large arrays.  
6. Integration Design and Implementation  
It is a formidible challenge to  reliably connect the  conductors 
from a flexible sensing surface that is subject to high 
continuous and impulsive stress and strain to the relatively rigid 
and unyielding circuit boards holding the sensor acquisition 
electronics. Promising techniques are being developed for 
intrinsic fabric electronics and flexible circuit co nstructions for 
extrinsic electronics for textile applications . A recent adaptation 
of chip- on-board techniques to a fabric substrate is attractive 
[41]. However l ow-volume or hobbyist application of these 
approaches is unlikely in the near future especially when high 
connection counts are re quired. 
 We summarize here a series of exploratory experiments that 
have yielded viable solutions to the connection problem for low 
production and hobbyist applications . 
  The following table  quantifies the problem. It describes  
variations in electrical contact resistance of various approache s 
to connecting conductive spun -wire thread to circuit boards 
including wrapping, gluing with conductive epoxy and 
soldering.  
 Further work is needed in this area to develop stronger data 
with analysis of long -term f ailure processes with accelerated 
life testing etc. but we have enough data to conclude that the 
particular contact method matters. 
Table 1 Connection resistance  
 
Before 
Mechanical Stress 
After 
Mechanical Stress 
Connection avg 
resistance 
(ohms) 
std dev 
Avg. 
resistance 
(ohms) 
std dev 
10x wrap .43 .16 .25 .034 
5x wrap .202 .053 .271 0.04 
5x wrap + 
CircuitWork conductive 
epoxy 
.255 .036 fail n/a 
5x wrap + MG 
chemicals conductive 
epoxy 
.189 .015 .149 .023 
5x wrap + solder 
on same hole .142 .0144 .17 .024 
0x wrap with stress 
relief on adjacent hole .263 0.05 fail n/a 
  We found that the fastest method for hand construction with 
readily-available tools is soldering. In automated production 
conductive glues are attractive because they can be printed, and 
achieve higher densities than soldering because they don’t 
require special structures to dissipate heat. We focus now on 
soldering beca use construction is rapid, repair is much faster 
than conductive glues . S older also has a longer shelf -life and 
easier accessibility than conductive glues . 
7. Soldered textile connections 
7.1 Strain relief wrapping 
Since a soldered joint holds the thin wire s of the spun -metal 
thread to a large rigid surface the  wires can quickly suffer metal 
fatigue and breakage unless strain relief  is provided . One 
solution illustrated  here is to lace the thread into a pair of holes 
and then solder  the metal plies  to a third contact point on the 
board. We prefer this approach to the scheme on the Arduino 
Lilypad [3, 4] of wrapping the thre ad between a hole and the 
sharp edge of a fiber -glass circuit board. The edge of these 
boards is much more abrasive than a plated hole.  In any case it 
is essential that the circuit board be well anchored to the 
substrate fabric with other threads specifically optimized for 
this purpose so that the stress of snags and pulls of the board 
are absorbed by them instead of the conductive threads. To 
better control these two different roles of threads it is 
advantageous to provide a zig zag and loose path for the 
conductive threads. 
 
Figure 6: strain relief and soldered thread  
 Another alternative for circuit board connections is to use 
existing multiwire cabling assemblies such as ribbon cable s and 
solder these to specially constructed fabr ic solder pads as 
!"#$%&%'"($)$(&*'&
+,(
-'.+'%#*$&/,)0&
#%&1),++$(&2')&
%*),#0&)$"#$2
-'0(34*#5$&+"#$%
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
396
shown in Figure 5 and described more fully  in the next section . 
Notice that the flat cable is anchored to the substrate fabric with 
insulated-thread stitches in the interstices of the conductors.  
 Figure 7  shows the compatibility of the spun-metal thread 
with flexible circuit board materials , another approach to strain 
relief: 
 
Figure 7: Sewing to flat cable  
7.2 Embroidered Soldering Pad and Via 
Solder melting points are higher than the melting and 
combustion temperatures of many fabric mater ials. Our 
solution with spun -metal embroidary  thread i s to sew  pads on 
cotton tape that serves to insulate the polyester piezorestive 
fabric and to provide a large enough pad area for the heat to be  
rapidly dissipated across its surface. 
 
Figure 8 Soldered thread 
 Note that by embroidering the pads with conductive thread on 
both sides a via is formed allowing for all the soldered 
connections for the array to be implemented on one  side of the 
fabric. 
 The space is left in the layout design  for sewing a new pad to 
connect to in the case of failures. This is more reliable 
ultimately than reusing the original pad. 
 In the example of F igure 5 various circuit paths are explored. 
Alternating access to each side of a run increases the density of 
the pads. Connecting both sides of a run provide s a redundant 
path that allow s a run to still function correctly with a single 
breakage anywhere along it. 
8. Software considerations 
Before driving current into the array a special sequential scan is 
done to identify shorted and broken conductors. Shorts across 
the two layers require immediate repair. Broken connections 
and shorts between adjacent conductors can be compensated for 
in the software.  
 During regular use a ny unusual pressure data trigger s the 
same power-on evaluation sequence. The idea is to provide 
enough resiliance so that a performer need not abort a 
performance when a single wire breaks or short s.  
 To minimize performance bottlenecks from USB we encode 
an array scan as compact OSC blobs with one byte pe r taxel.  
9. Performance and Spatial Density 
Readily available 8 -bit microcontrollers with integrated USB 
can scan a 12x12 taxel array at around 200Hz. The limiting 
factor in these  chips is  the A/D conversion speed. 32 -bit 
microconrollers wit h 16 channels of A/D conversion  are 
available with higher A/D conversion rates  and can scan a 
16x16 taxel array at 500Hz. At this point the USB 
implementations become the limiting factor. This can be 
addressed by tiling 4 multitouch arrays and microcontrollers 
and aggregat ing the four streams with a USB 2.0 hub.  For 
arrays larger than 32x32 custom hardware using FPGA’s is a 
better way of managing the necessary parallelism to achieve 
high sample rates and host computer communication rates [38]. 
This is the scale where hobbyist fabric multitouch becomes 
challenging. The impact of these constraints is application 
dependent because conductor and spatial sampling density are  
still free variables  of the design. We have chosen to explore 
2.5mm and 5mm spacing. We believe the former may provide  
sufficient spatial resolution to estimate both finger position and 
orientation on the surface. The latter is sufficient to estimate 
finger position with sufficient resolution to capture vibrato -like 
gestures quite well. In this recording below the vertical axis 
represents displacements in mm of the second nuckle of the 
performers index finger. This  measuring point is 5.4cm from 
the tip of the finger at the sensing surface.  
 
Figure 9. Vibrato Gesture pressure sens ing 
10. Conclusion and Future Work 
We have achieved 7 -bit dynamic range of pressure sensing at 
each taxel  of our piezoresistive multitouch arrays. The 
piezoresistive fabric we are using was designed for foot 
pressure measurements so we have excellent sensitivity for 
ballistic interactions and high pressures. We will refine the 
materials to improve this  sensitivity for light, stroking  
gestures. 
 As we gain more experience with our smaller arrays we will 
scale up and move away from USB 2.0 to USB 3.0 or Gibabit 
Ethernet to approach our goal of an 8kHz taxel frame rate.  At 
these rates multicore parallel computation will be required to 
execute the machine vision algorithms for effective taxel scene 
analysis [1]. 
 We have demonstrated new design techniques to create 
robust, reliable and repairable multitouch. We continue to 
explore faster and easier methods of construction both for small 
scale manufacturing and individual hobbyists.  
11. Acknowledgements 
We gratefully acknowledge the support of Meyer Sound Labs , 
Disney/Pixar and Concordia University, Faculty of Fine Ar ts. 
12. Bibliography 
 
[1] Battenberg, E., Freed, A. and Wessel, D. Advances in the 
Parallelization of Music and Audio Applications 
ICMC, CMA, 2009. 
[2] Benko, H., Saponas, T.S., Morris, D. and Tan, D. 
Enhancing input on and above the interactive surface 
with muscle sensing Proceedings of the ACM 
International Conference on Interactive Tabletops 
and Surfaces, ACM, Banff, Alberta, Canada, 2009, 
93-100. 
[3] Buechley, L., Eisenberg, M., Catchen, J. and Crockett, A. 
The LilyPad Arduino: using computational textiles to 
investigate engagement, aesthetics, and diversity in 
computer science education Proceeding of the 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
397
twenty-sixth annual SIGCHI conference on Hu man 
factors in computing systems , ACM, Florence, Italy, 
2008, 423-432. 
[4] Buechley, L. and Hill, B.M. LilyPad in the wild: how 
hardware's long tail is supporting new engineering 
and design communities Proceedings of the 8th ACM 
Conference on Designing Int eractive Systems, ACM, 
Aarhus, Denmark, 2010, 199 -207. 
[5] Burgess, L.E. Tactile Sensing Transducer. USPTO 
#5060527, 1991. 
[6] D'Alessio, T. Measurement errors in the scanning of 
piezoresistive sensors arrays. Sensors and Actuators 
A: Physical, 72 (1). 71-76, 1999. 
[7] Eventoff, F.N. Electronic Pressure Sensitive Transducer 
Apparatus. USPTO #4314227, 1982.  
[8] Freed, A. Application of new Fiber and Malleable Materials 
for Agile Development of Augmented Instruments 
and Controllers NIME 2008, 2008. 
[9] Freed, A. Novel and Forgotten Current -steering Techniques 
for Resistive Multitouch, Duotouch, and Polytouch 
Position Sensing with Pressure NIME 2009, 2009. 
[10] Guillot, I., Hartman -Claverie, V. and Vaiedelich, S. 
Maurice Martenot: La poudre de l'enchanteur CIM09, 
Paris, France, 2009. 
[11] Helberger, B. Electrical Musical Instrument. USPTO 
#2201232, 1938. 
[12] Hillis, W.D. A High -Resolution Imaging Touch Sensor. 
The International Journal of Robotics Research , 1 
(2). 33, 1982. 
[13] Kazuhiko Ito, F.I.U., Myagi.  Input Device. USPTO 
#4529959, 1985. 
[14] Koehly, R. Fabrication of Sustainable Resistive -Based 
Paper Touch Sensors: Application to Music 
Technology (forthcoming). Doctorate Thesis McGill 
University 2011. 
[15] Lee, S., Buxton, W. and Smith, K.C. A multi -touch three 
dimensional touch-sensitive tablet. SIGCHI Bull., 16 
(4). 21-25, 1985. 
[16] Marshall, M. and Wanderley, M. Evaluation of sensors as 
input devices for computer music interfaces. 
Computer Music Modeling and Retrieval. 130-139, 
2006. 
[17] Martenot, M. Résistance variable pour instrument de 
musique électriques et radio-électriques. Industrielle, 
D.d.l.P. #703923, 1930.  
[18] Reimer, E. and Baldwin, L. Cavity Sensor Technology for 
Low Cost Automotive Safety and Control Devices 
Air Bag Technology 99, Detroit, 1999. 
[19] RFMicroLink Zoflex. 2011. 
http://www.rfmicrolink.com/products.html . 
[20] Roh, J., Chi, Y. and Kang, T. Thermal insulation 
properties of multifunctional metal composite fabrics. 
Smart Materials and Structures , 18. 025018, 2009. 
[21] Roh, J., Chi, Y. and Kang, T. Wearable textile antennas. 
International Journal of Fashion Design, Technology 
and Education, 3 (3). 135-153, 2010. 
[22] Roh, J., Chi, Y., Lee, J., Nam, S. and Kang, T. 
Characterization of embroidered inductors. Smart 
Materials and Structures , 19. 115020, 2010. 
[23] Roh, J., Chi, Y., Lee, J., Tak, Y., Nam, S. and Kang, T. 
Embroidered Wearable Multiresonant Folded Dipole 
Antenna for FM Reception. IEEE Antennas and 
Wireless Propagation Letters, 9. 803, 2010. 
[24] Rosenberg, I. and Perlin, K. The UnMousePad: an 
interpolating multi-touch force-sensing input pad. 
ACM Trans. Graph., 28 (3). 1-9, 2009. 
[25] Sado, R. Anisotropically Pressure -Sensitive 
Electroconductive Composite Sheets and Method for 
the Preparation Thereof. USPTO 1981.  
[26] Sandbach, D.L. Multiplexing Detector Constructed from 
Fabric#US6492980, 2001.  
[27] Schmeder, A. and Freed, A. Support Vector Machine 
Learning for Gesture Signal Estimation with a Piezo 
Resistive Fabric Touch Surface NIME, Sydney, 
Australia, 2010. 
[28] Scilingo, E.P., Lorussi, F., Mazzoldi, A. and De Rossi, D. 
Strain-sensing fabrics for wearable kinaesthetic -like 
systems. Sensors Journal, IEEE, 3 (4). 460-467, 
2003. 
[29] Shimojo, M., Makino, R., Namiki, A., Ishikawa, M., 
Suzuki, T. and Mabuchi, K., A sheet type tactile 
sensor using pressure conductive rubber with 
electrical-wires stitches method. in, (2002), IEEE, 
1637-1642. 
[30] Shimojo, M., Namiki, A., Ishikawa, M., Makino, R. and 
Mabuchi, K. A tactile sensor sheet using pressure 
conductive rubber with electrical -wires stitched 
method. Sensors Journal, IEEE, 4 (5). 589-596, 
2004. 
[31] Singer, P. Electric Musical Instrument. USPTO #501543, 
1893. 
[32] Smith, J.D., Graham, T.C.N., Holman, D. and Bor chers, J., 
Low-Cost Malleable Surfaces with Multi -Touch 
Pressure Sensitivity. in Horizontal Interactive 
Human-Computer Systems, 2007. TABLETOP '07. 
Second Annual IEEE International Workshop on , 
(2007), 205-208. 
[33] Strangways, H. The Action of the Telepho ne. THE 
TELEGRAPHIC JOURNAL AND ELECTRICAL 
REVIEW. 216, 1882. 
[34] Tongbi Jian, Z.W. High Resolution Pressure -sensing 
device having an insulating flexible matrix loaded 
with filler particles. USPTO #6820502, 2004. 
[35] Trautwein, F. Device for the Producti on of Musical 
Sounds by Electrical methods. UK #403365, 1933.  
[36] Trautwein, F. Electrical Musical Instrument. USPTO 
#2141231, 1938. 
[37] Wang, C.C.L., Tang, K. and Yeung, B.M.L. Freeform 
surface flattening based on fitting a woven mesh 
model. Computer-Aided Design, 37 (8). 799-814, 
2005. 
[38] Wessel, D., Avizienis, R., Freed, A. and Wright, M., A 
force sensitive multi-touch array supporting multiple 
2-D musical control structures. in NIME, (2007), 
ACM, 41-45. 
[39] Westerman, W. Hand Tracking, Finger Ident ification, and 
Chordic Manipulation on a Multi -touch Surface. Ph. 
D. Thesis Ph. D.University of Delaware 1999.  
[40] Wright, M., Freed, A., Lee, A., Madden, T. and Momeni, 
A. Managing Complexity with Explicit Mapping of 
Gestures to Sound Control with OSC International 
Computer Music Conference , International Computer 
Music Association, Habana, Cuba, 2001, 314 -317. 
[41] Yoo, J., Yan, L., Lee, S., Kim, H. and Yoo, H. A wearable 
ECG acquisition system with compact planar -
fashionable circuit board -based shirt. Information 
Technology in Biomedicine, IEEE Transactions on , 
13 (6). 897-902, 2009. 
[42] Yoshikawa, O. Pressure Sensitive Three -Dimensional 
Tablet and Manipulation Data Detecting Method 
Therefor. USPTO #5852260, 1998.  
 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
398