Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-235
ACROE - ICA
Artistic Creation and Computer Interactive Multisensory
Simulation Force Feedback Gesture Transducers
Claude Cadoz, Annie Luciani, Jean-Loup Florens, Nicolas Castagné
ACROE - ICA
INPG, 46 Av. Félix Viallet - F-38000 Grenoble
Ministère de la Culture et de la Communication
Claude.Cadoz@imag.fr, Annie.Luciani@imag.fr, Jean-Loup.Florens@imag.fr, Nicolas.Castagne@imag.fr
www-acroe.imag.fr
Introduction
The ACROE and the ICA laboratory are two associated
institutions running a program of research, development,
creation and pedagogy in the field of computer for music and
animated image synthesis. ACROE was founded in 1976 by
Claude Cadoz, Annie Luciani and Jean-Loup Florens, in the
Institut National Polytechniqueof Grenoble (INP-G) with the
support of French Ministry of Culture. The ICA (Artistic
Creation and Computer) was initially a team, belonging
successively to the LCP (Laboratoire de la Communication
Parlée -I NP-G), from 1976 to 1985, to the LIFIA ( Informatique
Fondamentale et Intelligence Artificielle -I MAG), from 1985 to
1995, and to the CLIPS ( Communication Langagière et
Interaction Personne-Système -I MAG). Since 1999, ICA is
itself a laboratory of INP-G. ICA is in charge of the scientific
research part of the global program.
The team built up from 1976 with fundamental aims motivated
by the computer entering in several fields of artistic creation.
The deep mutation represented by the computer, regarding the
technology history, required a new and fundamental analysis of
the role of the material tools in artistic creation as well as the
role of the computer itself as tool. New concepts and theories
were necessary that cannot be simply deduced from the
previous.
The following few points, from this time, determined the basic
positioning of the group:
-T he computer being essentially a universal tool for
representation ,f ounded on the concepts of information,
symbolic operations, language, etc. cannot be envisaged as
as imple extension of the previous tools and instruments
founded on physical, mechanical, energetic processes.
-T he creation process, in "instrumental" arts is supported by
ah ierarchy of tools and systems, from a physical level (the
musical instrument for example), to a conceptual level (the
musical theories for example). But even if the theoretical
evolutions of esthetics can be at the origin of technical
changing in the physical tools, the technology, at a moment
of the history, determines fundamentally the range and the
limits of the possibilities. So, the first level at which we
must start, while there is a so deep change in technology, is
the most elementary: the physical instrumental level.
-T he physical instrumental interaction is sensory-motor and
multisensory .S e n s o r y-motor: every perception needs
always a kind of action, and every action is always more or
less accompanied by a perception. Multisensory: every
perception, even through a specific channel, is always more
or less correlated with perceptions on other channels.
-T he computer, as a general representation system, must be
used at a first stage for the level of the instrumental
interaction. This level, then, will be the base for the
development of the higher levels.
The computer was then envisaged to introduce explicitly a
new mediation level in the creation process, through the
paradigm of the interactive and multisensory simulation (IMS)
of physical objects. This principle and its correlated techniques
are the core of the computer creation tool envisaged. The higher
level functionality being built from this base.
These points determined the general program axes:
• Research and development on the technical conditions for
multi-sensory-motor interaction with computer: a
substantial point here, is the concept and technology of
force-feedback gesture transducers (TGR®, for
Transducteurs Gestuels Rétroactifs, in French).
• Definition of a modeling and simulation language of
physical objects - The CORDIS-ANIMA language.
• Designing and implementation of hardware and software
architectures for real-time simulation - The TELLURIS
platform.
• Study and research on the human interaction modalities, of
the instrumental interaction, the instrumental gesture, the
haptic perception and the multiple and multisensory action-
perception loops.
• Research and development on the user interfaces for artistic
(musical, animated images, multisensory) creation - The
GENESIS and MIMESIS environments.
• Exploration, in scientific and artistic ways, of the universe
of multisensory models of physical objects and
phenomenon.
• Research and development on application of IMS and TGR
in scientific and industrial fields.
• Application in artistic and pedagogic activities.
1. The force-feedback gesture transducers
(TRG®)
To allow an instrumental gesture interaction with the
computer, we have to take into account the fact that this
interaction is bi-directional: from the human being to the
computer, and conversely. The transducers, whatever their type
(acoustic-electric, electro-acoustic, mechanic-electric or electro-
mechanic, etc.) work, by their technologic principle, in a
unidirectional way. So, the first characteristic of a gesture
transducer able to support an instrumental interaction is that it
must be, by principle, a pair of symmetrical unidirectional
transducers: a force or a displacement sensor paired with an
actuator (motor).
The physical phenomenon within the gesture action and
perception (tactilo-proprio-kinesthesic perception) are complex
and accurate. There are several important criterions that we must
consider carefully in the design of retroactive gesture
transducers:
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-236
• the number of degrees of freedom (DOF), (our hand has
itself 23 degrees of freedom),
• the bandwidth of gestural signals (at least 1KHz),
• the resolution of displacements (up to 1mm),
• the range of forces (up to several hundred N),
• the range of displacements (at least ~ 1m).
One of the greatest difficulties in the design of such devices is
to respect all these criterions at the same time in the same device
assuming that under a sufficient level, the gesture interaction has
no relevance at all.
And then, above all, a particular difficulty is to provide a well-
adapted geometry (or morphology :s hape and displacement
trajectories,…) to the physical component we manipulate. Due
to the physical contact and interaction, on the contrary to the
electro- acoustical or visual transducers, it is not possible to
build a universal mechanical architecture available for every
application.
We worked on this set of problems since 1978. The first TGR
was built by Jean-Loup Florens in 1978 [FLORENS (JL), 1978].
Fig.1a - On the left : First TGR® from ACROE - J-L.
Florens (1978)
This device, sensing forces and displacements at its
manipulation stick was able to produce a force-feedback of
several tens of N with a time response of about 1ms, and with a
displacement range of about 1m. It allowed for the first time to
evaluate the importance of the force-feedback in the
manipulation of simple virtual objects. It allowed also to
highlight, from decisive experiences, the inter-sensory
phenomenon and its importance (for example, the influence of
the visual perception on a correlated tactile perception, and
conversely).
As econd device was built in 1981 by Claude Cadoz and Jean-
Loup Florens [CADOZ (C), LUCIANI (A), FLORENS (JL),
1984, 1989], (fig.1).
Fig. 1b : "la Touche", C. Cadoz, J-L. Florens (1981)
This piano key device, more compact and with better
performances that the previous was the first table device. But it
had always only one degree of freedom.
It allowed carrying out the first actual real-time multisensory
interaction.
The next step was the invention of the concept and technology
of Modular Retroactive Keyboard (CRM®) and of its associated
principle of Slice Motor ®[ CADOZ (C), LISOWSKI (L),
FLORENS (JL), 1987, 1989, 1990, NOUIRI (J), 1994, 1995],
(fig.2).
This concept solved the two crucial problems within the TGR:
modularity in terms of number of degrees of freedom, and
modularity in terms of manipulation morphology.
Fig.2 - The Slice Motor® - C. Cadoz, L. Lisowski, J-L.
Florens, 1987
A unique rectilinear magnetic field is provided by a set of
magnetic "slices" (one per key) inserted between flat coils (one
per key) driving each key. This principle allows getting a strong
magnetic field (by adding the one of each magnet) within a very
compact volume. It is possible to add any number of keys in a
complete modular way, according to the number of degrees of
freedom needed.

Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-237
Fig.3 - Morphological modularity: several "habillages".
The "habillages"a re added mechanical components, designed
according to the specific applications, that convert the rectilinear
and parallel sensor-actuator axes provided by the bloc to the
manipulated object trajectories.
The first version (1987), with 16 DOF, 13,75mm width per slice,
3mmo f minimum displacement detection, 80N of maximum
force and 1ms of response time, was the most performant in its
category. Thanks to this device, J-L. Florens [FLORENS (JL),
1988] achieved the first real-time simulation of a bowed string
played with a real gesture, showing the fundamental role of the
mechanical interaction between the player and the object in
terms of quality and expressiveness of the sound.
Numerous other experiments achieved thanks to this
equipment were decisive for the global understanding of the
gesture in instrumental interaction and to demonstrate the
relevance of physical modeling in this context.
After numerous analyses, experiments and improvements
carried out from this period, a second family of TGR based on
the same technology has been built. The maximum force
provided on each DOF can reach today 200N, and the main
categories of "habillages"h ave been designed and implemented:
classical keyboard, 2D, 3D sticks, pliers, 6D stylet, 6D platform,
6D sphere,…
The size, variety and performances of the ACROE's TGR family
give them the place of the best candidate for the future desk
haptic devices.
These devices are today used for various applications: basic
experiences on haptic modality in experimental psychology,
telemanipulation, nanomanipulation, etc. and, of course for
artistic musical, visual and multisensory creation.
2. The CORDIS-ANIMA language
The second important concept in the Interactive Multisensory
Simulation is of course the simulation itself. So, the physical
modeling, which is the background of simulation, is not simply a
judicious paradigm to link with TGR, but the TGR and the
physical modeling (or simulation of physical objects) are the
two non-separable components of a single approach. Each of
them can give the best when conceived and implemented within
the context of the other. We considered these two concepts as
non-separable from the beginning of our work in 1976.
The simulation paradigm holds the idea of a reference, for the
mental and material representations, to the physical real objects
and phenomenon. But it is only a reference, assuming that our
active and cognitive system have been elaborated through
permanent interaction with the real world. The laws, the regular
properties of this last have equivalent and resonance in the
structure and the economy of our active-cognitive system. This
"ecological" point of view, related to the one of Gibson
[GIBSON (J), 1979], is crucial in this approach. But it plays
only as a reference since it is no longer question (and, by the
way feasible) to duplicate the real world, but to provide a stable
basis for invention of free imaginative and expressive
representations.
Since the interaction between instrumentalist and instrument is
supported, through the TGR, by two signals representing dual
physical variables (intensive as input, extensive as output, or
conversely), and in respect to the scale of the considered
phenomenon, the conceptual framework will be the Newtonian
physics. Then, the basic notions represented in the language will
be inertia, spatial positions, displacements, velocities, and
physical interaction laws, referenced to the classic mechanic
mathematics.
Designing the simulation process, then, must be supported by
ah igh level language avoiding the user to write the basic code
for each case. The definition of the primitives is then
determinant for the consistency, the generality and the relevance
of the language. So, the CORDIS-ANIMA formalism [CADOZ
(C), LUCIANI (A), FLORENS (JL), 1983, 1984, 1985, 1989,
1991, 1993, 1994] was completely (and exclusively) deduced
from a main principle: the generalization of the interaction
concept from the macroscopic scale (interaction between
instrumentalist and instrument) to the components of the
"object" themselves. This principle led to the general pattern of
the CORDIS-ANIMA models: a network where the nodes (the
<MAT> elements) are the smallest modules representing inertia,
and where the links (the <LIA> elements) represent physical
interactions between them. Under <MAT> is an algorithm
calculating at each sampling time a position (in one, two or
three-dimensional space) from a force input and according to an
inertia parameter (M). Under <LIA> are several kinds of
algorithms calculating the interaction forces between the two
<MAT> it links, from their positions and according to basic
interaction laws like elasticity, viscosity, etc.
These algorithms are designed in absolute optimized forms in
regard of the number of basic numeric operations and of the
calculation delays. So, the language is general and consistent.
This systemic pattern assumes that all the relations between its
entities, whatever the scale (including the one of the
instrumentalist itself) are bi-directional interactions. There is no
ap r i o r ihierarchy, but any hierarchy can be decided in the
modeling approach. The properties of the models are
"emerging": they come exclusively from the local properties of
its components and from the way they are combined in the
network.
This is a strong choice having important consequences in the
modeling approach and, more deeply, in the creation process
itself, since we must think everything in terms of interaction.
3.  Real-time simulators
The CORDIS-ANIMA system can be implemented on any
general-purpose computer but the real-time interaction implies
two major conditions: of course a maximum of computing
power to simulate models of sufficient complexity, but also a
specific control of the input and output protocols. A real-time
simulation loop is indeed complex: it is constituted of three
nested loops at three frequencies: the sound sampling frequency
(the higher), the image sampling frequency and the gesture
sampling frequency. The two last being a sous-multiple of the
first. The synchronism must be absolute and driven by an
external clock. For each input (gesture) data, the computer has to
run a complete simulation loop including the nested ones and to
produce the output data (for sound, image and force-feedback
control).
In the early stages of development in the laboratory, the very
first simulators were in fact real-time in their principle: an
analogic computer has been used for the first force-feedback
experiences, and a DEC LSI11 just after. The LSI11 processor
was controlled by an external clock assuming a rigorous
synchronism of the input and output. Of course, the simulated
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-238
models were very simple, and sometimes simulated in very low
frequency, but they were real-time.
After that, we adopted two consecutive solutions for real-time
simulation:
In 1982, Talin Berberyan [DARS-BERBERYAN (T), 1982,
1983] built a dedicated processor, the CTR (CORDIS Temps-
réel), with a hardware implementation of the CORDIS-ANIMA
algorithms, that was probably the first real-time processor for
physical modeling. It allowed to simulate models of strings (or
others) with about 20 to 30 masses in real-time and with gestural
control. It has been replaced during the 80's by an Array
Processor (AP120 from Floating-Point System inc.) that reach
approximately the same performances, but with more generality.
In both of the previous cases, the simulator was a specific
machine exclusively dedicated to simulation process and driven
by a host computer. The next step was centered on Silicon
Graphics workstations (1993) offering at this time the best
compromise between the computing power, the graphical
resources and the general software environment (under Unix). In
this last case, as in any case today focused on any non dedicated
platform, it is not possible to overcome the real-time constraints
without intervention at the basic hardware (including the
processor in a specific architecture allowing a complete control
of the input/output data-flows) and at the basic software level (of
the operating system itself in order to eliminate all operations
not strictly involved in the simulation during the simulation
process).
Fig.4 - Real-time manipulation with TELLURIS
The TELLURIS project, dedicated to real-time multisensory
simulations with usual platforms, is at this time a major axe of
development in the laboratory.
4. Study and research on the human
interaction modalities
[CADOZ (C), LUCIANI (A), FLORENS (JL), 1984, 1988,
1992, 1994, 1996,1997]
The gesture, in instrumental interaction, is more than a simple
"control". From a physical point of view, one can consider that
during the interaction, the instrumentalist and the instrument are
together a global system which properties depends intrinsically
of the ones of each of them and which is more than the sum of
their parts. Moreover, in the natural instrumental interactions,
the instrumentalist is the source of any energy produced. From
this point of view, the study of instrumental interaction concerns
the physical phenomenon involved: the dynamic properties of
the mechanical systems (of the instrument as of the
instrumentalist itself), the energy transfers, energy
transformations (from mechanical to acoustical vibrations or to
visible movements).
From a communication point of view, the instrumental
interaction is a combination of three nested loops, from the
gesture action to the haptic perception, from the g.a. to the
auditive perception, and from the g.a. to the visual perception.
The study, then, concerns the human motricity, the auditive
perception, the visual perception and the complex haptic
perception (tactilo-proprio-kinesthetic perception). But even if
these fields can be studied separately, the more relevant and
needed study is about their combination in a global multi-
sensori-motor process.
The study of the instrumental interaction, thanks to
experimental devices or in order to develop them, suppose an
investigation in each of these fields.
4.1 Instrumental gesture typology
[CADOZ (C), 1994, 1995, 1999]
The gestures applied on a same instrument may be of different
types. But we can generally observe three main categories
whatever the instrument and its function. They are determined
by the principles of action, modification and selection.
In the action or excitation part of the gesture (for example
what a violinist does with his right hand), we produce an energy,
which is communicated to the instrument and converted by it
into energy in the final phenomenon (the sound).
In modification or modulation part of the gesture (the left hand
of violinist), we modify certain properties of the instrument, and,
consequently the way in which it works in the previous function.
We may spend energy in this gesture, but it is not transmit to the
final phenomenon.
In the selection part of the gesture (ex: selection of keys in piano
performance), we spend energy to move our fingers, hands,
arms… in order to act on, or modify something but there is no
actual effect on the instrument.
These three categories are generally intimately correlated.
They are components of the gesture as a whole, but from a
physical point of view, they correspond to different process and
then, they are not supported by the same rules. From the
communicational point of view, they don't play the same role.
The excitation gesture has a quantitative consequence while the
modification gesture is more qualitative. To the selection gesture
corresponds an exploration of separate categorized elements.
One of the direct applications of this typology is that it offers
criterions for gesture device design: the force feedback (which
has a technological cost) is actually necessary only for the
excitation gesture.
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Instruments for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-239
4.2 Coding, analyzing, composing the
instrumental gesture
The gesture transducers introduced the gesture signal .S o ,i n
the same way than the sound signal gave rise to the Schaefferian
"Objet Sonore ", the gesture can become an object that can be
recorded, observed, analyzed, transformed, edited, composed.
Unfortunately it is not so simple! The gesture interaction
doesn't produce one, but two correlated (input and output)
signals. Both of them can be recorded and candidate to editing.
But what are the meaning and the consequences of the
modifications we can apply on them? The output signal is
completely determined by the input signal and the global
transfer function of the virtual physical object. Conversely, the
input signal is completely determined by the output (which is the
input of instrumentalist) and the "instrumentalist transfer
function", that is not a transfer function since the instrumentalist
(hope so!) is an active component. So, too fast manners with this
can be of catastrophic consequence: an arbitrary modification of
one of the signals ( af o rtiori of the two) may be inconsistent
within the integrity and permanence of the mechanical systems
involved (instrument and instrumentalist).
This point represents the most important (and fascinating)
question in this problem of understanding and treatment of
instrumental gesture signal.
We laid down the basis and the theoretical solution of this
problem. Assuming that the notion of gesture signal is, strictly
speaking, non-definable, we replaced it by two concepts: the
gesture interaction signal,w hich is solely measurable (through
TGR) but that cannot express exactly the intention of the
instrumentalist, and an hypotheticalinternal gesture signal ,
unreachable for measurement, that represents purely the gesture
intention.
To define the second, Sylvie Gibet and Jean-Loup Florens
[GIBET (S), FLORENS (JL), 1987, 1988] considered the
instrumentalist itself as a two parts mechanical system: a purely
passive one (that can be, incidentally, modeled thanks to
CORDIS-ANIMA), and an ideal generator of force or
displacement. Using the two interactive signals, it is possible
(theoretically) to infer this model and to get the two separate
parts. Editing the internal gesture signal so obtained, it becomes
possible to create new gestures in respect of the consistence and
integrity of the (virtual) instrumentalist.
This defines the rigorous theoretical context of coding,
representing and editing of gesture. But it is quite complex to
implement.
Some simplifications are possible when restricting to gestures
with low interaction (for example in the percussive actions).
Claude Cadoz and Christophe Ramstein [CADOZ (C),
RAMSTEIN (C), 1990, 1991] developed a first gesture editor
working solely on the input signal that allowed to create and edit
gestural scores.
We are today working on further developments from these
bases and for the definition of a standard format for the gesture
representation, editing and transmission.
Through the instrument modeling, the gesture performance
and the gesture editing, we have at our disposal the complete
panoply to propose a new approach for music and animated
images creation with computer, replacing totally the focus on the
phenomenon by a focus on their causes. Of course, this approach
is completely compatible with a continuation of signal modeling
and editing and with composition of music and/or animated
images scenarii by traditional methods.
4.3 Study of haptic modality and
multisensory interaction
The technical equipment for gesture interaction (TGR) and
interactive multisensory simulation (IMS) is, apart its
application in music and image creation, ideal as experimental
environment to study the human active-cognitive features.
Numerous experiments achieved randomly during the
development and adjustment of the systems has soon focussed
our attention on the peculiar properties of the cognitive system
in interactive and multisensory situation: the role of the action
during perception, the mutual influence of the sensory channels
between them, or the robustness of our action-cognition system
in certain cases, in spite of strong anamorphosis in the
experimental conditions.
Some of these experiences have been carried out
systematically in several specific works.
Sensory-motor anamorphosis - the "presence"
notion
During the 80's, an important evolution occurred in the Man-
Machine-Interaction domain (MMI), with concepts like direct
manipulation of windows, icon, and menu through pointing
devices (WIMP). This evolution from a technocentric to an
anthropocentric approach of MMI borne the general idea of
"metaphorisation" of interaction: make the manipulation of
numerical entities and processes analogous to the manipulation
of simple current objects. The full outcome of this concept is
probably in the Virtual Reality trend, strongly emphasized from
the end of 80's [RHEINGOLG (H), 1991, KALAWSKY (R-S),
1993, QUEAU (P), 1993, CADOZ (C), 1994, KUNII (TL),
LUCIANI (A), 1998] in which the laboratory has been
implicated.
As pecific difficulty in this domain is to get a good projection
of the real or referenced scene in the virtual ones. Two obstacles
arise: a reduction of the properties through the numerical
representation, and several kinds of anamorphoses between the
real and the virtual scenes. We dedicated some works to the
second [BOUZOUITA(A), CADOZ(C), UHL (C), LUCIANI
(A), 1995, 1996, 1997].
An example of first order anamorphose (purely geometric) is,
for example, when we control the 2D displacements of a point
on a surface by two buttons driving separately the horizontal and
the vertical dimensions. Such situations may be imposed by
unavoidable technologic constraints, and sometimes they can be
overcome by training. But in certain cases, they may bring
advantages by transposing complex manipulation in simpler
ones, better adapted to our possibilities or relieved of
unnecessary and perturbing features. The question is then: on
what criterion can we determine if an unavoidable anamorphose
is a drawback, or how can we define an anamorphose that
improve the interaction? This problem cannot be studied without
considering the whole context of the interaction, and,
particularly in terms of multisensoriality.
So, we brought to the fore, against the general expectation that
gave favor to the immersive realism, that under certain
conditions, we are able to tolerate quite strong geometrical and
spatial anamorphoses, for example the separation and the
delocalisation of the sources of the acoustical, visual and haptic
phenomenon for a same virtual object, or the transformation of
the range and trajectories of its manipulated parts. More
precisely, when the force-feedback devices performances are
sufficient and can respect the dynamic and energetic
consistence, this last is more important than the pure geometric
and visual one in the sophisticated (and costly) 3D immersive
systems.
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Instruments for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-240
Now, this is crucial, because it is quite impossible to get
relevant performances in force-feedback within immersive
approach. On the other hand, these performances are possible in
the desk and "vis-à-vis" systems.
In fact, the relevant and crucial concept here, is not this notion
of purely visual and superficial realism, but the "feeling of
presence": what makes us convinced that the phenomenon with
which or by which we act and perceive are manifestation of
reality? What makes present the things? Feeling of presence is
stronger than "realism": it is more efficient, as well in learning
tasks as in dexterous manipulation ones. Our hypothesis
[LUCIANI (A)] is that the gesture channel, by its double
function (linking closely action and perception) has the major
role in this question: everything being equal elsewhere, just
adding the gesture channel with sufficient performance brings a
gap in the presence feeling.
The haptic and multisensory modality
In collaboration with the Experimental Psychology Laboratory
(LPE) of the Université Pierre Mendès-France, in Grenoble, we
worked to better understand the haptic modality and the gestural
action-perception loop, and also to get a new understanding of
the eye-hand inter-sensory coupling.
Some relevant results have been obtained recently: it seams
possible to experimentally determine if a person acts preferably
with reference to visual or to tactilo-propri-kinesthetic
information,the person uses the forces he produces to get
information on the external environment, certain forces perturb
this estimation; so, there are useful and non-useful forces and
certain persons are more sensible to this perturbation.
This results in new analysis methods allowing to better
distinguishing between categories of people ("geometric people"
and "dynamical people").
5. Environments and interfaces for artistic
creation
The Gesture Interfaces (TGR), the simulation language
(CORDIS-ANIMA), the simulator (TELLURIS) are the core of
the creation tool. To complete this tool, a global environment to
support the creation process must be designed.
The creation process is the series of operations we do in order
to achieve an artistic work: a sound or/and a video record, a
mixed numeric piece where gesture intervenes during the
performance, a mixed piece where fixed numeric data, real-time
numeric processes, real people, instruments, objects can perform
together.
Ac reation environment must support the different tasks
involved to achieve such works. It must be a production tool
allowing to create the various objects: models, set of parameters,
descriptions or recordings of real or virtual performances, sound
and/or visual signals, scores, etc. But it must be also acreation
tool, providing tutorials, supporting experimentation, suggesting
heuristics, accompanying empiric explorations, allowing
scribing and mnemonic marking. He must also provide tools to
analyze and understand the phenomenon.
In 1985, Annie Luciani and Aimé Razafindrakoto [LUCIANI
(A), 1985, RAZAFINDRAKOTO (A), 1996] designed the first
modeler allowing to create graphically CORDIS-ANIMA
models of 2D and 3D objects. The graphical interface was
implemented in an Evans § Sutherland graphic workstation, and
the models were simulated, for some of them in real-time, in the
AP120 array-processor.
From the beginning of 90's, this area become an important part
of our work. Because the real-time simulation techniques were
at this time difficult to implement in ordinary platforms, we
decided to develop a special effort in specialized interfaces
dedicated to our physical modeling method. Moreover, we
decided to approach independently the musical and the visual
domains, which communities and needs were quite different. De
facto, we are working actually and yet today on three
environments: GENESIS for musical creation, MIMESIS for
animated images creation (which are both non-real-time
environments) and TELLURIS, which, connected with the
previous, allows experiments and creation solely in the
laboratory.
GENESIS and MIMESIS are both interfaces to built physical
models within the CORDIS-ANIMA formalism. They work
mainly in the same way, with a two modes process: creating and
editing the models / running the models to produce the output
phenomenon (sound signals / visual signal). Nevertheless, an
important difference is that MIMESIS requires two steps in the
final result production (see after).
GENESIS1
The creation of a model in GENESIS is made by direct
manipulation of icons corresponding to the basic components
(<MAT>, <LIA>) of the CORDIS-ANIMA language. Among
them, GENESIS uses only the unidimensional components that
are simpler to manipulate and to calculate, and that are
sufficient. Positioning each <MAT> and linking then by <LIA>,
on a workbench, we define the network (structure) of the objet.
Then, we can give parameters and initial conditions thanks to
suitable windows. A first simulation with a visualization of the
movements of the objects at low rate allows verifying and
understanding how the model works. Putting "microphones" on
certain <MAT> elements, the movements of these <MAT> are
recorded in a file that becomes the output sound files.
With these very simple bases, any user (even without any
previous experience or specific knowledge) can get start with
the concepts and functions, obtain models that works and
understand the philosophy of the approach.
Beyond this elementary layer, numerous elaborated functions
supported by very studied ergonomics allow to work at different
levels: analysis of the properties of the structures, grouping of
elements in functional entities, define macro and
metaparameters allowing to control the "emergent" properties of
the models, define the energy and action time of "pilot events",
etc. Within these resources, GENESIS can be used not only to
create sounds, but also to compose music in a new way (see
below).
Aw ide and structured library of generic objects and processes
is provided, accompanied with several kinds of didactic
interactive supports.
The first version of GENESIS was distributed under
partnership collaboration in 1996. From this date, numerous
improvements made by Nicolas Castagné [CASTAGNE (N),
CADOZ (C), 2002] and under a close collaboration with the
users allowed to realize a very powerful tool. It is, with
MIMESIS, the core of a user network created in 1998 in the
Rhône-Alpes Region (France), and with several European
institutions, called R_APM (Pedagogic Mobile Workshop
Network).
MIMESIS
Apart the final object, which is an animated sequence instead
of a sound file, MIMESIS, presents three other important
differences:
1 [See on www-acroe.imag.fr]
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Instruments for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-241
• the objects are 3D
• a textual language is used to create and edit the models
• as pecific visualization phase is defined after the
mechanical simulation.
Textuel langage
Due to the great number of particles and the complexity of
the topology for the objects to be animated and visualized, a
direct manipulation system is not possible. So it was necessary
to define a language for the conception of such physical
networks using logic operations, loops and symbolic assemblage
under graphico-textual modalities.
Visualisation
As a strong feature of the simulation approach, the animated
image creation works in the opposite way of the classical
approaches. In the last, the visual properties of the objects
(shape, texture, color, etc.) are first defined. Then, they are
animated. In the MIMESIS (simulation) way, the movement
(animation) is first, and then, the objects (a set of consistently
moving particles) must be "clothed" with visual attributes. This
visualization can be done through several different ways that
are, in so speaking, a modeling of "how photons meet matter".
Annie Luciani and Arash Habibi [HABIBI (A), LUCIANI (A),
1993, 1997] developed a physical modeling based concept for
visualization, the "engraved screen" inspired from the technique
invented, in the traditional animated images domain, by
Alexeieff.
Fig.5 - The GENESIS (top) and MIMESIS workbenchs
(bottom)
GENESIS and MIMESIS are used today in several cultural
institutions and have been used also for numerous creations in
music and image (see below). Claude Cadoz created is musical
piece " pico..TERA "( 2001) which uses exclusively GENESIS,
and Annie Luciani her film " Mémoires Vives "( 2001) that uses
also exclusively the simulation technique.
6. The future platform
Sight and hearing are two complementary ways of
apprehension of the objects and phenomenon in our
environment. They inform us on different features from a same
object or event. Some objects are better perceived by sight, other
by hearing. So, it is not surprising that the creation of acoustic
and the creation of visual phenomenon refer to different
approaches. So, it was legitimate to dedicate tools for each
domain. But the simulation paradigm is, precisely, above the
perception modalities. Focusing on the causes rather than on
their effects open the way for a deep synthesis allowing not only
to superficially "paste" together the audio and the visual media,
but to integrate a multisensory consistence in the "model" itself.
In an other hand, several years of development and practice
within GENESIS and MIMESIS reveal two facts: numerous of
their functionality are de facto formally identical (even if they
are sometimes implemented with some superficial differences),
and it is no rare that, using one or the other, the artists from one
category develop obviously implicit thinking of the other. This
incites strongly to actualize this synthesis in a unique tool.
The computing power needed by real-time multisensory
simulation is today reachable, at least for models of reasonable
complexity, and the CORDIS-ANIMA simulation process are
now stable enough to be implemented in any platform.
If we add the fact that gesture devices (TGR) are now compact
enough, with high-performance, to be integrate nearby the
mouse on usual desk workstations, we can clearly conceive the
future platform: a real-time simulator connected to a general
physical modeler and to panoply of TGR.
Assuming (through a deep and carefully studied definition of
the standards) the complete transparency and compatibility with
general environments for computer artistic creation, and thanks
to a relevant analyze of what can be transmit and what must be
resident on a site, such platforms can be the nodes of a wide user
network.
7. Artistic, scientific, research, creation and
applications
In this last part, we expose and summarize, in a global survey,
several significant steps in the research and application of these
concepts and techniques, as well in the internal activities during
or in parallel of the designing of the tools, as in collaborative
activities in several fields: artistic creation, education and
pedagogy, scientific and industrial applications.
1979:
• First TGR (J-L. Florens) and first experiments of gestural
interaction with virtual objects (rigid obstacles), with an
analogic calculator, and then with DEC-LSI11.
• First simulation of vibrating structures (C. Cadoz).
1980-83:
• First CORDIS-ANIMA simulator (C. Cadoz) on DEC-
LSI11, first non real-time simulation of strings, and also the
"falling ball", a simple model of a ball falling on the ground
and producing very realistic sounds.
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-242
• First simulation of simple deformable objects manipulated
in real-time and visualized on oscilloscope screen (A.
Luciani).
• The "Touche" (C. Cadoz and J-L. Florens), simulation of
various matter tactile rendering.
• The CTR (Cordis Temps-Réel), first physical modeling
real-time procesor (T. Berberyan).
• Thanks to the CTR (specialized hardware for CORDIS-
ANIMA simulation in real-time), simulation of plucked
strings manipulated with the "Touche" and modulated (in
elasticity) with a position sensor.
• Multisensory (eye-hand) experiences with simple
visualization on oscilloscope screen.
1983-87:
• Implementation of real-time simulator on Floating-Point
System AP120 (J-L. Florens).
• Implementation of the first modeler (A. Luciani, A.
Razafindrakoto).
• Design of a vectorial real-time visualization screen (B.
Merlier).
• Model of a marionette simulated and manipulated (by its
feet) in real-time.
• First complete multisensory real-time simulation: a tennis
ball (deformable object), played with a racket moving
horizontally and manipulated with the "Touche", striking
walls with acoustical vibrating properties.
• First models of bow-string interaction within the CORDIS-
ANIMA modeling (C. Cadoz).
• Design of the "Clavier Rétroactif Modulaire" (CRM®) and
its slice-motor technology (C. Cadoz, L. Lisowski, J-L.
Florens)
1987-93:
• Thanks to the CRM and the AP120, first real-time
simulation of a violin bowed string (J-L. Florens): the bow,
handily manipulated through a joystick mounted on the
CRM could be controlled on pressure and velocity. The
bow-string interaction included the pressure parameter. A
third key from the CRM allowed modifying the elasticity of
the string, and then its pitch.
• With the same equipment, model of maracas with a set of
particles in a box, manipulated in real-time with the CRM
(C. Cadoz).
• Series of models of structured deformable objects for image
animation (S. Jimenez, A. Luciani):
- second model of marionette with force-feedback,
-flag, football ball, trampoline, basketball basket, bicycle,
complex vehicle, etc.
• First models (animated images) of non-structured objects:
large set of particles in elastic interaction, producing
waterfall effect, study of plasticity, etc. (S. Jimenez).
• Second model of complete real-time multisensory
simulation, the "Granule" (J-L. Florens). This model was
decisive in regard of the "presence" sensation: several small
objects are enclosed in a circular 2D box manipulated by
CRM. Thanks to a very precise modeling of the collisions
between the objects and the container, even with very
simple sounds and visual representations, but thanks to the
deep consistence of the physical phenomenon and their
relation to manipulation, we obtain a genuine effect of real
existence ("presence").
• Development of the first gesture editor (C. Cadoz, Ch.
Ramstein).
• Premises of GENESIS.
1993-2000:
• Implementation of simulator and all environments on
Silicon Graphics Workstations, replacing the AP120.
• Models of complex structured objects and complex
interactions: complex vehicle interacting with a soil (B.
Chanclou). In the context of contracts with CEA for the
studies of a VAP (Autonomous Planetary Vehicle), a
complete 6 wheel articulated vehicle has been modeled,
taking account the deformations of the wheels, their
interaction with the soil, the deformation of the soil. This
vehicle included also a physical model of motor generating
its movements.
• In the same context, models of motricity have been studied
and implemented in simple models of frog, snakes, etc.
• At the same time, B. Chanclou implemented the first
physical models to realize non-physical operations: task
planning for robotic application.
• Experiments on psycho-physics: using of multisensory
simulation and gesture control in complex manipulation
with several collaborating people on a same task (A.
Bouzouita, C. Uhl).
• Models of collective behavior within large ensemble of
particles:
-m odels of sand, pastes, smoke, fluid (A. Luciani, Z.
Junedi, A. Vapillon),
-m odels of turbulence and chaotic phenomenon,
autosimilarity,
-application to the human scale of crowd behavior (A.
Luciani, N. Tixier),
From these steps, the modeling activity in animated image
made a breakthrough where the artistic (or esthetic) finality
become significantly a guideline for modeling.
• Starting of the general study of the form/movement relation
as a central paradigm in animated images with physical
modeling (A. Luciani).
• Development of the "engraved screen" principle for
visualization of physical model by physical models (A.
Habibi, A. Luciani).
• Models of large scale atmospheric phenomenon: aurora
borealis (E. Juliax, A. Luciani).
• First piece (image and music) created with the technique of
ACROE, by ACROE: ESQUISSES - 1993. (ACROE).
• First versions of GENESIS and MIMESIS (1995, C.
Cadoz, O. Corbun, A. Luciani, A. Habibi).
• First international Workshops with GENESIS and
MIMESIS (1996).
• Starting of the R_APM project (Network of Mobile
Pedagogic Workshop) in the Rhône-Alpes Region, and of
teaching of artistic creation with computer by ACROE in
several institutions (conservatory and school of art in
Grenoble, Turin, Karlsurhe,…).
• Residences of artists in ACROE, creation of several
musical and/or visual pieces by tens of artists, organization
of public events (concerts, expositions, conferences).
2000-2003:
• Development of high level versions of GENESIS and
MIMESIS and of their didactic environments (N. Castagné,
C. Cadoz, A. Luciani, P. Fourcade).
• New TGR improving the performance of the CRM
technology, and development of a complete panoply of
"habillages": keyboard, 2D, 3D, 6D joysticks, etc. (J-L.
Florens, G. Brocard).
• Development of the TELLURIS simulator on powerful
multi-processor platforms (J-L. Florens, D. Muniz, Y.
Chara).
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-243
• Development of fundamental experiments in haptic
perception and multisensory interaction (A. Luciani, P.
Ostorero, T. Olhmann).
• Development of scientific and technologic applications of
the IMS and TGR:
-i ntroduction of the TGR in car industry (J-L. Florens, A.
Luciani)
-development of a "nanomanipulator with force-feedback"
in collaboration with the LEPES laboratory (CNRS-
Grenoble) (J-L. Florens, A. Luciani, C. Cadoz, J. Chevrier,
S. Marlière, D. Urma).
• Development of new models: a new version of the bowed-
string has been developed by J-L; Florens (invited
conference in the Forum Acousticum 2002) where two
strings can be played in a 2D space allowing to apply the
bow on a realistic way on the both, or on one of them, with
a very accurate gesture.
• First musical piece created by C. Cadoz ("pico..TERA")
illustrating the principle of creation at the compositional
structure level by the physical model paradigm.
• "Mémoires-Vives", film from A. Luciani.
• Development of wide structured libraries of models for
musical creation and of the basis of the composition by
physical modeling (C. Cadoz).
[see Figures 5X, 5Y, 6 and 7 at the end]
7. The team
Jean-Claude Risset is President of ACROE, and Max Mathews
President of Honor, Annie Luciani and Claude Cadoz manage
ACROE-ICA, Jean-Loup Florens has general scientific and
technical high responsibility, Maria Guglielmi is Secretary of
ACROE, Guy Diard was our so kind multimedia engineer that
left us so suddenly in 2001, Nicolas Castagné joints us as
permanent member just after his PhD.
Numerous non-permanent members working during periods
on the different axes complete this basic team. More than 20
Univeritary Thesis have been written on the ACROE-ICA
program. About 300 trainee students have worked on different
subjects during the 20 last years. The list of names of these
numerous contributors of the results we can show today is too
long to be placed there. But we address them warm thanks.
8. Acknowledgements
The works of ACROE-ICA are supported by:
•French Ministry of Culture and Communication
• French Ministry of Research and Technology
• Institut National Polytechnique de Grenoble
• Rhône-Alpes Regional Council
• General Council of Isère
• Culture dept. of Grenoble
These supports are completed by specific contracts with:
•Ministry of National Education, Research and Technology.
• Renault-United Parts France.
• CNRS (Force-feedback Nanomanipulateur Project), etc.
Bibliography ACROE-ICA
Force-feedback Transducers
FLORENS (JL), 1978 - "Coupleur gestuel interactif pour la
commande et le contrôle de sons synthétisés en temps réel" -
Thèse Docteur Ingénieur - Spécialité Electronique - I.N.P.G. -
Grenoble 1978.
CADOZ (C), LUCIANI (A), FLORENS (JL), 1984 -
"Responsive Input Devices and Sound Synthesis by Simulation
of Instrumental Mechanisms : The Cordis System" - Computer
Music Journal, 8, N°3, pp. 60-73. M.I.T. Press, Cambridge
Mass. 1984.
CADOZ (C), LUCIANI (A), FLORENS (JL), 1989 -
"Responsive Input Devices and Sound Synthesis by Simulation
of Instrumental Mechanisms : The Cordis System" - In Music
Machine Curtis Roads Ed. MIT Press, Cambridge Mass. 1989.
LISOWSKI (L), CADOZ (C), 1989 - "Conception, optimization
and realisation of extra flat DC linear motors" - Proc. of 4th
International Conference on Electrical Machines and Drives -
IEEE - Sept 1989.
CADOZ (C), LISOWSKI (L), FLORENS (JL), 1989 - "Clavier
rétroactif modulaire et actionneur modulaire plat" - Brevet
Français déposé le 13 / 10 / 88. n°88 14064, US n° 07/420 242
-Europe n° 0 365 441 - Japon, 1989/11/10 - n° 265299 -
Titulaire : ACROE.
CADOZ (C), LISOWSKI (L), FLORENS (JL) - "Modular
Feedback Keyboard" - International Computer Music
Conference - Glasgow 1990.
CADOZ (C), LISOWSKI (L), FLORENS (JL), 1990 - "A
modular Feedback Keyboard design" -
Computer Music Journal, 14, N°2, pp. 47-5. M.I.T. Press,
Cambridge Mass. 1990.
LUCIANI (A), CADOZ (C), FLORENS (JL), 1994 - "The CRM
device : a force feedback gestural transducer to real-time
computer animation" - Displays , Vol. 15 Number 3 - 1994 -
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford OX2 8DP UK,  pp. 149-155.
NOUIRI (J), FLORENS (JL), CADOZ (C), 1994 - "Actionneurs
modulaires plats à flux réparti" - Colloque EPE Chapter
Symposium, Lausanne 17-21 Oct 1994 pp. 331-334.
NOUIRI (J), 1995 - "Etude pour la conception de transducteurs
gestuels à retour d'effort et de modèles de systèmes mécaniques
pour leur contrôle" - Thèse de l'INPG, Spécialité Signal-Image-
Parole, Grenoble Nov. 1995.
CORDIS-ANIMA language
CADOZ (C), "Synthèse sonore par simulation de mécanismes
vibratoires", Thèse de Docteur Ingénieur, Spécialité
Electronique - INPG. - Grenoble 1979.
CADOZ (C), LUCIANI (A), FLORENS (JL), "Synthèse
musicale par simulation des mécanismes instrumentaux.
Transducteurs Gestuels Rétroactifs pour l'étude du jeu
instrumental", Revue d'Acoustique N° 59, pp. 279-292. Paris
1981.
CADOZ (C), LUCIANI (A), FLORENS (JL), "Synthèse sonore
par modélisation mécanique de l'instrument. Le langage
CORDIS", Onzième ICA, Paris 1983.
LUCIANI (A.), CADOZ (C.), "Modélisation et animation
gestuelle d'objets - Le système ANIMA", CESTA - 1er Colloque
Image, Biarritz 1984.
CADOZ (C), LUCIANI (A), FLORENS (JL), "Gesture,
Instrument and Musical Creation. The CORDIS-AQNIMA
system", Preprint n° 2086, 75th AES Convention Paris 1984.
CADOZ (C), LUCIANI (A), FLORENS (JL), "Responsive
Input Devices and Sound Synthesis by Simulation of
Instrumental Mechanisms : The Cordis System", Computer
Music Journal, 8, N°3, pp. 60-73. M.I.T. Press, Cambridge Mass
1984.
CADOZ (C), LUCIANI (A) - "Processes, Sound Synthesis
Models and the Computer Designed for Musical Creation",
ICMC - Paris IRCAM.1984.
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-244
LUCIANI (A), "Un Outil Informatique de Création d'Images
Animées : Modèles d'objets, Langage, Contrôle Gestuel en
temps réel. Le Système ANIMA", Thèse de Docteur Ingénieur -
INPG.  Grenoble 1985.
RAZAFINDRAKOTO (A), "Langage d'objets pour l'animation,
implantation temps réel", Thèse d'Université - Grenoble 1986.
CADOZ (C), LUCIANI (A), FLORENS (JL), "Responsive
Input Devices and Sound Synthesis by Simulation of
Instrumental Mechanisms : The Cordis System", InMusic
Machine Curtis Roads Ed. MIT Press, Cambridge Mass 1989.
FLORENS (JL), CADOZ (C), "Modular Modelisation and
Simulation of the Instrument", International Computer Music
Conference - Glasgow 1990.
LUCIANI (A), "Modèles Physiques et Animation", Imagina 90 -
Monte-Carlo 1990.
FLORENS (C), CADOZ (C), "The physical Model,
Modelisation and Simulation Systems of the Instrumental
Universe", InRepresentations of Musical Signals .G .D eP oli, A.
Picciali, C. Roads, Ed. MIT Press, 1991.
CADOZ (C), "Modèles physiques, temps réel et contrôle
gestuel avec retour d'effort dans la synthèse sonore pour la
création musicale",  Imagina '91 - Monte-Carlo 1991.
CADOZ (C), LUCIANI (A), FLORENS (JL), "CORDIS-
ANIMA : a Modeling and Simulation System for Sound and
Image Synthesis- The General Formalism", Computer Music
Journal, Vol 17-1 spring 1993, MIT Press.
HABIBI (A), LUCIANI (A) - “ From the physical model to the
eye”, 4th Eurographics Workshop on Animation and Simulation,
Ed. A. Luciani, D. Thalmann - Barcelone - Espagna - September
1993.
CADOZ (C), LUCIANI (A), FLORENS (JL), "CORDIS-
ANIMA : a Modeling and Simulation System for Sound and
Image Synthesis- The General Formalism", CMJ Vol 17-1
spring 1993.
CADOZ (C), LUCIANI (A), FLORENS (JL), “CORDIS
ANIMA : Système de modélisation et de simulation
d’instruments et d’objets physiques pour la création musicale et
l’image animée", Collection "Recherche Musique et Danse",
Actes du colloque "Modèle physique, création musicale et
ordinateur", organisé par l’ACROE Grenoble 1990, Ed. Maison
des Sciences de l’Homme, Paris 1994.
LUCIANI (A), ”Informatique graphique", numéro spécial de
TSI, Vol 14, n°10, Hermes Ed., Paris 1995.
Real-Time Simulators
DARS-BERBERYAN (T), "Etude et réalisation d'un calculateur
spécialisé pour la synthèse sonore en temps réel par simulation
de mécanismes instrumentaux", Thèse l'Institut National
Polytechnique de Grenoble 1982.
DARS-BERBERYAN (T), CADOZ (C) & FLORENS (JL),
"Processeur spécialisé pour le calcul de sons en temps réel par
simulation instrumentale", Onzième ICA, Paris 1983.
FLORENS (JL), LUCIANI (A), CADOZ (C), "Optimized real-
time simulation of objects for musical synthesis and animated
images synthesisInternational", ICMC La Haye 1986.
UHL(C), LUCIANI(A), CADOZ (C), “Le simulateur temps réel
pour le langage CORDIS-ANIMA. Modèles Physiques, Gestes,
Sons, Images” - 3ième séminaire Animation et Simulation. Lille
1994.
UHL (C), "Architecture de machines pour la simulation d'objets
physiques en temps réel", Thèse de l'Institut National
Polytechnique de Grenoble 1996.
FLORENS (JL), LUCIANI (A), CADOZ (C), "A real-time
workstation for physical model of multi-sensorial and gesturally
controlled instrument", ICMC 1998.
GIRAUD (O), "Architecture logicielle haute performance pour
la simulation temps-réel synchrone d'objets physiques
multisensoriels : retour d'effort, synthèse de sons, synthèse
d'images", Thèse de l'Institut National Polytechnique de
Grenoble1999.
Instrumental Interaction
CADOZ (C), LUCIANI (A), FLORENS (JL), "Gesture,
Instrument and Musical Creation. The CORDIS-ANIMA
system", Preprint n° 2086, 75th AES Convention Paris 1984
GIBET (S), "Codage, représentation et traitement du geste
instrumental", Thèse de Docteur de l'Institut National
Polytechnique de Grenoble - Spécialité Electronique, -
Grenoble 1987
CADOZ (C.), "Instrumental Gesture and Musical Composition",
International  Computer Music Conference - Cologne 1988.
GIBET (S) & FLORENS (JL), "Instrumental gesture modeling
by identification with time varying mechanical models",
International Computer Music Conference - Cologne 1988.
CADOZ (C) & RAMSTEIN (C), "Capture, Representation and
Composition of the Instrumental Gesture", International
Computer Music Conference - Glasgow 1990.
RAMSTEIN (C), "Analyse, représentation et traitement du geste
instrumental", Thèse pour obtenir le grade de Docteur de
l'I.N.P.G., Spécialité Informatique, décembre 1991
CADOZ (C) "Interface de Communication Instrumentale -
Interaction gestuelle", Conférence "L'Interface des Mondes
Réels et Virtuels" - Montpellier - Mars 1992
CADOZ (C), "Geste Instrumental et Informatique Musicale" ,
5ièmes Entretiens du Centre Jacques Cartier sur "La
performance Musicale Avancée : une perspective convergente
de l'Artiste et du Scientifique"  - Montréal, 6 - 10 Octobre 1992
LUCIANI (A), "Ordinateur, Images et Mouvements. Apparition
de l'instrumentalité dans l'art du mouvement visuel", Revue Les
Cahiers de l'Ircam n° 2, novembre 1992
CADOZ.(C), “Le geste, canal de communication
homme/machine. La communication instrumentale” - Technique
et science informatiques . Volume 13 - n° 1/1994, pages 31-61
CADOZ (C) , “Relation instrumentale et Création musicale avec
l'ordinateur” - Conférence Culture Technologie Convergence -
Conférence de l'Ontario et des 4 moteurs de l'Europe -
MacLuhan program in Culture and Technology - University de
Toronto - Mai 1994
BOUZOUITA(A), CADOZ(C) - “Interaction Instrumentale
Multisensorielle : Eléments pour l'étude des transformations de
l'espace de l'opérateur et de l'espace de la tâche" Actes IHM'95,
Toulouse 1995.
CADOZ (C), "Physical Modelling and Gestural Interaction in
Computer Music" Workshop in "Currents trends of research on
Acoustics of Musical Instruments, Musical and non Musical
Applications" of the  98th AES Convention - Paris,  1995.
CADOZ (C), " Technologies and Concepts of the Instrumental
Communication,", 2nd Franco-Japonese Conference on
Synthetics Worlds, Paris, January 25-27, 1995, John Wiley &
Sons Publ.
BOUZOUITA(A), UHL (C), LUCIANI (A), CADOZ(C) -
“Manipulation complexe d'objets virtuels" - 5ième Journées
Internationales "Interface des mondes réels et virtuels", AJIIMD
Ed., Montpellier, 21-24 mai 1996, 1996, pp459-470
CADOZ (C), "Réintroduire les sensations physiques : des
interfaces manuelles pour montrer, toucher, palper, éprouver",
Numéro spécial "la Recherche" "l'ordinateur au doigt et à l'oeil"
- n°285 Mars 1996
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-245
LUCIANI (A), "Ordinateur, gestes, images, sons : une nouvelle
ère pour les systèmes dynamiques", Conférence "Voir, entendre,
calculer, raisonner", CNRS SPI & SPM, Paris, la Villette, 10-13
juin 1997
BOUZOUITA (A) "Contribution à l'étude de la perception du
retour d'effort dans la commuication Homme - Machine" - Thèse
de l'Université Joseph Fourier de Grenoble , Spécialité Signal -
Image - Parole, 1997
CADOZ (C), "Musique, gestes, technologies". in "Les nouveaux
gestes de la musique". sous la direction de Hugues Genevois et
Raphaël de Vivo. Editions Parenthèses, Marseille1999.
CADOZ (C), WANDERLEY (M), "Gesture and Music" in
Trends in Gestural Control of Music. Editeur M. Wanderley et
M. Battier - IRCAM, Paris 2000, avec CDROM.
CADOZ (C), "Continuum énergétique du geste au son :
simulation multisensorielles d'objets physiques". in "les
interfaces pour la création musicale". HERMES Editeur. 1999.
Artistic creation Interfaces
HABIBI (A) "Modèles physiques pour la visualisation d'objets
très déformables : Relation, mouvement - forme - image" , Thèse
de l'Institut National Polytechnique de Grenoble, Spécialité
Informatique, Grenoble 1997.
CASTAGNE (N), CADOZ (C) , "L'environnement GENESIS
pour la création musicale à l'aide des modèles physiques
particulaires" - Journées d’Informatique Musicale – Marseille
2002.
CASTAGNE (N), CADOZ (C) , "GENESIS: A Friendly
Musician-Oriented Environment for Mass-Interaction Physical
Modeling" - ICMC – Goteborg 2002.
CADOZ (C), "Le Modèle Physique, métaphore pour la création
musicale" - Journées d’Informatique Musicale – Marseille 2002.
CADOZ (C), "The Physical Model as Metaphor for Musical
Creation"pico..TERA", a piece entirely generated by physical
model" - ICMC – Goteborg 2002.
Voir aussi www-acroe.imag.fr
General recent publications
HABIBI (A), LUCIANI (A). "Dynamic Particle Coating",
IEEE Transactions on Visualisation and Computer
Graphics. A paraître.
TIXIER (N), "Street listening", in Helmi Järviluoma (dir.)
Soundscape Studies and Methods ,U niversité de Turku,
Finlande, 2001, sous presse.
DJOHARIAN (P), "Material Design in Physical Modelling
Sound Synthesis". Proceedings of DAFx. Trondheim,
Norway. Dec. 1999.
FOURCADE (P), MANGIAROTTI (S), CADOZ (C),
"Generating pitches in transients by a percussive
excitation. Proceedings of ICMC. Beijing. China. Oct. 1999.
FOURCADE (P), CADOZ (C) " Generating /p/ /t/ /k/
Consonants by a physical Modelling of Musical
Percussions". The 8th International Workshop on
Cognitive Science of natural Language. Galway. Ireland.
August 1999.
FLORENS (J.L), GERMOND (J), "Reed Instruments
Modular Representation and their Interactive Real Time
Simulation". Proceedings of ICMC. Beijing. China. Oct.
1999.
CADOZ (C), GUBIAN (S), "From Song of Birds to
extended virtual reed instruments : Musical modelling of
bird vocal tracks and application to a new kind of sound
sustain virtual instruments". Proceedings of ICMC.
Beijing. China. Oct. 1999.
CASTAGNE (N), CADOZ (C) "Physical Modeling :
balance between realism and computing speed", DAFx
2000 - Italy. December 2000.
DJOHARIAN (P), "Shape and Material Design in Physical
Modelling Sound Synthesis". Proceedings of ICMC. ICMA
ed. Berlin. Sept 2000.
GUILBAUD (C), LUCIANI (A), LECLERC (A), "Volume
construction from moving unorganized points".
Proceedings of Graphicon Conference. Moscow. Sept.
2000.
LUCIANI (A), "From granular avalanches to fluid
turbulences through oozing pastes : a mesoscopic
physically-based particle model. Proceedings of
Graphicon Conference. Moscow. Sept. 2000.
FOURCADE  (P), CADOZ (C), "Physical Modeling for
Sound Synthesis with Particle – Interaction Networks  :
Study of the Percussion Phenomena and Design of generic
rules for Percussions", ICMC 2001. Cuba. Sept 2001.
TIXIER (N), "Toward a caracterisation of the sound
environment :t h em ethod of qualified listening in motion  ",
Actes Inter.noise 2000, Nice, août 2000.
TIXIER (N), "Street listening  ", Actes du colloque Sound
Practice, Devon, Angleterre, Février 2001.
FOURCADE (P), LUCIANI (A), TIXIER (N), "Modeling of
sound ambiences : contributions of the physical model  ",
Actes Inter.noise 2001, La Haye, Pays-Bas, août 2001.
LUCIANI A., "Gravure virtuelle : de geste dans l'argile à
l'ordinateur". in Nouvelles de l'Estampe. Edité par le
Comité National de la Gravure Française. Numéro spécial
"de l'estampe traditionnelle à l'estampe numérique".
N°167-8. Décembre 1999/Janvier 2000.
Other references
GIBSON (JJ), "The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception"
– Houghton Mifflin ed. – Boston 1979.
RHEINGOLG (H), "Virtual Reality" - Summit Books, New
York 1991.
KALAWSKY (R-S), "The Science of Virtual Reality and
Virtual Environments", Addison-Wesley 1993.
QUEAU (P), "Le Virtuel - Vertus et Vertiges" - Ed. Champ
Vallon, Seyssel 1993.
CADOZ (C), "Les réalités virtuelles" - Collection DOMINOS -
Flammarion -  Paris 1994.
KUNII (TL), LUCIANI (A), "Cyberworlds" - Springer-Verlag
Tokyo Berlin Heidelberg New York 1998.
WANDERLEY M. "Interaction musicien – instrument :
applications au contrôle gestuel de la synthèse sonore". Doctorat
de musicologie. Université de Paris VI. Juin 2001.
9. Recent artistic creations
LUCIANI A. « Mémoires Vives », Images de synthèse et
textes. Co-production ICA / ACROE. 2001
CADOZ C. « pico..TERA » - Sons de syntèse GENESIS- Co-
production ICA  / ACROE. 2001.
BRUEMMER L. « Thrill ». Sons de synthèse GENESIS. Co-
production ZKM /  ICA / ACROE. 2001
BRUEMMER L. « Medusa ». Sons de synthèse GENESIS et
percussions. . Co-production ZKM /  ICA / ACROE. 2001
MAIGUASHCA M. Tiefen. Pièce pour Sons de synthèse
GENESIS et percussions. Co-production ZKM / ICA / ACROE.
2001
GAVAZZA G. « La natura delle cose ». Co-production AIAM /
ICA / ACROE. 1999.
GAVAZZA G. « Variazioni su un Preludio di Skrjabin ». Pièce
pour Disklavier et sons de synthèse GENESIS. Co-production
AIAM / ICA / ACROE. 2001.
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-246
PETIT A. « Song from Waves », pièce pour Voix et Sons de
synthèse GENESIS, Co-production CNR / ICA / ACROE. 2001
STUBBE H.P. « Rhizome » Harpe et sons de synthèse
GENESIS. Co-production DIEM / ICA / ACROE. 2001.
DADACHOVA V. «Eks ». Pièce pour Orchestre et sons de
synthèse GENESIS. Co-production CNR / ICA / ACROE. 2001
DOUVITSAS P. « Three songs ». Pièce pour Percussion, voix,
piano et sons de synthèse GENESIS. Co-production CNR / ICA
/ ACROE. 2001
ZBOROWSKI M. « Communication ». 5 tableaux. 2000.
ZBOROWSKI M. « Wittgenstein ». 11 tableaux. 2001.
LUCIANI A. Images pour la chorégraphie «Lettre Capitale» de
Joel BORGES. Opéra Bastille 1998, et Nantes 1999
LUCIANI A. Images pour la chorégraphie « Epopée pour jamais
de Joel BORGES. Villa Médicis. 2000
Figure 5X
Figure 5Y
Fig.6 - Images from "Mémoires Vives" - A. Luciani 2001
Fig.7 - GENESIS models for "pico..TERA" - C. Cadoz 2001