Bridging the Gap Between Art and Science Education
Through Teaching Electronic Musical Instrument Design
Paul D. Lehrman, M.A. Todd M. Ryan
Department of Music, Tufts University 69 Conwell Avenue, #3
48 Professors Row Somerville, MA 02144
Medford, MA 02155 +1 617 784 5342
+1 781 393 4888 todd.ryan@tufts.edu
paul.lehrman@tufts.edu
ABSTRACT
Electronic Musical Instrument Design is an excellent vehicle
for bringing students from multiple disciplines together to
work on projects, and help bridge the perennial gap between
the arts and the sciences. This paper describes how at Tufts
University, a school with no music technology program,
students from the engineering (electrical, mechanical, and
computer), music, performing arts, and visual arts areas use
their complementary skills, and teach each other, to develop
new devices and systems for music performance and control.
Keywords
Science education, music education, engineering, electronic
music, gesture controllers, MIDI.
1. INTRODUCTION
Tufts University is not a place one might expect to find a
course in Electronic Musical Instrument Design (EMID). The
music program at Tufts is very tradition-oriented, emphasizing
theory, musicology, composition, and ethnomusicology, with
no program in music technology and no electronic music
studio per se. The electrical and computer engineering
program emphasizes high-level design and development and
has no specific courses in audio electronics or recording
engineering.
However, there has been in recent years a strong push from the
administration to develop programs that are multidisciplinary
in nature, bridging the gap between C.P. Snow's "Two
Cultures," the arts and the sciences. 1 Because it draws from so
many disciplines simultaneously, EMID has generated quite a
lot of interest.
The student population at Tufts is extremely diverse,
intelligent, and talented, and also, as befits a campus close to a
large culturally-oriented city such as Boston, very aware of
current trends in popular culture. Besides traditional
performance ensembles, many students are active in
extracurricular musical groups and music production projects
that use electronic instruments and performance systems, with
surprisingly sophisticated results. So the raw materials for this
kind of course are definitely there.
2. HISTORY OF THE EMID COURSE
The idea for the course emerged from two other
multidisciplinary programs at Tufts.
2.1 Musical Instrument Engineering
The Musical Instrument Engineering (MIE) program, which
offers both a minor and a concentration, began in 1994 as a
"half-course" in the Mechanical Engineering department for
first-year students called "Design and Performance of Musical
Instruments.”2 It was "intended to pique the interest of
students in engineering by teaching them principles of
engineering using musical instruments as the educational
medium." 3 It soon caught the attention of Steinway Musical
Instruments, the parent company of Steinway & Sons Pianos
and Selmer Musical Instruments, who formed an alliance with
the university to work on a variety of research projects for the
two companies. Out of that alliance, and with the participation
of the Electrical Engineering (now Electrical and Computer
Engineering) and Music departments, the MIE program was
developed. The first students in the program were enrolled in
1999.
Today the MIE program encompasses courses in:
• Musical Instrument Design and Manufacture
• Dynamics and Vibrations
• Fluid Mechanics
• Physics of Music and Color
• Music Composition
• Acoustics
• Materials Science
• Finite Element Analysis
• Technical Writing
• as well as individual research projects and seminars
The certificate program is open only to Mechanical
Engineering majors, but the minor program is open to any
student with a good mathematics background and an interest
in the field.
2.2 Multimedia Arts
The second multidisciplinary program is the minor in
Multimedia Arts (MMA), which is administered by the
program in Communications and Media Studies. The MMA
program, which prepares students for research and careers in all
aspects and combinations of media, draws from the Music,
Drama, Dance, Fine Arts, Studio Art, and Electrical and
Computer Engineering departments. Among the facilities that
this program created was the first computer-based laboratory
on campus for music composition and digital audio editing.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
NIME ’05 , May 26-28, 2005, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
136
Present author Lehrman was asked to join the faculty at Tufts
in 1999 to teach courses in these subjects and to act as
supervisor for the lab, which is also used for courses in digital
photography and web design.
2.3 Electronic Musical Instrument Design
The EMID course was proposed in 2000, and was first offered
in Fall 2001, when it had an enrollment of seven. It was next
offered in Spring 2004, with an enrollment of 10, and is being
given in the current semester (Spring 2005) with an enrollment
of 11. The students have come from many disciplines,
including mechanical engineering, electrical and computer
engineering, computer science, chemical engineering, music,
sociology, mathematics, economics, entrepeneurial studies,
and the School of the (Boston) Museum of Fine Arts, with
whom Tufts has a cross-registration arrangement.
The course is listed by both the Music and Engineering
Science departments. Financial support comes primarily from
the Mechanical Engineering and Music departments, with
technical support from the Mechanical Engineering and
Electrical and Computer Engineering departments.
3.  CURRICULUM
The curriculum covers seven general areas. While this list is
more or less in chronological sequence, many of the topics
overlap.
•  Broad analysis of what constitutes "music:" elements of
melody, harmony, rhythm, timbre, dynamics, orchestration.
•  Gesture controllers: analyzing the types of physical
gestures that are used to control musical parameters in
existing instruments, followed by creative
conceptualization of other ways in which physical gestures
could be used to control musical parameters.
•  Study of existing commercial and prototype electronic
musical instruments and performance systems, including
live demonstrations by their inventors and/or expert
performers. The companies and institutions represented
have included Buchla Associates, Alternate Mode Inc., Sonic
Implants Inc., Yamaha, Immersion Music Inc., Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute, Northeastern University, and the MIT
Media Lab.
•  Finding and working with a wide variety of sensors for
measuring force, acceleration, distance, pressure, position,
and other factors, and designing circuits for obtaining
meaningful data from them.
•  Study of MIDI and how it is used to control performance
parameters.
•  Study of IRCAM/Cycling '74's MAX and how it is used to
process MIDI data.
•  Study of Propellerheads' Reason , particularly the NN19
sampler and SubTractor  "analog" synthesis modules, and
how they are manipulated by MIDI commands.
4.  EQUIPMENT
Tufts has dedicated a laboratory space approximately 10' x 20'.
In the lab are two complete development systems built around
Macintosh  "Sawtooth" G4s with 1 GB of memory in each,
running Reason  and MAX under OS X 10.3.
Two MIDI keyboards are provided, each of which has a large
number of configurable controllers: an M-Audio Oxygen8 and
an Edirol PCR-30. These are used to help program Reason
sounds and to act as a source of consistent and reliable data for
testing Max patches.
Originally M-Audio USB Audio Quattro  interfaces provided
both audio output and MIDI input, but they proved so
unreliable that it was decided to go back to the Macintoshes'
own audio outputs, which are fed through  Edirol MA-10
powered speaker systems. Given the small space of the lab,
these are more than adequate, and for public presentations a
larger system is brought. in. MIDI input is handled by Mark of
the Unicorn FastLane USB  interfaces.
An I-Cube sensor/MIDI converter system was used in the first
semester the course was taught, but it was problematic in a
number of ways, primarily in the consistency of the data and
the cost of expansion. It was replaced in the second year by
two each of the Pocket Electronic  and CTM 64  circuit boards
from Doepfer Musikelektronik GmbH, of Graefelfing, Germany.
These boards were custom-mounted (see Figure 1) on two
Lexan bases by our Electrical Engineering staff, so that each
system can read 64 discrete switch closures and 16
potentiometers or DC circuits, and translate them into MIDI
note and controller commands,  respectively. They have
proven to be very reliable.
Figure 1. The custom-mounted Doepfer modules
5.  STUDENT ASSIGNMENTS
5.1 Readings
Required readings include several chapters from Towards a
choice of gestural constraints for instrumental performers,
edited by Axel G.E. Mulder (IRCAM); MIDI For The
Professional , by present author Lehrman and Tim Tully
(Music Sales); Users' Guide to Propellerhead Reason , by
Debbie Poyser  and Derek Johnson (Muska & Lipman), and
selected articles from Electronic Musician , Keyboard ,
Computer Music Journal , and IEEE Spectrum  magazines.
Students are also given several written assignments and a
midterm exam which are primarily intellectual exercises
designed to stimulate their thinking about the relationship
between physical gestures and the production and control of
musical sound.
5.2 Design and construction
There are three construction assignments during the semester.
The first assignment is to build a simple one-parameter MIDI
controller, the second is to build a multi-parameter controller
and connect it to Reason through MAX, and the third, which is
considered the term project, is to build a complex performance
system and learn to play it.
6.  CREATING WORKING GROUPS
Perhaps the most important contribution to the success of the
course has been in its creation of working groups comprised of
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
137
students with complementary skills. In each group there was at
least one student with at least one of these qualifications:
• musical literacy and performance experience
• familiarity with MIDI and Reason
• ability to assemble simple electronic circuits
• woodworking and/or metalworking skills
• sufficient computer programming experience to be able to
master MAX quickly
Fortunately, most students had two or more of these
qualifications, since considering the small size of the class, it
would have been difficult to constitute more than one group
had it been otherwise!
For example, among the students in 2004 were the following
individuals:
• a computer science major who had the previous semester
started working on an independent project to design a
granular synthesizer using Max/MSP
• a student from the Museum school who was also an active
DJ
• a chemical engineering student who was a fine guitarist
and woodworker
• an electrical engineering major who not only loved
breadboarding but was an accomplished pianist and
composer
• an art history major who was a talented bass player, record
producer, and sound designer
• a music and entrepeneurship major who had taught
himself Reason
• a mechanical engineering major who was an excellent
carpenter
• and an ethnomusicology graduate student with a degree
in recording engineering
The students were divided into four groups for their first
assignment, and when the assignment was completed, they
were asked them to evaluate themselves and their teammates,
and indicate whether they would like to continue with the
same team. The response was almost unanimous that they
would, and so the teams were kept intact for their final
projects.
7.  SPRING 2004 STUDENT PROJECTS 4
7.1  Sequence-oriented projects
Two of the groups' final projects took advantage of Reason 's
built-in sequencer, and used their controllers to manipulate
sequencer tracks in real-time, rather than generate individual
musical events.
7.1.1 The Carstrument
This team built a mock-up of an automobile steering column
with directional and windshield-wiper levers attached to
toggle switches, a steering wheel (which they obtained from a
plastic child's car that had been left in someone's rubbish)
attached to a rotary potentiometer, a slide potentiometer with a
shift-lever-style handle, and two foot pedals containing
springs pushing down on pressure sensors.
The position of the toggle switches determined which of
several procesing or timbral parameters would be controlled
by the steering wheel. The slide potentiometer turned on and
off individual sequencer tracks. The foot pedal controlled
delay feedback.
7.1.2 Edward Sensorhands
This team used two garden gloves, equipping one with a force-
sensing resistor on each finger tip and the palm, and the other
with a flex sensor on each finger (see Figure 2). The flex
sensors were mapped to Controller commands and the FSRs to
notes. In Max, the incoming notes toggled mute switches
(touch on/touch off) for each of the sequencer tracks. The FSR
in the palm was interpreted as a MIDI Start command, which
reset the sequencer. The incoming controllers were mapped to
various timbral parameters in the Reason  modules.
Figure 2. "Edward Sensorhands"
The students had also hoped to influence tempo and more-
complex timbral changes using distance and tilt sensors, but
were unable to get them to work reliably.
7.2 The Digital Washboard  performance instrument
This two-person team (which included present author Ryan)
bought an old-fashioned washboard made by the Columbus
Washboard Company, who claim to be the last manufactuer of
such items in the United States, at a local hardware store. They
ran a strip of duct tape along each of the 18 ridges on one face,
and then attached conductive copper tape to the duct tape,
anchoring each piece of copper tape with a screw, and
soldering a lead to each screw.
Each lead was attached to a different terminal on the CTM
module, so that completing a circuit through the tape would
generate a different note. To complete the circuit, thimbles
were glued to the five fingers of a cloth glove, and wired to the
+5VDC output of the CTM module (see Figure 3).
In Max the students created 12 matrices which mapped
incoming MIDI notes to degrees of different scales and
arpeggio patterns. On the top of the washboard they mounted
12 momentary-contact buttons, which were connected to the
Pocket Electronic  module (see Figure 4). In Reason , the
students created 12 different patches, each with its own MIDI
channel, using the SubTractor  and Maelstrom  pseudo-
granular synthesis modules.
Pushing any of the buttons sent a Controller command which
selected one of the note-mapping matrices in Max and also
changed the MIDI channel of subsequent notes. A slide
potentiometer on the board was also wired to the Pocket
Electronic  module and served as a transposer with a range of
one octave: the Controller value it generated was divided by
10, and the result was added to the MIDI note numbers being
generated. A second slide potentiometer was mapped to MIDI
Controller 72, which is used by most of Reason 's modules to
control amplitude envelope release time, on the ucrrently
active channel. Two more buttons were used to momentarily
add or subtract 1 to the note numbers, to enable playing non-
scale tones.
The students were able to play a reasonable version of Herbie
Hancock's Rockit on the device. In effect, they created a
stringless, highly-flexible digital autoharp—which, in-
terestingly enough, was an instrument that neither of them was
familiar with.
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
138
Figure 3. The Digital Washboard and glove
Figure 4. Detail from the Digital Washboard
7.3 The Virtual Lunga
This project was different from the others in that the students
were not constructing an electronic performance instrument:
they were essentially de-constructing, using similar
technology, a traditional instrument.
The project was undertaken at the request of Dr. David Locke,
professor of ethnomusicology at Tufts, whose specialty is the
drumming of West Africa. During the semester Prof. Locke was
hosting Dolsi-naa Abubakari Lunna, one of the most renowned
master drummers of the Dagbon region of Ghana, who was in
residence at Tufts. Dolsi-naa's instrument is the talking drum,
or Lunga, which is played by hitting one of the drum's two
heads with a crooked stick with one hand, and changing the
tension on the head by pulling on a set of cords connecting
the heads, using the wrist, forearm, and elbow of the other arm.
Prof. Locke has recorded and studied the musical language of
the Dagomba drummers extensively, and asked for the class's
help in creating a database of musical gestures employed by
Dolsi-naa. Dolsi-naa contributed one of his drums, which he
makes by hand., to the project.
The students analyzed Dolsi-naa's playing and determined that
the musical events could be distilled down to four parameters:
• how hard the stick hits the head
• where on the head the stick makes contact
• the angle of the stick when it hits the head
• the tension on the cords
They then placed two force-sensing resistors on the face and
side of the stick head, three piezo-electric pressure sensors
underneath the head, and a short-range distance sensor on one
of the cords (see Figure 5).
Figure 5. The Lunga with distance (L) and force sensors (R)
The plan was to record Dolsi-naa using audio and video, at the
same time feeding the data from the sensors into the Pocket
Electronic , where they would be translated to MIDI controller
commands and recorded in parallel with the audio, using Mark
of the Unicorn's Digital Performer . The second phase of the
project would be to extract samples of individual events from
the recording and use them to create a sampled instrument that
would respond to the recorded MIDI data in such a way as to
re-create the original performance.
Due to restrictions on Dolsi-Naa's time and difficulties in
obtaining some of the necessary parts, the students were not
able to complete the first phase of the project before the end of
the semester. But they laid some fine groundwork, and it is one
of the goals of the class in the current semester, when Dolsi-
Naa is again visiting Tufts, to make much more progress.
8.  CONCLUSIONS
The Electronic Musical Instrument Design course at Tufts
University has hardly broken new ground in the field of
interface design, but the authors feel we have sparked the
imagination of a group of students and inspired them to think
in new ways about combining art and technology. The course
was unanimously praised by the students and several of them
reported on their formal evaluations that it was one of the best
courses they had taken at Tufts. The musicians were grateful
for the new perspectives on music and musical tools that they
were exposed to, and the engineers were happy that they had
done so much hands-on engineering, and learned so much
about music.  As a vehicle for bringing together students from
very different disciplines, teaching them and watching them
teach each other, while having fun in the process, we have
found the course to be eminently successful.
9.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to acknowledge the assistance of Chris
Rogers, Jesse "Chip" Jones IV, Warren Gagosian, George
Preble, the staff of Cycling '74 Inc., David Locke, Roberto
Aimi, James Caccese, Todd Nocera,  John McDonald, Anil
Saigal, Janet Schmalfeldt, Mohammed Nurul Afsar, Karen
Panetta, Howard Wolfe, Alva Couch, Tod Machover, and Mark
Goldstein.
10.  REFERENCES
[1] Snow, C.P. The Two Cultures , Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK, 1964.
[2] Jones, J., Lehrman, P., and Rogers, C. "Using Musical
Instruments as an Engineering Educational Medium."
Proceedings, IEEE Frontiers In Education , IEEE,
2002http://fie.engrng.pitt.edu/fie2002/papers/1605.pdf
[3] all student reports available at "Music 53/ES 95me:
Electronic Musical Instrument Design,"
http://www.tufts.edu/programs/mma/emid
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
139