Robot: Tune Yourself! Automatic Tuning in Musical
Robotics
Jim Murphy2
[2] Victoria University of
Wellington
School of ECS, NZSM
Wellington, New Zealand
jim.w.murphy@gmail.com
Paul Mathews2
[2] Victoria University of
Wellington
School of ECS, NZSM
Wellington, New Zealand
pfcmathews@gmail.com
Ajay Kapur1,2
[1] California Institute of the
Arts
24700 McBean Parkway
Valencia, California
ajay@karmetik.com
Dale A. Carnegie3
[3] Victoria University of Wellington
School of ECS
Wellington, New Zealand
dale.carnegie@ecs.vuw.ac.nz
ABSTRACT
This paper presents a method for a self-tuning procedure for
musical robots capable of continuous pitch-shifting. Such a
technique is useful for robots consisting of many strings: the
ability to self-tune allows for long-term installation with-
out human intervention as well as on-the-ﬂy tuning scheme
changes. The presented method consists of comparing a de-
tuned string’s pitch at runtime to a pre-compiled table of
string responses at varying tensions. The behavior of the
current detuned string is interpolated from the two nearest
pre-characterized neighbors, and the desired virtual fret po-
sitions are added to the interpolated model. This method
allows for rapid tuning at runtime, requiring only a single
string actuation to determine the pitch.
Keywords
Musical Robotics, Mechatronics, Tuning, Automation
1. INTRODUCTION
Musical robots allow human performers and composers to
explore physical music-making with the use of new instru-
ments that aﬀord the composers with a degree of precision
and accuracy that is unusual for non-synthetic instruments.
As physical objects, though, these instruments require ad-
justments prior to use. Indeed, without specialized calibra-
tion routines, the instruments often require time-consuming
human intervention in order to behave as expected in a per-
formance or installation context. Automated closed-loop
calibration for musical robotics oﬀers a solution: a musi-
cal robot capable of adjusting its future output based upon
an analysis of its current and past outputs can be quickly
prepared for performance and remain reliable in long-term
installation scenarios.
The work presented in this paper focuses upon self-tuning
for robotic guitars and bass guitars. Robotic stringed in-
struments are an active sub-discipline of musical robotics (a
more thorough history of which can be found in [4] and [7]);
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’14,June 30 – July 3, 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
in order to fully exploit their potential for repeatability and
precision, closed-loop self-tuning systems can be employed,
allowing for automated tuning and on-the-ﬂy musical tun-
ing scheme changes. Such automated tuning systems allow
for both long-term installation with minimal human inter-
vention and for rapid calibration prior to performances.
This work was motivated by the aforementioned problem
of human intervention in an otherwise automated system.
It was undertaken with three main beliefs about the func-
tionality of a successful robotic self-tuning system: ﬁrst,
the automated tuning approach should work for any robotic
chordophone capable of continuous variation of pitch; the
tuning system should not be restricted to a single type of
actuation, pitch shifting, or transduction approach. Sec-
ondly, the automatic tuning procedure should be designed
such that it requires relatively little time to complete: a sys-
tem capable of tuning a string with the data received by a
single pick or pluck is preferred. Finally, a good self-tuning
system should be able to not only tune the string’s tonic
pitch but to automatically assign virtual “fret” locations to
various positions along the string; these frets could then be
reassigned on the ﬂy.
2. AUTOMATIC TUNING: RELATED WORK
The idea of a self-tuning chordophone has interested re-
searchers and inventers for decades. While early examples
focused upon piano tuning schemes [3], the contemporary
examples discussed below are applied predominantly to gui-
tars. The majority of the existent techniques have been de-
veloped to augment a human-played instrument, freeing a
human player from the need to tune his or her instrument.
2.1 Fretted Instrument Self-Tuning
There exist several self-tuning systems developed for human-
played and robotic fretted guitars. The patent literature
features diﬀerent methods developed to aid human players
in tuning instruments. The technique most closely match-
ing the approach described in this paper is employed on
guitars built by AxCent Tuning Systems [12] and Transper-
formance LLC [9]. These systems adjust the strings’ ten-
sion by tightening or loosening it with the aid of an array
of small motors. As described in [12], the strings’ charac-
teristics are stored in a calibration table, allowing for rapid
comparisons between a string’s current performance and its
desired tuned behavior. Notably, this approach is limited to
a single string thickness: string gauge changes require exten-
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
565
sive oﬄine mechanical and electronic recalibration. Similar
to this approach is that used by the commercial human-
played Gibson Robot Guitar1.
While the aforementioned systems are commercial and
designed to augment human-played instruments, the Lo-
gos Foundation musical robotic collective (described in [5]
and [10]) has shared the design for a fretted mechatronic
chordophone tuning system designed for musical robotics
applications. The Logos Foundation’s approach appears to
be similar to the proprietary approach used on the Gibson
Robot Guitar2.
Finally, sound artist Trimpin employs a self-tuning setup
on his long-term sculpture If VI Was IX [2]. This sys-
tem uses a modiﬁed commercial guitar tuner whose output
controls a DC servomotor, and is described in more detail
in [1].If VI Was IXrepresents an ideal usage scenario for
self-tuning guitars: as a long-term installation mounted in a
diﬃcult-to-access manner, the self-tuning capabilities of the
guitars results in greatly simpliﬁed long-term maintenance.
2.2 Fretless Instrument Self-Tuning
There exist fewer examples of self-tuning systems for fret-
less instruments. A notable example is Zhen J. Wang and
Cesar Ortega-Sanchez’s Electronic Assisting Violin Tuner
[13], which augments a traditional violin with a motorized
tailpiece for string tensioning and a piezo-based pickup sys-
tem.
Self-tuning fretless instruments allow for a further degree
of ﬂexibility over fretted systems: after tuning, arbitrary
notes can be played along the string’s length. For human-
played systems, this requires the player to possess the mu-
sical skill to play without the aid of frets. For mechatronic
systems the lack of frets increases the instrument’s ﬂexibility
by allowing for the use of “virtual fret” lookup tables, which
allow for a very wide variety of tuning schemes and into-
nation styles to be employed. These “virtual fret” lookup
tables are simply arrays of motor setpoints, instructing the
pitch shifter to move to a particular position.
2.3 Tension-based and Pitch-based Tuning
Strings are typically tuned based either upon a reading of
the string’s tension or it’s vibratory frequency. To tune
a string based upon the string’s tension, a transducer is
mounted to the string. The transducer’s output corresponds
to the string’s current tension. Coupled with a knowledge
of the string’s gauge, length, and material, the approximate
tune of the string can be determined. An example of such
a tension-based approach can be found in [6].
A more popular technique (used in the AxCent systems,
as well as [11] and [13]) is to extract string frequency infor-
mation from the output of the instrument’s pickup. This
approach is used in the work presented in this paper. An
advantage of this approach over tension-based systems is
that it typically requires no retroﬁtting of the instrument.
3. TECHNIQUE OVERVIEW
The technique presented in this paper has been developed
for musical robots capable of relatively ﬁne control over
string length or tension. This section presents an overview
of the technique, while the next section focuses upon the
implementation of this method on a robotic chordophone.
This self-tuning approach consists of two parts: a string
characterization stage and a string detune correction stage.
The string characterization stage is performed oﬄine and
results in the population of the string’s response to a range
1http://www.gibson.com/robotguitar
2See logosfoundation.org/instrum gwr/synchrochord
of pitch shift events. The online detune correction stage
compares the open string’s frequency with the pre-recorded
characterization tables, allowing the string’s deviation from
the ideal to be corrected.
3.1 String Characterization
Fretter Position
String Frequency
Figure 1: An illustration of the string characteriza-
tion curves: each dark dotted line represents a dif-
ferently detuned fundemental frequency and its re-
sultant response to diﬀerent fretter positions. The
light dot-dash line represents an interpolated de-
tune correction curve.
The self-tuning approach described in this paper aims
not only to set the string to the correct fundamental fre-
quency but also to allow the robot’s pitch shifting mecha-
nism to repeatably travel to any attainable frequency along
the string’s length. To determine the relationship between
the robot’s pitch shifter (fretter) position and the string’s
vibratory frequency, the string’s response to various fretter
positions must be characterized.
To characterize the string’s response to various fretter
positions, the fretter is instructed to move to a number of
points along the string. At each point, the string is actu-
ated and the resultant frequency is measured. The process
is repeated incrementally along the string, with each value
(and the corresponding position value sent to the fretter)
stored in a table. After the string has been characterized at
one open string frequency, the string is retuned and the pro-
cess repeated (as illustrated in Figure 1). By repeating the
string characterization procedure at numerous open string
frequencies, an overall view of the string’s response can be
formed.
3.2 Detune Correction
Once the string has been characterized at a variety of dif-
ferent fundamental frequencies, the string’s behavior at a
frequency between two of the characterized frequencies can
be inferred by interpolating between the upper and lower
neighboring response curves.
This is performed ﬁrst by actuating the string and mea-
suring the string’s frequency. The string’s current funda-
mental frequency is then compared with the previously-
performed string characterization tables. The behavior of
the fretter in relation to the string at the current frequency
can then be determined along the whole string length by in-
terpolating between each of the two nearest characterization
tables (as represented by the dot-dash line in Figure 1).
After the robot’s fretter actuator position in relation to
diﬀerent string frequencies is known, the virtual “frets” can
be placed along the string length by populating another ta-
ble with the fretter positions that correspond to the desired
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
566
x
x
x
1
2
3
Fretter Position
Figure 2: An illustration of the string tuning and
fret assignment process. In 1, the x represents the
measured frequency of the detuned string in rela-
tion to the precompiled string characterization ta-
bles. In 2, the detuned string’s behavior is interpo-
lated from the characterization tables. Finally, in
3, the virtual frets (represented by circles along the
plot) are assigned.
frequencies, a process illustrated in Figure 2.
4. IMPLEMENTATION
The self-tuning procedure described in this paper is imple-
mented on Swivel 2, a six-stringed robotic slide guitar [8].
Each of the six Swivel 2 modules conduct pitch-shift events
by rotating a servo-mounted fretter arm along the string. To
change the fundamental frequency of the string, the “home”
position of the fretter arm is changed.
4.1 Characterizing Swivel
To characterize the six strings of Swivel 2, a series of MIDI
pitchbend commands are sent to each string. The pitchbend
command instructs the fretter arm to rotate to a desired
angle, after which the fretter arm clamps against the string
and string is picked. The string’s vibrations are transduced
by the magnetic pickup on each Swivel 2 module; the pitch
is extracted from this signal. If the pitch lies within an
expected range, it and its accompanying MIDI pitchbend
value are stored in the string’s characterization table. After
the string has been characterized at a particular fundamen-
tal frequency, the string is retuned and the process repeated.
4.2 Self-Tuning and Fret Assignment
Move fretter clear of string
Pick string
Perform pitch extraction 
Compare string pitch to 
characterization tables
Interpolate from tables to 
characterize current string
Populate fret location table, 
enter running mode
MIDI 
NoteOn 
from DAW 
(or other 
MIDI 
device)
Convert MIDI to appropriate 
MIDI pitchbend value
 MIDI out to 
robot
Figure 3: The Self-Tuning Procedure.
Once the robot’s strings are characterized, a custom-built
Table 1: Characterization Fundamental Pitches
Swivel Unit Freq. 1 (Hz) Freq. 2 (Hz) Freq. 3 (Hz)
1 70.2 80.6 90.6
2 96.4 106 116
3 130 140 150
4 175 187 200
5 226 246 267
6 306 326 349
application is used to self-tune the strings. The application,
dubbed SwivelAutotune, was built with the Juce C++ li-
brary. The application behaves in a manner illustrated in
Figure 3.
SwivelAutotune instructs the robot to move the fretter
clear of the string and, after a small delay, to pick the string.
The string’s pitch is determined by an FFT-based pitch ex-
tractor built into SwivelAutotune (implemented using the
FFTW library). After determining the pitch, SwivelAuto-
tune compares the pitch to the pre-populated string char-
acterization tables (which are stored as XML-format data
ﬁles). After the detuned string’s behavior is interpolated
from the characterization tables, the MIDI pitchbend val-
ues corresponding to the desired fret frequencies are deter-
mined, and a “fret location” table is populated. At this
stage, the string has been tuned and its “virtual fret” inter-
vals set. The user can then instruct the software to enter
its running mode, where MIDI messages from the DAW are
routed through SwivelAutotune.
5. RESULTS AND EV ALUATION
To evaluate the performance of the automated tuning scheme,
the full procedure was tested on Swivel 2. The string was
characterized and subsequently detuned. The detuned strings
were then retuned using the SwivelAutoTune application.
5.1 Characterization
The string characterizer was run on the six Swivel 2 string
modules, taking 25 measurements along each string. The 25
measurements were predicted to produce an output curve
of acceptable resolution, lying within the lower resolution of
the servomotors; on a robot with higher actuator resolution,
more string measurements may be taken. The character-
izer’s output was recorded and used to populate the string
characterization lookup tables used in the automated tun-
ing application. To obtain the measurements used in the
characterization, each string was tuned to three diﬀerent
pitches. These pitches, shown in Table 1, were expected to
be similar enough to allow for reliable linear interpolation
between each adjacent tuning.
5.2 Self-tuning
Two assumptions were made in characterizing Swivel 2’s
string: that 25 measurements along each string are suﬃcient
to produce a smooth-sounding characterization curve and
that characterizing the string at three diﬀerent pitches is
enough to allow for smooth interpolation between them.
To evaluate these assumptions, the SwivelAutoTune ap-
plication was run with such data sets. After tuning the
string, the robot modules were instructed to play 12-tone
equal temperament chromatic scales; the output frequency
was then measured and compared to a desired frequency.
Figure 4 illustrates the results of the test on Swivel 2’s A
and B strings. The test consists of an instruction to move
the fretter from a home position clear of the string to a po-
sition corresponding to SwivelAutoTune’s interpolated D3
position. The string is then picked and its frequency mea-
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
567
125
145
165
185
205
225
245
265
285
305
D3 D#3 E3 F3 F#3 G3 G#3 A3 A#3 B3 C4 C#4 D4
Target Note
Swivel 2 A String Self-Tune Test Swivel 2 B String Self-Tune Test
Target Note
220
270
320
370
420
470
520
Figure 4: Recorded string pitches compared to
target frequences on Swivel’s B string (left) and
A string (right). The dark points represent tar-
get pitches; the light points represent the average
recorded output.
sured. The fretter is then instructed to move to and pick the
next highest chromatic note along the string. This process
is repeated three times; the average results are shown, with
the results’ standard deviation represented by the plot’s er-
ror bars. To demonstrate the scheme’s eﬀectiveness, arbi-
trary pitches were chosen on two of Swivel’s strings and the
results were logged.
The results of the tests show that the automatic tuning
scheme produces a result that lies quite close to the desired
pitches. On the A string, an average deviation from the
target pitches of 0.7 Hz (with an average of all of the stan-
dard deviations of 1.1 Hz) was observed. On the B string,
an average deviation of the target pitches of 2.2 Hz (with
an average standard deviation from the targets of 1.2 Hz)
was observed. These deviations lie both above and below
the target, indicating that the errors are due not to inter-
polation error but more likely to to mechanical actuator
resolution, placement, and jitter: the table size of 25 tar-
get pitches across three characterization curves is therefore
deemed suﬃcient for Swivel 2.
6. PERFORMANCE APPLICATIONS
Parametrically-complicated musical robots require many in-
structions to reach a desired state. The work presented
in this paper (and in the authors’ accompanying ongoing
research) aims to reduce the amount of low-level control
required by a human performer, musician, or installation
artist. Without the aid of SwivelAutoTune, the string must
be tuned by hand, and each pitch shift event must be man-
ually directed by sending a human-derived MIDI pitchbend
command, followed by clamping, picking, and damping in-
structions [8]. This self-tuning approach, then, allows for
tuned compositions to be made rapidly and by those less
familiar with the robot’s interface.
To allow for daily self-tuning in long-term installation se-
tups, the SwivelAutoTune application must be conﬁgured
to run automatically upon startup. While Swivel has yet to
be tested in such an environment, the increased ease of use
will allow galleries and other installation venues to display
the instrument with little need for human maintenance.
In performance scenarios requiring musician-control over
all of Swivel’s parameters, a complicated musical robot’s
manual operation may be desirable, allowing for ﬂexible
human-in-the-loop exploration of the instrument’s string
behavior. However, for more traditional performances, the
automatic tuning method described in this paper will be
employed.
7. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The self-tuning technique described herein compliments an
underlying theme in much of the authors’ work on musi-
cal robotics: that of using feedback and characterization to
increase the musical expressivity of relatively complicated
musical robots.
The self-tuning scheme has been tested on two robots but
can likely be extended to work on any pitched instrument
capable of continuous pitch adjustment: self-tuning robotic
tom-toms, pianos, and bowed chordophones should be pos-
sible with minor changes to the procedure.
This work aﬀords many opportunities for future improve-
ments. To improve on the string characterization proce-
dure, additional variables such as ambient humidity, tem-
perature, and string gauge can be accounted for. Further,
the string characterization procedure should be further au-
tomated: currently, it is a partially manual process. Finally,
the on-line fret assignment system can be improved with a
larger library of intonation schemes, allowing composers to
pick from a wider pool of virtual fret layouts including var-
ious just intonation schemes and atonal approaches.
8. REFERENCES
[1] P. Esmonde. Trimpin: The sound of invention. Film,
2009.
[2] A. Focke. Trimpin: Contraptions for Art and Sound.
Marquand Books, Seattle, Washington, 1st edition,
2011.
[3] E. Groven. Improvements in a tuning system for
pianos. Patent, 1935.
[4] A. Kapur. A history of robotic musical instruments.
In Proceedings of the 2005 International Computer
Music Conference, Barcelona, Spain, 2005.
[5] T. R. Laura Maes, Godfried-Willem Raes. The man
and machine robot orchestra at logos. Computer
Music Journal, 35(4):28–48, 2011.
[6] G. Minnick. Self-tuning tail piece for string
instruments. US Patent 4,584,923, April 1986.
[7] J. Murphy, A. Kapur, and D. Carnegie. Musical
robotics in a loudspeaker world: Developments in
alternative approaches to localization and
spatialization.Leonardo Music Journal, 22(1):41–48,
December 2012.
[8] J. Murphy, A. Kapur, and D. A. Carnegie. Swivel 2:
A systems overview and evaluation of a new
mechatronic slide guitar. In Proceedings of the 2013
Engineering New Zealand Conference (ENZCON),
Auckland, New Zealand, 2013.
[9] S. K. B. S. J. Neil Skinn, Frank Strazzabosco.
Apparatus and method for self-tuning stringed
musical instruments with an accompanying vibrato
mechanism. US Patent, 2008.
[10] G.-W. Raes. A personal story of music and
technologies. Leonardo Music Journal, 2(1):29–35,
1992.
[11] D. M. G. T. M. C. Shawn Trail, Leonardo Jenkins
and P. Driessen. Stari: A self tuning auto-monochord
robotic instrument. In Proceedings of the 2013
PACRIIM, Victoria, BC, 2013.
[12] N. C. S. Stephen J. Freeland, Gerard F. Hallaren.
Musical instrument self-tuning system with
calibration library. US Patent, 1998.
[13] Z. J. Wang and C. Ortega-Sanchez. Electronic
assisting violin tuner. In TENCON 2012 - 2102 IEEE
Region 10 Conference, Cebu, 2012.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
568