Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-3
EpipE: Exploration of the Uilleann Pipes as a Potential
Controller for Computer-based Music
Cormac Cannon
Media Lab Europe
Sugarhouse Lane
Bellevue, Dublin 8
+353 1 4742836
cormac@media.mit.edu
Stephen Hughes
Media Lab Europe
Sugarhouse Lane
Bellevue, Dublin 8
+353 1 4742864
steve h@mle.media.mit.edu
SíleÓ Modhráin
Media Lab Europe
Sugarhouse Lane
Bellevue, Dublin 8
+353 1 4742844
sile@media.mit. edu
ABSTRACT
In this paper we present a design for the EpipE, a new
expressive electronic music controller based on the Irish
Uilleann Pipes, a 7-note polyphonic reeded w oodwind. The
core of this proposed controller design is a conti nuous
electronic tonehole-sensing arrangement, equally applicable
to other woodwind interfaces like those of the flute, recorder or
Japanese shakuhachi. The controller will initially be used to
drive a physically-based synthesis model, with the eventual
goal being the development of a mapping layer allowing the
EpipE interface to operate as a MIDI-like controller of arbitrary
synthesis models.
Keywords
Controllers, continuous woodwind tonehole sensor, u illeann
pipes, Irish bagpipe, physical modelling, double r eed, conical
bore, tonehole.
1. INTRODUCTION
Am usician’s performance is intimately bound up with their
physical means of expression. This relationship is equal parts
struggle and dialogue – the instrument constrains, but its
unique character colours and informs the performance. Until
now,m ucho ft he focus in electronic musical interface design
has concentrated on the keyboard, leaving many instrumental
musicians at a loss when faced with a computer. The wind and
string communities have been particularly poorly served – the
more ‘organic’ nature of their interaction with their instrument
making it much harder to measure meaningfully.
A number of flute and clarinet-style interfaces have been
developedi nt he past,A kai’s EWI and Yamaha’s WX series of
controllers being notable examples, but these fail to provide
continuous tonehole control, a feature particularly important
for players of open-holed folk woodwinds like the pipes, tin-
whistle or traditionalf lute. Performerso f Irish,S cottish,
Breton and other folk musics make heavy use of sliding and
half-holing techniques, anda controllert hat doesn’t allow for
this drastically restricts their range of expressive possib ilities.
The tonehole problem has been considered by some
investigators, in the context of keyed woodwinds at least.
Gary Scavone ofCCRMA built the Holey Controller[3] ,
modifying a Yamaha WX11 to give a degree of continuous
control by adding force sensing resistors under the keys, but
this was primarily to provide him with a means of controlling
his multiple-tonehole physical model of a clarinet. For a real
instrument, the parameter of interest is the degree to which the
player’s finger is covering the tonehole rather than the force
with which it is applied.
The Irish Uilleann Pipes, a polyphonic reeded woodwind
(described more fully in the next section of this paper),
provides an interesting basisfor a new electronic interface.
Like the Scottish Pipes, air is continu ally provided to the
instrument and it is therefore completely finger-articulated.
Unlike the Scottish pipes, the sound of the instrument may be
stopped during play, allowing for staccato as well as legato
playing and a wide range of tone colours and dynamic
variation, greatly increasing the range and complexity of
instrumental gesture. This combination of factors makes it an
ideal test-bed for a new tonehole-sensor. Another feature of
the instrument unusual in a member of the woodwind family is
that it allows the player to provide their own chordal
accompaniment using the regulators, a set of keyed pipes
played with the wrist.
2. THE UILLEANN PIPES
Ab rief description of the Uilleann Pipes is provided here to
rendert his documentm orei ntelligible to those unfamiliar
with the instrument.
2.1 Physic al Design
As et of Uilleann Pipes (see Figure 1) generally consists of:
• Bag
• Bellows
• Chanter
• Drones (3)
• Regulators (typically 3, though as many as 5 have been
known)
The bag or air reservoiro nt he Uilleann Pipes is inflated by
means of a bellows .T he bellows are attached by a belt to the
player’s waist and by a length of flexible tubing to the bag.
The Chanter , attached to the neck of the bag, is the main
melody instrument and has a range of two octaves, very
unusual among bagpipes. Its tonehole arrangement is similar
to that of the recorder, though the fingering is very different
and the bottom of the chanter effectively serves as an extra
hole, played by raising and lowering it from the knee.
Figure 1: Set of D Uilleann Pipes made by the Taylor
brothers, Chicago circa 1890.
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-4
The Drones supply a conti nuous ‘drone’ accompaniment to
the melody. Each drone is tuned by means of a slide – the
tenor to the bottom noteo ft he chanter,t he baritone an octave
lower and the bass an octave lower again.
The Regulators are keyed chanters and are used to provide a
chordal accompaniment. The end of each regulator is s ealed,
so the regulator remains silent until a key is pressed. The three
most usual regulators (tenor, baritone and bass) lie side-by-
side across the player’s knee with the bass on the outside, near
the chanter, the tenor on the inside, and the baritone between
them. The bass and baritone each have four keys and the tenor
five.
Both Drones and Regulators are mounted on a common
stock which is connected to the body of the bag and rests
across the player’s knee.
2.2 Playing Technique
The pipes are usually played sitting down so as to allow the
regulators and chanter to rest on the knee. They are operated
by the elbow of one arm while the bag is held under that of the
other and used to maintain a steady supply of air to the rest of
thei nstrument. Them ainf actor determining the range of bag
pressure to be applied is the chanter reed – those of the drones
and regulators are of more straightforward construction and
can normally be adjusted to match it. The chanter reed plays in
quite an arrowr ange of bagp ressure: too little and the reed
will not sound; too much and it will blow closed. The drones,
along with the regulators, lie across the player’s knee on the
bellows-side, and may be activated or deactivated using a
wrist-operated toggle switch.
2.2.1 The Chanter
TheU illeannp ipec hanter,t hough tuned differently, has an
identical tonehole arrangement to that of the Scottish bagpipe
chanter. Of the seven toneholes on the front of the instrument,
the top three are covered with the 1st through 3 rd fingers of one
hand (usually the left) and the remaining 4 with the 1 st through
4th fingers of the other. The topmost tonehole is on the back of
the chanter and is covered with the thumb of the upper hand.
The Uilleann pipe chanter differs from that of other
bagpipes in three major respects:
1. Itsr eed, liket hato ft he oboe, is a double reed which
can be overblown into the second octave, eff ectively
doubling its range.
2. The open end of the chanter serves as an extra hole.
The chanter is usually played resting on the knee,
allowing the player to stop the sound abruptly
between notes by covering all the toneholes. This
enables the performer to play “tight” staccato
passages as well as the legato stream of notes to
which players of other bagpipe instruments are
restricted. Notes of the scale are played with just one
ortwoo ft he toneholes uncovered, facilitating rapid
staccato runs and allowing the performer to m odulate
the tone by uncovering lower toneholes and/or
raising the chanter from the knee. Vibrato may be
achieved by rapidly uncovering and re-covering the
lower toneholes and, optionally, raising the chanter
from the knee to produce a more strident tone.
3. The bo ttom note of the chanter can be played in two
different pressure regions, one producing a tone
similar to that of the other notes of the lower octave,
the other a much stronger tone, known as the “hard”
bottom D which can be used to great ornamental
effect.
As with other open-holed folk woodwinds, much use is
made of the technique of “sliding” from a lower note to the
note above and of rapid grace notes.
Figure 2: Principal author playing a set of pipes pitched in
D
2.2.2 The Regulators
The Regulators lie across the player’s knee on the same side
as thep layer’s lowerc hanter hand anda re usually played
usingt he wristo ft he this hand, though while p laying certain
notes the hand may be removed from the chanter to finger more
complex chords.
Figure 3: Regulator Tuning Diagram [2]
When played with the wrist, the upper four rows of regulator
keys may be struck singly or in chords of two or three notes
across a row. The 5th note on the tenor regulator is usu ally
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-5
played in combination with the lowest note on the baritone.
These notes and chords may be sustained or used for rhythmic
effect.
3. DESIGN OF THE EPIPE INTERFACE
There are two parallel strands to the development of the
EpipE interface: the physical design of the controller and the
construction of an appropriate synthesis model with which to
test the design.
3.1 Physical Controller Design
During the initial phase of development, we considered the
instrument itself and the way it is played in an effort to
identify the parameters to be measured and determine
appropriate ranges, resolutions and sampling rates for them.
Starting with these observations, we have sketched a design
outline for the interface prototype and have made substantial
progressi nt he processo fd esigning and constructing the
required electronic circuitry.
3.1.1 The Bag and Bellows
Thea ir pressure in theb ag is af unction of the force applied
by the player’s elbow. One means of quantifying this
parameter would be to attach a pressure sensor to a sealed
bladder. The other obvious solution is to measure the applied
force directly using a force-sensing resistor. We have chosen
the second approach for reasons of cost and ease-of-
integration.
TheB ellows servet he purely mechanical purpose of f illing
the bag with air to drive the reeds. As no air flow is required
through our electronic interface we have opted to discard the
bellows, thereby easing the task of playing the regulators.
3.1.2 The Chanter
The EpipE chanter consists of a 3D-printed tube-like frame
housing two printed circuit boards and a momentary switch.
The frame is a flattened oval inc ross-section, approx imately
38 cm in length, and has slots front and back for the circuit
boards. The front board is a four layer PCB 17.6 mm across
and 328 mm in length. It has seven holes along its length,
whose spacing and dimensions are based on measurements
taken from a number of instruments in the principal author’s
possession. The back board is of identical cross section, 57
mmin length, andc ontains thet humb-holea nd its supporting
circuitry. The perimeters of both PCBs are routed to a depth of
1.2 mm (half the board thickness), allowing them to be
mounted securely in their respective slots in such a way as to
be flush with the wall of the frame.
Plan View
Cross Section
Figure 4: EpipE Chanter
3.1.2.1 The Tonehole Sensor
The selection of an appropriate technology for the chanter
tonehole sensor has proved to be the biggest challenge
encountered to date in the development process. The length of
the air column, which determines the pitch produced, is
predominantly governed by the position of the first opening
in the bore of the instrument; therefore the particular parameter
we want to measure is degree of tonehole coverage. More
specifically, we must measure the degree of tonehole edge
coverage, as the player’s finger may begin to cover or uncover
the hole froma range of different angles. The tactile feedback
provided by the feel of the tonehole edges is an important aid
to the player of the real instrument, and for this reason a flat
plate-style sensor would be unsuitable for our purposes.
Numerous approaches have been considered, most
involving optical or capacitive technologies, or a combination
of the two. The idea of using capacitive sensing in its
analogue range was discarded due to its extreme sensitivity to
variations in humidity, skin-conductivity and other
environmental variables. Likewise, the optical solutions
considered would have been susceptible to variations in
ambient light and, in some cases, to variations in the levels of
infrared radiation emitted by the performer. An instrument
built using any of these approaches would need to be
calibrated to each individual user and set of conditions, and
would not provide the clean open, closed and partially covered
readings required for a robust electronic interface.
We eventually decided to experiment with a number of
capacitive touch sensors spaced evenly around the rim of the
tonehole. Thea dvantageo ft hisa pproach is its reliability –
each individual switch is either definitely on or definitely off
–but thed rawbacki st hata relativelyh igh numbero f switches
is required to approximate an analogue range. The issue is not
the frequency resolution required for held notes – over the
semitone to full-tone intervals involved, a relatively small
number of sensors would suffice – but rather the resolution
required while sliding between notes. Some of the
technologies used in fingerprint sensors would be ideal for the
task, as wouldt hoseu sedi ns ome laptop pointing devices.
Regrettably, these are usually implemented as custom-
designed microelectronic devices and none are available in the
unusual form factor we require.
Our first tonehole prototype was built using discrete
analogue components and comprised six individual cap acitive
touch-sensor circuits connected to electrodes mounted ar ound
thee dge of a hole. The numberi so fn op articular signif icance,
but worked out conveniently in terms of the electronic
components involved and was d eemed suff icient to test the
reliability of our solution. These sensors were connected as
inputs to a PIC microcontroller and used to drive a single-hole
clarinet model provided with Perry R Cook’s Signal
Processing Toolkit[4] and some single-hole flute models of
our own, with the expected results. Even with thelimited
resolution of our prototype, it was possible to consistently
produce sounds corresponding to fully open and fully closed
tonehole states as well as a satisfactory semitone. Attempts to
slide, however, produced stepped tones rather than smooth
legato, highlighting the need to increase the sensor density to
the point where each touch electr ode corres ponds to a change
in frequency of less than the Just Noticeable Difference
discernible by the human ear. The JND varies with frequency,
butcan be taken to be about 1/12 th of as emitone in the
frequencyr ange of interest in our work [5]. Filtering the
composite sensor signal to conceal its stepped characteristic is
not appropriate in the context of a performance instrument, as
this would introduce an unacceptable delay of somewhere
around 30ms (the shortest measured duration for a complete
finger gesture in a sample of fast, staccato piping).
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-6
For the second pr ototype we increased the number of
electrodes-per-hole to sixteen. In this denser system,
dedicating a touch-sensor circuit to each electrode would have
entailed a prohibitive component count. Instead, we chose to
use a single capacitive touch-switch circuit and to multiplex
the tonehole sensor-pads using some new analogue sw itches
with ESD protection manufactured by Maxim. This
arrangement, detailed below, provides a satisfactory sliding
effect between notes andf orms theb asis of our multi-tonehole
circuit. Multiplexing the tonehole-sensor pads has enabled us
to reduce the circuitry considerably and poll all 128 pads at a
rate of 100 Hz using just two touch-plate sensor sub-circuits.
Figure 5 is a simplified representation of the sensing
circuitry for a single electronic tonehole. A high frequency
oscillator feeds the top node of an RC (Resistor-Capacitor)
potential divider. A capacitance, the parallel combination of
parasitic capacitances to ground and the capacitance of a tone-
hole pad to ground, forms the lower half of the divider. When
the player’s finger is in contact with the pad this capacitance
typically increases several fold, thereby causing the voltage at
the centre node of the potential divider to fall in magnitude.
This drop is detected by comparing its peak value to a
reference voltage. By multiplexing all the tone-hole pads to
the centre node of the potential divider, one peak-detect /
comparator circuit can service a much larger number of
toneholep ads. The microcontroller manages them ultiplexer
addressing and converts the sensor signals to a custom serial
protocol for output.
Figure 5: Block Diagram of Single EpipE Tonehole
3.1.3 Drones and Regulators
The drones and regulators of the EpipE will be realised as a
set of switches which connect di rectly to a distribution board
mounted in the modified stock of a real set of pipes. The
switches’ states arem ultiplexed and monitored by the PIC on
thec hanter PCB. Thed istributionP CB also houses various
housekeeping sub-systems, including an RS-232 driver, an
FSRcircuit forb ag pressure measurementa nd power supply
circuitry.
Thei nterface to thed ronesi sa simple wrist-operated on-off
toggle switch. It might also be useful to include another
button to cycle through additional pre-programmed drone
tunings not achievable on a real instrument; to activate an
extra drone tuned a 5th above the baritone for example.
The regulator keys can easily be instrumented, either by
mounting simple momentary switches in the holes they cover
or by attaching wires directly to the keys themselves and
allowing them to act as capacitive touch-plates. Analternative
approach would be to use a position sens itive strip, like those
used in some MIDI keyboards, for each regulator. This would
allow for more flexibility of us e– in standard operation the
strips could be divided into zones corresponding to the
various regulator keys, but an alternative mode could be
implemented in software allowing the player to slide between
notes or perhaps use regulator vibrato.
3.2 The S ynthesis Model
In order to properly evaluate our interface, we will need a
carefully designed synthesis model to drive with it. The
subsections below review the synthesis possibilities that seem
most appropriate for the chanter, drones and regulators.
3.2.1 Chanter Synthesis
Thec omplex inter-relationships of the control parameters
being measured here suggest a physical modelling approach as
being the most appropriate during the initial evaluation of our
electronic interface. This will involve tackling a number of
difficult physical modelling issues, particularly in relation to
the double reed excitation of the chanter. The following
section offers a brief review of recent developments in the
relevant areas of physical-modelling synthesis of woodwind
instruments.
3.2.1.1 The D ouble Reed
Although the single reed of the clarinet ands axophone is
well understood, the double reed remains something of a
mystery. The two halves of the double reed run close to one
another for a considerable distance near their tips, making
Bernoulli forces become particularly important[6]. The flow
resistance in then arrows taple alsoh as as ignificant effect on
its operation[7]. Josep Nebot reports some success with a
CSound synthesis of the Grallot, a sort of double-reeded
clarinet[8]. Cook (1995) has also conducted some research on
theA ulos[9], a double-reed cylindrical-bore woodwind d ating
from the 5 th century BC, concluding that more theoretical and
experimental work wasr equired fromt he acoustics community
before an accurate synthesis model of the double reed could be
constructed. Guillaume Lemaitre, working in the Université du
Maine and IRCAM, recently completed a masters thesis on a
physical model of the oboe[10] andpublished a paper with
Christophe Vergez, Xavier Rodet and René Caussé on the
influence of bore conicity and the pipeneck downstream of a
double reed[11]. They explain that the presence of the narrow
pipe (or staple) causes a pressure drop between the top of the
staple and opening of the conical bore, invalidating the flow
model commonly used for the single reed, and propose a
simple model for the pipeneck with the pressure drop
representedb yad ischarge-lossc oefficient. Ther esulting reed
model exhibits three different behaviours depending on the
discharge-loss coefficient chosen for the pipeneck.
3.2.1.2 The Tonehole Model
     Keefe (1981) [12] presented a study of w oodwind tonehole
providing distinct models for the open and closed toneholes.
Thesem odels were translated for efficien td igital waveguide
implementation by Scavone and Smith[13]. In his doctoral
thesis[14], Scavone presents a new tonehole model capable of
dynamic state changes from fully-open through fully-closed.
This latter solution does h avea limitation on the minimum
tonehole length (one spatial sampling interval) later addressed
by van Walstijn and Scavone using wave-digital filtering
techniques[15]. This wave-digital model, though more
computationally complex than that presented in Scavone’s
thesis, is probably the most appropriate for our chanter model
given the small diameter of some of the chanter toneholes.
3.2.1.3 The Conical Bore
The bore of the chanter is approximately a truncated straight
sidedc one with some subtle but significant deviations[1]
which affect the alignment of the air column’s modes of
oscillation. For synthesis purposes, the chanter bore can be
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-7
approximated as a serious of conic sections interspersed with
tonehole scattering junctions.
Figure 6: Bore Diameter vs. Distance for a Kenna Chanter
pitched in C [15]
Various previous studies have demonstrated the difficulty
of establishing stable reg imes of oscillatio ni na truncated
conical bore. Scavone (2002) [12] presents a flexible model
fors ucha borea nd describes its implementation using dig ital
waveguide techniques. In his doctoral thesis [13], on which
our most recent work in this area has been based, Maarten Van
Walstijn uses wave-digital filtering techniques to address
some issues relating to the modelling of toneholes in a conical
bore.
3.2.1.4 Sound Radiation
Given that much of the dynamic variation in piping is
achieved by opening and closing chanter toneholes, it will be
important for us to accurately modelt he contributiono f each
tonehole to the overall sound radiated by the instrument.
Scavone has dealt with this area in a paper on the mode lling of
wind instrument sound radiation in 3D space published in the
proceedings of ICMC 1999, approx imating each tonehole as
an open-pipe discontinuity [14]. Lower frequency
components tend to radiate in an almost omni-directional
pattern while those at higher frequencies have greater
magnitude in front of the pipe opening and along its axis.
Scavone uses a frequency-dependent directivity f ilter for each
radiation source to account for the angle between source and
pickup-point. For our purposes it should be safe to assume
that the observer is at a sufficient distance from the instrument
that the angle to each source is approximately equal, allowing
us to sum the pressure components contributed by each
tonehole directly and avoid the additional computational
complexity the inclusion of directivity filters would incur.
3.2.2 Drone Synthesis
A physical drone model would be similar to that of a simple
clarinet and could be readily rea lised using digital waveguide
techniques. As the drones are not “played” as such but rather
tuned to the chanter at the outset and switched on and off as
needed, a number of other synthesis approaches (additive, or
even sample-based) could also be used interchangeably, or
MIDI signals could be used to drive an external synthesis
module.
3.2.3 Regulator Synthesis
The physical construction of the regulators would s uggest a
modification of the chanter synthesis model as being the ideal
regulator synthesis solution. When we attend to the way in
which they are played, however, it becomes clear that a much
simpler and less computationally intensive solution will
suffice. The regulators are key-operated, so a regulator
tonehole may be held only in its fully-closed or fully-open
state. This suggests that a simplified tonehole model will be
adequate to the task. We can further simplify things when we
consider that only one tonehole on each regulator will be open
at any given time, suggesting that a model consisting of a
double reed coupled to a conical, or even cylindrical, bore
should be sufficient for our purposes. Indeed, as with the
drones, the more mechanical way inw hich the regulators are
played detracts from the benefits to be gained from a physical-
modelling synthesis approach in terms of note transitions etc.
The pitch corresponding to each regulator key is known, so the
additive, sample-based and external synthesis options
mentioned in the drone section above remain equally viable in
this case.
4. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In the course of the research described here, we have studied
the Uilleann Pipes and the way in which they are played in an
effort to identifyt he physical parameters that are manipu lated
by thep layer in theiri nteraction with the instrument. On the
strength of our findi ngs we ha ve come up with a design for a
new electronic interface, at the core of which is a new tonehole-
state sensing solution. We have successfully built two
tonehole prototypes and written a Java interface allowing us to
test them with physical models constructed using Perry
Cook’s Synthesis Toolkit (STK). Based on the design of the
second of these prototypes, we have laid out the PCBs for an 8-
tonehole electronic chanter. In preparation for the
construction of a physically-based synthesis model with
which to test our interface, we have reviewed much of the
existing literature on the double reed and other relevant
aspects of woodwind acoustics and physical modelling
synthesis. Work hasb eenb egun on the implementation of the
required buildingb locksw ithin the framework provided by
the STK.
Our observations suggest that the Uilleann Pipes have great
potential as a basis for a new electronic musical controller.
Their combination of expressive woodwind-style melodic
control with the harmonic capabilities of the regulators should
make them an attractive option in a performance context as
well as a novel expressive MIDI controller. Our immediate
goali st oc ompletec onstruction of our physical interf ace. In
parallel, we will be continuing to develop the physical
synthesism odelo ft he chanter discussedi ns ection 3.2.
Having verified our sensor arrangement using this synthesis
model, the eventual goal is the abstraction of our interface
through the development of a mapping layer which will allow
us to drive arbitrary synthesis models using the EpipE
controller.
5. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Thanks are due to Perry Cook and Gary Scavone for
consultations on the subjects of the double reed and the
conical bore respectively.
6. REFE RENCES
[1] Fischer, C., Pipe Bores and Pipe Acoustics. Ceol na
hÉireann, 2001. 3:p . 24-37.
[2] Rowsome, L., Tutor for the Uileann Pipes . 1936, Dublin:
Walton's Musical Instrument Galleries Ltd. 35.
[3] Scavone, G.P., The Holey Controller . 1999.
[4] Cook, P.R. and G.P. Scavone. The Synthesis ToolKit
(STK).i n ICMC. 1999. Beijing.
[5] Worrall, D., TheP hysics and Psychophysics of Sound &
Music.
[6] Benade, A.H., Fundamentals of Musical Acous tics . 2nd
ed. 1976: Dover Press. 596.

Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-8
[7] Fletcher, N.H. and T.D. Rossing, The Physics of Musical
Instruments . 2nd ed. 1998: Springer-Verlag.
[8] Nebot, J.M.C., CSound Implementation of Physical
Models of Woodwind Instruments . 1999.
[9] Cook, P.R. Greek AulosP roject Status Report: Acoustics
of Double Reed Cylindrical Bore Instruments .i n
Symposium on Physical Models and Applications in
Psychoacoustics . 1995. Thessaloniki, Greece.
[10] Lemaitre, G., Synthèse de Hautbois par Modèle Physique ,
in DEA (Acoustique Appliquée) . 2000, Université du
Maine.
[11] Lemaitre, G., et al. Physical modeling of oboe-like
instruments: influence of the bore conicity and of the
pipeneck after the double reed.i n SCI. 2001.
[12] Scavone, G.P. Time-Domain Synthesis of Conical Bore
Instrument Sounds .i n ICMC. 2002. Göteborg, Sweden.
[13] van Walstijn, M., Discrete-Time M odelling of Brass and
Reed Woodwind Instruments with Application to
Musical Sound Synthesis. 2002, University of
Edinburgh: Edinburgh. p. 312.
[14] Scavone, G.P. Modeling Wind Instrument S ound
Radiation using Digital Waveguides. in ICMC. 1999.
Beijing, China.
[15] Fischer, C., Pipe Bores and Pipe Acoustics .C e o ln a
hÉireann, 2001. 3: p. 24-37.
[16] Scavone, G.P. Time-Domain Synthesis of Conical Bore
Instrument Sounds .I nI CMC. 2002. Göteborg, Sweden.
[17] van Walstijn, M., Discrete-Time M odelling of Brass and
Reed Woodwind Instruments with Application to
Musical Sound Synthesis. 2002,University of
Edinburgh,Edinburgh. p. 312.
[18] Scavone, G.P. Modeling Wind Instrument Sound
Radiation using Digital Waveguides .I nI CMC. 1999.
Beijing, China.