New Open-Source Interfaces for Group-Based
Participatory Performance of Live Electronic Music
Timothy Barraclough
Victoria University of
Wellington
New Zealand School of Music
Wellington, New Zealand
barraclough.tim@gmail.com
Jim Murphy
Victoria University of
Wellington
School of ECS
Wellington, New Zealand
jim.w.murphy@gmail.com
Ajay Kapur
California Institute of the Arts
24700 McBean Parkway
Valencia, California
Victoria University of
Wellington
School of ECS
Wellington, New Zealand
ajay@karmetik.com
ABSTRACT
This paper describes the Modulome System, a new hard-
ware interface set for group-based electronic music perfor-
mance and installation. Taking inﬂuence from a variety of
established interfaces, the Modulome is a modular controller
with application dependant use cases.
Keywords
Musical Interface, Collaborative performance, open-source
1. INTRODUCTION
We live an age where the nature of our social interaction is
rapidly changing in response to, and aided by, technological
development. It seems that the creation and consumption
of electronic music has not developed accordingly, in that
division of audience and performer still occurs on a large
scale: it is becoming more evident that we must create new
technologically-aﬀorded experiences for social interaction in
electronic music if electronic music performance is to remain
relevant in this ever-changing technological landscape.
By transferring the hardware semiotics of music controllers
into social settings, we can create new, novel musical inter-
faces and experiences that reﬂect changes in our social and
technological landscape to challenge the nature of the divi-
sion between performer and audience. Without the hard-
ware semiotics, the legitimacy of smartphone/tablet inter-
faces as transparent performance tools can be questioned.
This paper presents the construction and implementation
of a networked system for electronic music performance by
group participation that is both inclusive and accessible to
performers of any experience level. Inspired by the social
nature of smartphone technology and designed with mod-
ularity in mind, Modulome attempts to avoid the often
criticized technological obscurity of electronic music per-
formance and explore the second order abstraction of an
audience within electronic music performance.
This paper’s ﬁrst section discusses the construction of the
Modulome System, a modular hardware interface for wire-
less communication and the resulting hardware communi-
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’14,June 30 – July 03, 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
cation network (Figure 1) . The second section presents a
custom-built Java application for the handling of the wire-
less communication and the parsing into both MIDI and
OSC protocols. The third section discusses the community-
based nature and importance of creating open source hard-
ware controls and will provide links to Gerber ﬁles, PCB
layouts and links to instructions for construction of the wire-
less hardware interface(s) speciﬁed in this paper. The ﬁnal
section is an discussion of one of the system’s applied per-
formance contexts.
Figure 1: Diagram of the Hardware communication
2. MOTIV ATIONS AND RELATED WORKS
Recent investigations into group participation in live elec-
tronic music have focused on utilising mobile phone tech-
nology [6, 3] to communicate data to a ‘master’ performer,
which could either be a musician on stage or a computer ma-
nipulating parameters of a digitized performance. Although
novel, the separation between the participating group (from
the audience) and the performer is still integral to the per-
formance. Of a group-based, participatory performance, we
should expect that the participatory experience for audi-
ence members should behave as the performance itself and
the audience participation would subsequently be directly
causally related to the music performed. For this kind of
experience to truly be novel, the participatory experience
of the group performing must be essential to the resultant
“work”. Although the possibilities aﬀorded by emergent
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
155
smartphone technology allow for interface design as imple-
mented within smartphones, the aesthetics of a tactile con-
trol still remain a predominant factor in live-performance
of electronic music and, as such, should be echoed within a
group-based electronic music performance in order to truly
challenge the issues of audience-performer dichotomies.
Although the Modulome diverges from the smartphone
technology previously mentioned, they both share a com-
mon ancestry of networked music performance groups such
as The Hub [2], The Machine Orchestra [4], SLOrk [9] and
PLOrk [7] speciﬁcally in the utilisation of technology to fa-
cilitate group collaboration in performance music. The use
of networks themselves as instruments has been highly in-
ﬂuential in the creation of social music controllers as a way
to give control over the network and subsequently, the sonic
direction of a performance. The Modulome system was de-
veloped with the philosophy of network based instruments
in mind, but is interested in the behaviour and the social
relationships of individuals within the network, attempting
to showcase the network wholly without compromising the
autonomy of individuals.
The name “Modulome” is a portmanteau of “Modular”
and“Monome”, the controller family the Modulome is based
upon1. The minimalist design and open-source nature of
the Monome system has been adapted and built upon, in-
spiring a lineage of designs with open-sources including the
Arduinome and Chronome projects [8] and a community
built around the devices themselves. Modulome proposes a
signiﬁcant diﬀerence to these other designs by being both
modular and wireless.
Investigations into multi-performer instruments, such as
the EDholak [5], and the Tooka [1], have revealed that these
instruments are targeted towards performers/players with
prior musicianship training and the resultant music is semi-
otically related to the physical construction and aesthetics
of the instruments themselves. This suggests the impor-
tance of semiotics in the relation to the intended musical
output of the instrument itself. Following from this, the
“Modulome” system intends to adapt the semiotic language
of electronic music performance from both contemporary
and historic MIDI controllers and DJ equipment to present
controllers and instruments that have a level of intuitive use
cases and resultant music.
3. MODULOME CONSTRUCTION
Each module consists of a variety of sensors, an XBee wire-
less module, an Arduino Pro Mini (5 V) and a lithium-
polymer rechargeable battery, resting on a custom-built PCB
(Figure 8). Enclosures are constructed from a combination
of black and white 6 mm acrylic and 6.7 mm bamboo ply-
wood, laser cut to speciﬁc dimensions from Ponoko2. Each
module is named independently, after the moons of Saturn,
preﬁxed with the name “%me” (Modulome) (Table 1). Fol-
lowing are the three speciﬁc sensor arrays’ diﬀerences that
have currently been implemented in separate modules.
3.1 Button-Pad Module
The Button-pad module (Figure 2) houses 16 single color
LEDs within 16 buttons arranged in a matrix. The LEDs
and switching mechanism are decoupled, such that the LEDs
can be addressed and operated independently of the but-
tons. This allows for application-speciﬁc visual feedback.
For applications in which a large amount of modules are
being used simultaneously, the LEDs can be mapped to the
1www.monome.org
2www.ponoko.com
Figure 2: The Button Pad-Module
button inputs directly in order to minimize the necessary
communication.
3.2 Rotary Encoder Module
Figure 3: The Encoder Module
The Rotary Encoder Module (Figure 3) houses a 128
pulse-per-revolution non-detented rotary encoder with push
switch. Surrounding the Encoder knob is an array of 32
LEDs driven by two TLC5940 LED Drivers. Similarly to
the Button-pad Module, LED interaction is decoupled from
the rotary encoder input. The encoder has multiple modes
of operation (Figure 4). In “Wrap Mode” the encoder will
output 128 values mapped directly to the encoder’s rota-
tional position which will be illuminated by the LEDs. “Fader
Mode” functions similarly except does not allow for the in-
put to wrap from maximum to minimum, allowing the en-
coder to work similarly to a rotary potentiometer where
the value (between 0 and 127) is illuminated by the LED
ring. “Pan-Pot Mode” is fundamentally identical to “Fader
Mode”, however it maps the LED ring as a distance from
the center value (63) to function like a pan-pot on a mixer.
The switch on the encoder allows for two modes of oper-
ation to be operated at one time (with the switch pressed
and unpressed).
3.3 Fader Module
The Fader Module (Figure 5) contains 3 linear slide poten-
tiometers, but is designed in such a way that any combina-
tion of 3 analog sensors (of any variety) could replace these
potentiometers without any signiﬁcant change to the Fader
Module’s ﬁrmware. Although the simplest of the modules,
the fader module allows for the most easily customizable
modules. This is because any 3 voltage dividers could be
used in place of the faders, or additional sensors could be
added (with minimal ﬁrmware changes) as the fader module
does not require any additional libraries or strong timing
mechanisms (due to the lack of visual feedback) that the
other two modules require.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
156
Figure 4: Diagram of LED feedback for each en-
coder mode
4. JA V A INTERFACE
In order to coordinate and process the serial data trans-
mitted by the modules, a custom Java application was pro-
grammed (Figure 6) to consolidate and communicate be-
tween existing protocols (Figure 7). If the application de-
tects a new module, by referencing the XBee address the
application will dynamically resize to allow for visualiza-
tion of the incoming module. The application is able to tell
what kind of module has been added based on the XBee
address. Settings can be adjusted per module to alter the
type of communication protocol (MIDI or OSC) and the
parameters of this output. For MIDI, the parameters are
whether a module outputs Control Change messages or No-
teOn messages and the parameters of the messages. For
OSC the parameters are those speciﬁed by the Monome
Protocol3, however, also included are settings for adjusting
3www.monome.org/tech
Module Name Module Type Java/ LED Color
anthe Fader Indigo
daphnis Button-pad Warm white
dione Encoder Lime green
helene Encoder Amber
iapetus Button-pad Red
loge Fader Turquoise
pallene Encoder Yellow
pan Button-pad Emerald green
tarvos Encoder Cool white
tethys Button-pad Blue
Table 1: Module names and colors
Figure 5: The Fader Module
Figure 6: The Java Interface
the size and shape of the Monome Emulation (in regards to
the Monome Arc and Grid arrangements). Additional op-
tions include the ability to choose the feedback the modules
receive. The feedback can either be directly from the mod-
ule sensors, echoed through the Java application or set to
external control via MIDI or OSC. The ability to customize
the parameters is the key to making the system modular; it
can be utilized in any number of diﬀerent ways, i.e. commu-
nicating to multiple diﬀerent applications simultaneously.
This is done without having to make any changes to hard-
ware or ﬁrmware and can be decided by the composer or
artist working with the system to ﬁt their speciﬁc use case.
5. OPEN SOURCE HARDWARE
Following in the footsteps of the Monome, Arduinome and
Chronome projects, the build ﬁles, including laser cutting
.eps ﬁles, the Gerber ﬁles for the printed circuit boards,
electrical schematics, build instructions, Arduino code, the
Java application and source code have been released. The
logic behind this decision is two-fold. Firstly, the project
is heavily based on the above projects and the communi-
ties built around them. It follows that Modulome can itself
become part of the chain of inﬂuence, modiﬁcation and com-
munity driven design. The second reason is based on the
philosophy and aesthetics of the concept of the interface it-
self: given the idea was to create interfaces that could be
diﬀused into audiences in a way that is symbolic of breaking
down the barrier between audience and performer, releas-
ing the source of the interface can be symbolic of taking the
philosophy to the logical extreme, whereby the knowledge
of how, and ability to create and operate the Modulome is,
itself, diﬀused.
6. ORBITS - INTERACTIVE INSTALLATION
The following is a discussion of an interactive multimedia
installation created speciﬁcally to demonstrate the social
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
157
Figure 7: Illustration of Communication Protocol
Figure 8: Printed circuit boards: Encoder module
board (left) and Modulome base PCB (right)
nature of the Modulome system. Orbits (Figure ??) is an
installation for four button-pad modules (pan, daphnis, ia-
petus and tethys), stereo audio and visual display. Each
module controls the speed, direction and radius of four
‘planets’ of corresponding color to the button-pad LEDs.
As planets collide, their direction reverses. As planets in
nearby ‘orbits’ pass each other they exert a ‘gravitational
pull’ upon one another. As planets pass a predeﬁned point
they trigger a piano-like sound. Users are able to interact
with their planets (and subsequently the sound) through
the button-pad modules and inﬂuence other users’ planets
by colliding planets on the same orbits. The result is a
novel sequencer that exhibits diﬀerent sonic characteristics
depending on the amount of players.
The core of the installation was programmed in ChucK,
receiving MIDI from the Modulome Java application and
output OSC to Processing for the visual elements, MIDI
back to the Java application for LED feedback and MIDI
to Ableton Live for the sound design components. Orbits
was presented at the Sonic Arts Engineering Expo 2013 at
Victoria University of Wellington on the 12th of October,
2013.
A video demonstration of Orbits can be found at:
https://vimeo.com/76930204
Figure 9: Television showing visual component of
Orbits
7. CONCLUSION
The Modulome System is a novel group performance
controller that can be utilized in a multitude of diﬀerent
performance and installation settings by virtue of its
modular design. It provides new opportunities for
group-based performance by oﬀering traditional hardware
controller elements in dispersible wireless modules that
strongly link user input to sound and visual outputs. The
result is new social musical experiences resulting from
participation and collaboration.
8. REFERENCES
[1] S. Fels and F. Vogt. Tooka: explorations of two person
instruments. In Proceedings of the 2002 conference on
New interfaces for musical expression, pages 1–6.
National University of Singapore, 2002.
[2] S. Gresham-Lancaster. The aesthetics and history of
the hub: The eﬀects of changing technology on
network computer music. Leonardo Music Journal,
8:39–44, Sept. 1998.
[3] O. H ¨odel, F. Kayali, and G. Fitzpatrick. Designing
interactive audience participation using smart phones
in a musical performance. In Non-Cochlear Sound,
Liubljana, 2012.
[4] A. Kapur, M. Darling, D. Diakopoulos, J. W. Murphy,
J. Hochenbaum, O. Vallis, and C. Bahn. The machine
orchestra: An ensemble of human laptop performers
and robotic musical instruments. Computer Music
Journal, 35(4):49–63, Dec. 2011.
[5] A. Kapur, P. Davidson, P. R. Cook, P. Driessen, and
A. Schloss. Digitizing north indian performance. In
Proceedings of the International Computer Music
Conference, volume 2004. Citeseer, 2004.
[6] J. Oh and G. Wang. Audience-participation techniques
based on social mobile computing. Ann Arbor, MI:
MPublishing, University of Michigan Library, 2011.
[7] D. Trueman, P. Cook, S. Smallwood, and G. Wang.
PLOrk: the princeton laptop orchestra, year 1. In
Proceedings of the international computer music
conference, pages 443–450, 2006.
[8] O. Vallis, J. Hochenbaum, J. Murphy, and A. Kapur.
The chronome: A case study in designing new
continuously expressive musical instruments. In
Proceedings of the Australasian Computer Music
Conference 2011, 2011.
[9] G. Wang, N. Bryan, J. Oh, and R. Hamilton. Stanford
laptop orchestra (slork). Ann Arbor, MI: MPublishing,
University of Michigan Library, 2009.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
158