LEMUR’s Musical Robots
Eric Singer, Jeff Feddersen,
Chad Redmon, Bil Bowen
LEMUR
Brooklyn, NY, USA
info@lemurbots.org
ABSTRACT
This paper describes new work and creations of LEMUR, a
group of artists and technologists creating robotic musical
instruments.
Keywords
Robotics, music, instruments, MIDI
INTRODUCTION
LEMUR, League of Electronic Musical Urban Robots, is a
group of artists and technologists dedicated to producing
robotic musical instruments. This paper describes
LEMUR’s motivations, instrument details, underlying
technology and applications of the instruments.
MOTIVATIONS
LEMUR is motivated by a desire to create new ways to
extend human musical capabilities. With our designs, we
seek to augment the possibilities available to players and
composers, not to replace human musicians. For example,
robotic instruments can play in ways that humans can’t or
generally don’t play. Some of these capabilities include
speed, pitch and expression granularity, complex
polyrhythms and extended duration playing.
In LEMUR designs, instrument musicality is of primary
importance. We strive to create robots which are
instruments, as opposed to robots which play existing
instruments – that is, newly designed instruments which
are robotically playable and controllable.
The instruments provide composers with an immediacy of
feedback, similar to composing on synthesizers. However,
as opposed to synthesizers, physical instruments resonate,
project and interact with sound spaces in richer, more
complex ways. Clearly, they have a more commanding
physical presence as well.
THE INSTRUMENTS
LEMUR has created a diverse group of stringed and
percussion robots, including GuitarBot, an electric slide-
guitar-like instrument; TibetBot, which plays Tibetan
singing bowls; !rBot (pronounced “chicker-bot”), which
plays goat-hoof rattles; ForestBot, a shaker-based
instrument; and ModBots, a series of modular percussion
robots.
All instruments are controlled by custom developed MIDI
hardware and software, based around PIC microcontrollers.
Using MIDI, the instruments can be played individually or
as an ensemble. They respond to MIDI commands in real-
time and can be played live by humans from MIDI
keyboards and other MIDI devices. They can also be played
from computer via sequences or algorithmically generated
improvisations. Use of standard MIDI commands allows
the musician or composer to control the instrument using
familiar tools with no additional computer or special
software required.
GuitarBot
In designing GuitarBot, our goal was to create an electrified
slide guitar that was versatile, responsive, capable of fast
and slow playing, easy to control, with high-quality sound,
modular and portable.
GuitarBot consists of four independent single-stringed slide
guitar units. A PIC microcontroller on each unit receives
MIDI commands and controls operation of the
electromechanical components.
Each slide is controlled by a DC servo motor driving a
pulley and belt that moves a sliding bridge. Positional
feedback is accomplished by a potentiometer on the idler
pulley. A proportional-integral-derivative (PID) algorithm
running in firmware is responsible for servo positioning.
The pick mechanism consists of four guitar picks mounted
on a block that rotates on a shaft. The shaft is also belt and
pulley driven by a DC servo motor. Pick position feedback
is accomplished using a photosensor reading dark and light
patterns on a wheel at the end of the shaft.
A “clapper” solenoid is used as a damper which closes on
the string and stops vibration when activated.
The units are independently tunable and have a 2-octave
range with microtunable pitch resolution. The bridge can
move from one end of the range to the other in under 1/4
second. Each unit also has a custom designed
electromagnetic pickup.
The second model of GuitarBot, which is currently being
designed, will feature an interchangeable picking system,
allowing for different actuation systems that can easily be
swapped in and out. Planned mechanisms include
bouncing, bow-like action, rubber and glass wheels and
electromagnetic excitation
GuitarBot is described in more detail in the paper LEMUR
GuitarBot: MIDI Robotic String Instrument.
TibetBot
TibetBot is designed around three Tibetan singing bowls,
with six robotic arms which strike the bowls to elicit a
variety of tones. It is capable of creating both atonal
rhythms as well as tonal droning soundscapes.
The singing bowl is a traditional instrument of the
Mahayana and Tantric sects of Buddhism centered in Tibet.
Each bowl produces two prominent tones – a high pitched
ring and a low pitched drone – as well as numerous
harmonic tones. Traditionally, bowls are constructed from
seven different metals formed into a distinctive dome
shape. The combination and density of these metals is what
produces the distinct tonal quality of the instrument.
The singing bowl is normally a hand-held instrument, with
a wooden mallet used to produce a ringing drone
combining the high, low and harmonic tones depending of
the area of the bowl struck.
For robotic implementation, we created six aluminum arms
(two per bowl). One arm per bowl is raw aluminum bar,
producing a high pitch tone when striking the bowl; the
other arm has a soft rubber end, producing a low tone. The
arms are controlled by solenoids, triggered by MIDI note
commands.
A future design will augment the instrument with
resonating tubes. A tube will be located over each bowl and
may be moved closer or further from the bowl using
robotic controls, shaping and filtering the sound of the
bowl.
!rBot
!rBot is a mollusk-like structure made of leather, aluminum
and steel. A mechanical system of cams and levers powered
by two motors opens and closes !rBot's shell. As the shell
opens, a platform holding a shaking percussive rattle
protrudes from the robot's interior, receding again as the
shell closes.
!rBot fuses traditional musical instruments with mechanical
design. Inspired by the human mouth, the goal of !rBot
was to develop a percussive instrument in which the release
of sound could be shaped and modified by a malleable
cavity. As the cavity opens and closes, it effectively acts
like an analog filter, shaping the sound of the enclosed
percussive instrument.
!rBot is an experiment in forms of mechanical motion and
their relation to sound. The rhythmic drone produced by a
set of Peruvian goat hoof maracas is dependent on
movement of mechanical gears and oscillating cam
systems. The sound achieved references both a history of
human percussive instruments and the mechanized motion
present in industrial machinery.
!rBot is designed to be modular. Its interior rattle can be
replaced by other percussive instruments including bells,
chimes, shakers or other types of maracas.
ForestBot
ForestBot consists of a collection of stalks which arc up
from bases on the ground. Each stalk has an egg-shaped
rattle mounted at the free end and a small aluminum
armature affixed near the base. The armature supports a
motor with an asymmetrical counterweight which, when
spun by the motor, vibrates the entire stalk and thus causes
the rattle to shake.
The stalks are in clusters, with 5 sharing a single base. The
robot's five bases can be arranged such that a person
interacting with it is entirely surrounded by the stalks, with
the rattles dispersed in the air just above head level.
The rods are made of fiberglass, 10 feet long by 1/4” inch
in diameter. A variety of dimensions and materials were
auditioned in order to find one that would create a system
with a slow and gentle fundamental movement when the
rattles were attached. The rattles themselves are Rhythm
Tech Eggz  brand plastic egg shakers, epoxied to suction
cups that allow them easily to be mounted to and removed
from the rods.
Each armature consists of a custom-formed piece of
aluminum approximately seven inches long that provides a
mechanism for attaching to the rod; a simple mounting for
the small DC motor; and a Delrin counterweight. After
some experimentation with various counterweight shapes,
we settled on a design in the form of a thickened
checkmark.
A long rod, fixed at one end and free at the other, is a
musical system analogous to the tine of a mbira, or thumb
piano. It has a fundamental vibration frequency determined
by the length and rigidity of the pole and the weight of the
egg rattle at the end. In our system the fundamental
frequency of the stalks is extremely low, expressing itself
as a very slow waving back and forth at about .5Hz.
Like a musical string, the rod also vibrates at harmonics of
its fundamental frequency. It is these harmonics that are
excited when the counterweight near the base of the stalk is
activated. Differing masses of counterweights and positions
on the stalk yield different harmonic excitations.
Furthermore, the system exhibits resonance and damping of
vibrations at different motor speeds.
Although at present the rattles are all nearly identical, a
variety of textures and responses are attainable by varying
the motor speed, counterweight mass and armature
position.
The original bases of ForestBot – fixed, non-articulating
platforms – are currently being modified to allow for
articulating X-Y angle control. The new bases enable us to
control their angle to “play” the fundamental frequency of
the rods, causing them to swing from side to side and front
to back. This gives us the ability to choreograph both the
sound and the motion of the robot and yields a compelling
immersive experience.
ModBots
ModBots are miniature, modular instruments designed to
affix to virtually any structure, thereby allow the composer
musical control of anything from a battery of specially
designed instruments to structural surfaces within pre-
existing architectural space. With an emphasis on
simplicity, each ModBot design usually consists of only
one electromechanical actuator (a rotary motor or linear
solenoid) which responds to varying degrees of supply
voltage regulated by a microcontroller. This single-actuator
design philosophy demands that all mechanical movement
within the instrument be subordinated to the physical
capabilities of the lone motor or solenoid employed. While
this may sound like a limitation, such use of mechanical
design (as opposed to more “intelligent” electronic design)
brings a reliability, mechanical consistency and modularity
that would otherwise not be possible.
Each device can be fitted with a variety of mounting
harnesses and is connected to the brain (box containing the
microcontroller, control circuitry and power supply) via  a
single run of cable. Thus, the microcontroller administers
the appropriate voltage to hit, shake, scrape, bow, spin or
pluck sound from any sonorous object with the precision
one would expect from digital control.
HammerBots (the ModBot beater device) for example, can
be fitted with any striking device to play loud or soft with
a speed and consistency unavailable to human
percussionists.
SpinnerBots apply friction to a circumference in much the
same way rubbing one’s finger on the rim of a wine glass
causes the glass to ‘sing’. Though usually fitted with round
telephone bells, SpinnerBots can also make metal tubing
“sing” with a rotary bowing action.
RecoBots use a high-performance servo to scrape back an
forth along an attached surface with precise control over the
position and speed of the scraper. Most commonly,
RecoBots scrape the sides of springs lightly stretched over
a resonator.
SistrumBots use a solenoids to pull a set of jingles back
and forth and allow precise control of tambourine-like
shaking sounds.
VibroBots consist of eccentrically loaded motors which,
when activated, shake at frequencies too fast to be rhythmic
and too slow to be a pitch.
A general bowing device, the BowBot is a bow-wheel
lowered to a surface by means of a centrifugal clutch which
engages when the motor is driven. BowBots can be used to
bow strings, sheets of metal or nearly anything that
responds to constant friction.
PluckBots agitate a surface in the same way that a bassist
plays pizzicato. PluckBots are used to play steel tongues,
wires and strings.
Because of their small size, versatile mounting capability
and minimal cabling required for installation, ModBots can
be configured in limitless arrangements. In addition to use
in custom instrument designs, ModBots have brought
MIDI capability to such places as museum stairwells, steel
hulled ships and the sculptural work of other artists.
APPLICATIONS
LEMUR robots have been featured in a wide variety of
applications, including automated and interactive musical
installations and in performance of live, generated and
sequenced musical works. They have performed as solo
instruments and in combinations as a robotic ensemble, as
well as interactively in conjunction with human musicians.
As tools in the hands of composers, players and interaction
designers, they provide compelling new means of musical
expression.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
LEMUR is Eric Singer, Kevin Larke, David Bianciardi,
Chad Redmon, Kate Chapman, Jeff Feddersen, Milena
Iossifova, Brendan J. FitzGerald, Michelle Cherian and Bil
Bowen.
LEMUR would like to thank Harvestworks
(http://harvestworks.org) and The Madagascar Institute
(http://madagascarinstitute.com) for collaborative and
facility support; the Rockefeller Foundation and the New
York State Council for the Arts (NYSCA) for their
generous support of the project; and composers Joshua
Fried and Mari Kimura for their work with the instruments.
More information on LEMUR is available at
http://lemurbots.org.
REFERENCES
1. Amorphic Robot Works web site. Available at
http://www.amorphicrobotworks.org.
2. Baginsky, N.A. The Three Sirens: A Self Learning
Robotic Rock Band. Available at http://www.the-three-
sirens.info.
3. Captured! By Robots web site. Available at
http://www.capturedbyrobots.com.
4. Jordà, S. Afasia: the Ultimate Homeric One-man-
multimedia-band, Proceedings of the 2002 Conference
on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-02)
(Dublin, Ireland, May 24-26, 2002).
5. Kaneda, T. et. al. Subject of Making Music
Performance Robots and Their Ensemble. Proceedings
of the 29th ASEE/IEEE Frontiers in Education
Conference (San Juan, Puerto Rico, 1999), Session
12b4.
6. Raes, G.W. Automatons by Godfried-Willem Raes.
Available at http://logosfoundation.org/instrum_gwr/
automatons.html.
7. Singer, E., Larke, K. and Bianciardi, D. LEMUR
GuitarBot: MIDI Robotic String Instrument,
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces
for Musical Expression (NIME-03) (Montreal, Quebec,
Canada, May 22-24, 2003).
8. Trimpin biography. Available at http://www.
otherminds.org/shtml/Trimpin.shtml.
9. University of Electro-Communications, Kajitani Ming
Laboratory Introduction to Mubot (Musician Robot).
Available at http://concert.rm.mce.uec.ac.jp/
mubot/mubot_e.html.
Figure 1: GuitarBot
Figure 2: TibetBot
Figure 3: !rBot
Figure 4: Observers viewing ForestBot
Figure 5: Several ModBots in installation
