MIDI Keyboard Defined DJ Performance System 
 
 
Christopher Dewey 
University of Huddersfield  
Queensgate, Huddersfield 
 West Yorkshire, United Kingdom 
c.dewey@hud.ac.uk 
 
Jonathan P. Wakefield  
University of Huddersfield 
Queensgate, Huddersfield 
West Yorkshire, United Kingdom 
j.p.wakefield@hud.ac.uk 
 
 
Matthew Tindall  
University of Huddersfield 
Queensgate, Huddersfield 
West Yorkshire, United Kingdom 
m.tindall@hud.ac.uk 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper explores the use of the ubiquitous MIDI keyboard to 
control a DJ performance system. The prototype system uses a two 
octave keyboard with each octave controlling one audio track. Each 
audio track has four two-bar loops which play in synchronisation 
switchable by its respective octave’s first four black keys. The top 
key of the keyboard toggles between frequency filter mode and time 
slicer mode. In frequency filter mode the white keys provide seven 
bands of latched frequency filtering. In time slicer mode the white 
keys plus black B flat key provide latched on/off control of eight time 
slices of the loop. The system was informally evaluated by nine 
subjects. The frequency filter mode combined with loop switching 
worked well with the MIDI keyboard interface. All subjects agreed 
that all tools had creative performance potential that could be 
developed by further practice. 
 
Author Keywords 
DJ, Electronic dance music, performance, exploration 
 
CCS Concepts 
• Applied computing → Sound and music computing; Performing 
arts; • Human-centered computing → Interface design prototyping; 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Electronic Dance Music (EDM) DJs characteristically blend and 
sonically manipulate two or more audio tracks to produce a seamless 
output of audio content. Traditional DJ systems typically feature two 
vinyl turntables and simplified audio mixing interface which enable 
the DJ to beat-match, cue and crossfade between sound sources and 
manipulate spectral characteristics of the sources [10]. DJ systems 
have evolved to also include virtual and hybrid solutions [8]. Hybrid 
systems enable DJs to use familiar traditional gestures [4]. Modern 
virtual systems extend the range of tools for sound source  
manipulation and musical expression. 
 The discipline of c ontrollerism emerged in the mid -2000s.  
Moldover undertook bespoke hacking of MIDI keyboards to 
facilitate his EDM performance practice [7]. EDM DJs currently 
utilise a variety of  commercial Music P roduction 
Centres/Workstations (e.g. Akai MPCs and Ableton Push).  
 Recent research has mainly focussed on extending the sonic 
manipulation capabilities of hybrid system by using traditional 
interaction gestures to control new types of parameters [1,3-5]. This 
paper takes an alternative approach, as adopted in the development of 
“ColorDex” [9]; which replaced the audio faders found on a DJ 
mixer with a hand held cube, and considers a simplification of the 
virtual DJ system interface. 
 This work replaces the hardware interfaces used by EDM DJs with 
the piano keys of a two octave MIDI keyboard controller and 
explores using this interface for time and frequency manipulation of 
EDM for use in loop-based DJ performance. 
2. MOTIVATION  
The motivation to use only the piano keys of a two octave MIDI 
controller as a virtual DJ system interface was:  
1) Democratisation - MIDI controller keyboards are more 
widely available and affordable than hardware interfaces in 
commercial virtual DJ systems.  Knobs, pads and faders 
which vary between controllers were excluded.  
2) Playability - Inspired by Atlantic Records engineer Tom 
Dowd who enabled mix engineers to “play the faders like you 
could play a piano” by replacing the mixing console’s large 
rotary knobs with slide -wire faders  [2] providing an 
“affordance of music playability” [6].  
3) Reductionism – To explore whether a simpler, easier and 
more accessible user interface can be created and to see if this 
has the potential to lead to new creative possibilities. 
3. DJ/EDM TECHNIQUES  
The following observations were made based on informal analysis of 
YouTube performance videos and the authors’ experience.  
 DJs use p redefined cue and loop markers to jump seamlessly 
between different sections of audio tracks. Faders are used to alter the 
level of "beat-matched" audio tracks to move seamlessly between 
tracks or to blend tracks. Peaking parametric filters are used to carve 
out specific frequencies. Low pass, high pass and band pass filters are 
also used to isolate specific frequencies or to swe ep through 
frequencies. These three techniques are used sequentially, 
independently or in combination to realise a musical intention. 
 EDM production involves the creation and manipulation of 
repeating and varying loops at the micro and macro level. At the 
micro level, step sequencers are commonly used to create rhythmic 
and/or melodic patterns using oscillators and/or samples of pre -
recorded audio material. At the macro level these patterns are 
sequenced and combined to create tracks either in a fixed sequence or 
dynamically performed in a live setting.  
4. IMPLEMENTATION 
The prototype interface was implemented using HTML5, JavaScript 
and the WebMIDI and WebAudio APIs (see Figure 1). 
 Each octave controlled one of two audio tracks as the ability to 
control at least two audio tracks simultaneously is a fundamental 
characteristic of any DJ system. Given more octaves this is extensible 
to control more tracks. The system ensured all audio elements were 
synchronised and looped continuously.  
 It appeared logical to use the inferred visual division afforded by 
the layout of the black keys on the interface. The first four black keys 
of each octave were used to switch between four different looped 
sections of the two audio tracks. This macro-level switching tool was 
inspired by the common practice of setting cue and loop markers. In 
contrast to commercial systems the switching of the two bar loops 
occurs at the current point in time of the loops. 
 The white keys were used to manipulate the audio tracks in either 
the time or frequency domain. The highest key (C3), shaded in grey 
in Figure 1, toggles between the two modes.   
200
 In frequency filter mode each octave's white keys provided control 
of a bank of filters. Low to high frequency was mapped from left to 
right to build on a user’s prior understanding of how frequency is 
mapped across a keyboard octave. The bottom key controlled a low-
pass filter (cut-off frequency of 100Hz), the top key controlled a 
high-pass filter (cut-off frequency of 6400Hz), the five remaining 
white keys controlled Constant Q Transform band-pass filters with -
60dB of attenuation (centre frequencies of 200, 400, 800, 1600 and 
3200Hz respectively). This allows the lower frequencies of one audio 
track to be blended with the higher frequencies of the other track or 
the snare drum from one track to be replaced by the snare drum from 
another. Despite the coarse resolution of frequency manipulation it 
seemed sufficiently effective. 
 In time slicer mode the white keys and the black B flat key in each 
octave perform a role inspired by the micro-level step sequencing 
found in Music Production Centres/Workstations. The currently 
active two bar loop of each audio track is sliced into eight beats, with 
each slice mapped to the keys from left to right. Pressing a key 
removes and skips the corresponding slice from the sequence. This 
allows polyrhythms to be explored by switching one loop to, for 
instance, three active steps whilst the other is playing four steps. It 
also allows the typical stutter of just playing one beat of a track 
repeatedly (although currently this can’t be “sped up” as per the 
commonly employed EDM technique).  
 
 
Figure 1: Overview of the Prototype System 
 Both latching and non-latching white key control was considered. 
Whilst the non -latching variation is more congruent with the 
keyboard paradigm it proved difficult to control all fourteen keys 
with two hands. Latching also enabled operation of the two modes 
simultaneously.  
 The authors initially resisted augmenting the hardware interface 
with a graphical user interface to avoid putting a barrier between the 
DJ and the audience. Difficulties of keeping mental track of the 
systems state meant that this was reconsidered and a simple graphical 
representation of the keyboard was displayed on a computer screen. 
Future work will consider ways of displaying piano key activity 
directly on the keyboard interface. 
5. EVALUATION 
The system was presented to eight Music Technology 
undergraduates and one technician with varying degrees of EDM 
DJing experience. The system was pre -loaded with two techno 
tracks. Three of the subjects evaluated the system alone and six in 
pairs. The informal evaluation was to gauge perc eption of the 
interface’s efficacy and creative potential.  
 Overall the subjects found the system fun to use. Both an 
experienced and novice EDM DJ stated it was the best DJ system 
that they have ever used. Many of the subjects were observed 
nodding their heads in time with the music, smiling and verbally 
expressing their delight when intended sonic outcomes were realised.  
 Subjects quickly learnt the interface with little explanation. All 
subjects commented that the simplification of the user interface made 
the act of DJing more accessible. All subjects agreed that whilst the 
system was easy to use, they felt that over time they could explore 
each mode’s nuances and people could become virtuoso performers. 
  All subjects agreed that the system had creativ e performance 
potential. Individual subjects were observed developing their 
technique and producing new output. Over time subject 
performances evolved to include multiple simultaneous key presses 
with some of the subjects using the side of their hands to perform 
chopping gestures which simultaneously activated/deactivated 
multiple keys. The authors observed subjects using the system in total 
for three hours and felt they were still hearing new variations of the 
system output at the end.  
 All subjects agreed that the system enabled them to modify the 
audio tracks in a way that was not possible or difficult to achieve with 
their current commercial DJ system.  
 The frequency filter mode was the most preferred mode overall. It 
was commented that the orientation of the keys of the keyboard in a 
one dimensional line in front of the user was better than the two 
dimensional grid format of pads adopted in Maschine and Akai 
MPCs and conformed to the common left to right visualisation of 
equalization (EQ) curves. 
 The time slicer mode was the least favoured mode overall and 
hardest to understand. Some subjects found it disconcerting that the 
change in audio output did not occur as soon as a key was pressed 
(slices would appear and disappear as the sequencer looped round).  
 In terms of collaboration potential, whilst we did not instruct the 
pairs of subjects to work together, two pairs were observed actively 
working together to interact with the keyboard, each taking control of 
a single octave and using verbal cues to di rect a collaborative 
performance.  
 Many of the subjects commented that while the supporting 
graphical user interface was only required periodically it was still 
necessary to seek visual clarification of the system’s state  
occasionally. Several subjects suggested augmenting the underside of 
each key with an LED and illuminating the active beat of the time 
slicer mode.  
6. REFERENCES 
[1] T. Beamish, K. Maclean and S. Fels. Manipulating music: 
multimodal interaction for DJs. In Proc of the SIGCHI conference on 
Human factors in computing systems (pp. 327-334). ACM, 2004. 
[2] A. Bell, E. Hein and J. Ratcliffe. Beyond skeuomorphism: The 
evolution of music production software user interface metaphors. 
Journal on the Art of Record Production, 9, 2015. 
[3] F. Heller and J. O Borchers. Visualizing Song Structure on 
Timecode Vinyls. In Proc NIME, 2014. 
[4] P. Lopez, A. Ferreira and J. M. Pereira. Battle of the DJs: an HCI 
Perspective of Traditional, Virtual, Hybrid and Multitouch DJing. In 
Proc NIME, 2011. 
[5] G. Marentakis, N. Peters and S. McAdams. Dj SPAT: spatialized 
Interactions for DJs. In International Computer Music Conference, 
2007. 
[6] J McGrenere and W. Ho. Affordances: Clarifying and evolving a 
concept. In Graphics interface (Vol. 2000, pp. 179-186), 2000. 
[7] Matt Moldover. Moldover's Approach to Controllerism (1 of 2). 
Video. (20 November 2007). Retrieved March 27, 2018 from  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L2McDeSKiOU, 2007. 
[8] H. C. Rietveld. Journey to the light? Immersion, Spectacle and 
Mediation. DJ Culture in the Mix: Power, Technology, and Social 
Change in Electronic Dance Music, 79-102, 2013. 
[9] N. Villar, H. Gellersen, M. Jervis and A. Lang. (2007, June). The 
ColorDex DJ system: a new interface for live music mixing. In Proc 
NIME, 2007. 
[10] S. Webber. DJ Skills: The essential guide to Mixing and 
Scratching. CRC Press, 2012. 
201