Battle of the DJs: an HCI perspective of Traditional,
Virtual, Hybrid and Multitouch DJing
Pedro Lopes Alfredo Ferreira J. A. Madeiras Pereira
Department of Information Systems and Computer Science
INESC-ID/IST/Technical University of Lisbon
R. Alves Redol, 9, 1000-029 Lisboa, Portugal
pedro.lopes@ist.utl.pt, jap@inesc-id.pt, alfredo.ferreira@inesc-id.pt
ABSTRACT
The DJ culture uses a gesture lexicon strongly rooted in the
traditional setup of turntables and a mixer. As novel tools
are introduced in the DJ community, this lexicon is adapted
to the features they provide. In particular, multitouch tech-
nologies can oﬀer a new syntax while still supporting the old
lexicon, which is desired by DJs.
We present a classiﬁcation of DJ tools, from an interac-
tion point of view, that divides the previous work into Tra-
ditional, Virtual and Hybrid setups. Moreover, we present
a multitouch tabletop application, developed with a group
of DJ consultants to ensure an adequate implementation of
the traditional gesture lexicon.
To conclude, we conduct an expert evaluation, with ten
DJ users in which we compare the three DJ setups with our
prototype. The study revealed that our proposal suits ex-
pectations of Club/Radio-DJs, but fails against the mental
model of Scratch-DJs, due to the lack of haptic feedback to
represent the record’s physical rotation. Furthermore, tests
show that our multitouch DJ setup, reduces task duration
when compared with Virtual setups.
Keywords
DJing, Multitouch Interaction, Expert User evaluation, HCI
1. INTRODUCTION
Through related work and previous research, we identiﬁed
that standard DJ solutions have inadequate hardware re-
quirements and are unable to cope with the rise of new fea-
tures that modern DJs praise. Furthermore, they have high
acquisition, maintenance and transportation costs; driving
many professional DJs to look for alternatives, such as soft-
ware DJing products. Although these applications include
exciting features in terms of musical expression and ex-
tensiveness, they are bounded to a non-natural interaction
scheme, derived from exercising indirect control via input
devices instead of the gestural lexicon available in standard
DJ solutions.
We classify DJ tools based upon their interaction and
technological idiosyncrasies and identify three major setups:
Traditional, Virtual and Hybrid. As multitouch technolo-
gies mature, they are applied in DJing, oﬀering bimanual
control of a virtual environment, providing DJs with digital
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’11,30 May–1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
sound processing advantages and natural interaction.
However, an evaluation of DJing interaction paradigms
has never been performed. We present such an evaluation,
aiming at understanding the virtues of multitouch in the DJ
scenario. We focus on a novel Human-Computer Interaction
(HCI) comparison of DJ setups, conducted with DJ experts,
in which we compared our multitouch prototype against all
three standard DJ setups. Ultimately we concluded on the
adequacy of multitouch in the DJ context, allowing future
researchers to build upon this set of hands-free interaction
metaphors.
2. DJ SETUPS
In this section we present an overview of Traditional, Vir-
tual and Hybrid DJ setups (Figure 1). The three DJ setups
represent evolution stages of DJing tools, both in hardware
and on interaction paradigm. We based upon the Tradi-
tional setup to understand the DJ mental model regarding
physical hardware interaction. On the other hand, an analy-
sis of the Virtual and Hybrid setups allows us to understand
how DJs interact with digital tools. Furthermore, we review
the interaction metaphors in recent controllers, as well as
related academic research on multitouch controllers.
One must stress that there is a handful of published re-
search on DJing across a multitude of platforms, thus the
scope of this survey is limited to professional DJ systems
and academic proposals that address DJing concepts. There-
fore, DJ systems for casual mobile-phone operation or gam-
ing/educational purposes are left out. Furthermore, since
we aim for a comparison of the standard and multitouch
setups, we left out other interaction paradigms that are not
touch-based, such as Wearable [8], Haptic [2] and some Tan-
gible [14].
Figure 1: Relationship between the three setups.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
367
2.1 Traditional DJ Setup
The Traditional setup is based on analogue devices, typi-
cally two turntables or CD-players and a signal mixer [7],
as depicted in Figure 1. Throughout the last three decades,
DJ’s gestures and techniques have been strongly inﬂuenced
by this setup.
In the Traditional users exercise direct bimanual interac-
tion on the hardware, with instant visual and haptic feed-
back, which is an advantage [13, 11]; however, its depen-
dence on complex and heavy equipment which often requires
technical maintenance, is a drawback.
2.2 Virtual DJ Setup
Boosted by the rising popularity and increased performance
of portable computers, the Traditional setup was virtualized
into a software application, hence denoted Virtual setup.
DJing applications in a Virtual setup provide digital audio
processing, audio plug-in integration, unlimited tracks, and
weightless storage environment. However, they are heavily
criticized for their non-natural interaction, based on tradi-
tional input devices (mouse/keyboard) or dedicated hard-
ware controllers, and also for their high learning curves,
specially to users acquainted with traditional DJ gestures.
From an HCI perspective, most Virtual DJing applica-
tions oﬀer a direct mapping of the Traditional setup, mainly
because to make interfacing easier, the virtual controls re-
semble Traditional DJ gear setup (Figure 2). The user in-
teracts with the turntable widgets to control the playout of
songs, mixing them with virtual faders on a mixer-like wid-
get. This visual trend follows the dual turntable metaphor,
with a mixer in between.
(a) djay
 (b) Traktor DJ
Figure 2: Virtual DJ setup interfaces
However, Virtual setups face a serious HCI issue: they
visually resemble the Traditional setup but do not feel as
one. In this setup the user exercises indirect control [13, 11],
not acting upon the interface, but operating at a distance,
through a controller device.
2.3 Hybrid DJ Setup
To overcome the drawbacks of Virtual setups, the Hybrid
setup was created, uniting Traditional and Virtual solu-
tions. This gave DJs the possibility of using their tradi-
tional gestures over analogue gear to control a software ap-
plication: by direct manipulation of the records, DJs are
in fact controlling the digital audio playout. These systems
depend on vinyl tracking to detect record position and ac-
celeration. Although this solves the non-natural mapping
problem found in Virtual setups, it also triggers the need for
analogue equipment, known for its limited features and high
acquisition, maintenance, and transportation costs. Fur-
thermore, it has more limitations in terms of simultaneous
playing tracks (usually two) when compared to the Virtual,
since in the Hybrid all audio is controlled by turntables and
needs to be routed back to the mixer.
Classifying a system as Hybrid may be misleading, be-
cause DJs may use full Virtual systems with accessory ex-
pression controllers without using computer input devices
(typically mouse/keyboard). Our deﬁnition of Hybrid sys-
tem embodies a setup that has at least one component found
in the Traditional setup and one Virtual system; this cat-
egorization of the “Hybrid DJ setup” is also proposed by
Bell [3].
2.4 Multitouch Controllers
Musical controllers have been around for quite a while, mainly
due to the pervasiveness of the MIDI protocol - a de facto
standard for audio control - but also because they pro-
vide a more natural interaction method for musical-related
tasks [4]. Due to space restrictions, we focus on: the Lemur,
a pioneer even amongst multitouch interfaces; the Reactable,
with scratch1 objects; the multitrack controller by Fukuchi,
for uniqueness in gesture lexicon; and the Stanton SCS con-
trollers, that include two ﬁnger touch-interactions.
2.4.1 Lemur
Lemur is a controller, although it has no physical controls
(i.e., knobs, faders, IR beams) and everything is touch-
screen based; all operations are performed on the touch-
screen surface, as depicted in Figure 3. Lemur distinguishes
itself from earlier controllers for its HCI contributions. The
surface interface is fully customizable by the end-user, and
new controls can be added, moved, resized and mapped
into any OSC/MIDI message. This modular interface ap-
proach can be adapted by the user according to his needs,
thus ﬁtting any style of DJing. However, to accomplish
customization, the user must operate through an oﬄine ap-
plication, running on a computer connected to the Lemur
device. Although targeted at a larger usage spectrum, the
Figure 3: The Lemur device in touch control. 2
Lemur can be used to perform some digital DJing tasks,
namely because some GUI objects include faders and knobs,
resembling the traditional gear. However, it is not designed
for DJ gestures and there is no appropriate widget for the
turntable-metaphor.
2.4.2 Reactable
In the Reactable [9] users can share control over the in-
strument by touching the surface or interacting with phys-
ical objects to build diﬀerent audio networks. Each Re-
actable object represents a diﬀerent audio concept, or com-
ponent, with a dedicated function: generation, modiﬁcation
or sound control (see Figure 4(a)). Unlike the Lemur, which
separates editing and playing modes, the Reactable com-
bines both, creating a user-friendly, seamlessly integrated
musical creation environment [10] - one more suited for syn-
thesizer and audio processing, and not a traditional DJ tool.
However, Hansen et al. have implemented a set of tangible
objects to allow DJs to perform scratch gestures within this
environment [6] and these are relevant to our research.
1Scratch is a DJ technique based on direct manipulation of
record motion, that can be combined with fader movements.
1www.jazzmutant.com, accessed on 05/01/2011
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
368
(a) Collaborating [9]
 (b) Scratch Objects [6]
Figure 4: Reactable with Scratch Objects
In the Reactable framework, scratch uses three objects:
the loop-player (controls audio), the movement-speed (con-
trols turntable motion and speed) and ﬁnally the cross-fader
(opens and mutes audio); with a combination of the three,
a user can achieve the typical sound of scratching, as de-
picted in Figure 4(b). Hansen’s evaluation [6] showed that
as the test progressed, a Reactable expert became more op-
timistic and gained a deeper understanding; conversely DJs
felt more pessimistic about the system, showing increasing
discomfort with the control objects. Also, they identiﬁed
that these systems cannot match the scratch experts’ ex-
pectations of analogue turntable behaviour.
2.4.3 Stanton SCS.3d and 3m
Both SCS.3d and 3m are part of Stanton’s“SC System Con-
trol Surface” product line. They are compact controllers
with several two-ﬁnger touchable areas. Figure 5 shows
that resemblance between the SCS.3d (a) and a turntable,
or between the SCS.3m (b) and a mixer is not coincidental:
Stanton expects to ease the user learning curve by mimick-
ing the component design of a Traditional setup 3.
(a) SCS.3d
 (b) SCS.3m
Figure 5: Stanton SC System 3 [7]
Furthermore, it features some new interactions, not pos-
sible with typical DJ faders: touching directly on a slider’s
mark will make the value bump to that position - while in
the “real world” a fader has to be manually dragged to the
new position. Also, by holding one ﬁnger on the slider and
tapping a new position with another ﬁnger will cause the
cap to move to a new value for as long as that ﬁnger re-
mains on the surface. When the second (upper) ﬁnger is
removed, the slider will generate the value indicated by the
ﬁrst ﬁnger position.
2.4.4 Multitrack scratch controller
Fukuchi has proposed a multitouch-enabled device directed
at scratching tasks [5], depicted in Figure 6, which enables
the DJ to scratch several sources simultaneously, thus elim-
inating the time lost when users switch between various
turntables. Fukuchi’s Multitrack scratch controller is also
highly eﬀective in reducing space and component count.
Fukuchi’s metaphor does not follow the typical “revolving
3www.stantondj.com, last accessed on 02/02/2011
Figure 6: Multitouch scratch interface. [5]
platter” found in turntables and in some DJ software, it
uses a “moving waveform” metaphor. This metaphor is also
used in Attigo4 prototype, and can also be referred to as
“conveyor-belt”, because if the sound sample is looped, then
the waveform reappears again in the beginning of the inter-
face.
In this multitouch interface the DJ interacts via direct
manipulation of the waveform, making it move back and
forth. Fukuchi also proposes a new metaphor, that en-
ables DJs to perform record-crossfader combinations with
just one ﬁnger, which increases scratching performance, but
also generates a new “faderless” lexicon that was not easy
to some DJs; thus raising the learning curve, as evaluations
denote.
2.4.5 Discussion on Multitouch Controllers
Multitouch Controllers do oﬀer new possibilities as Vir-
tual DJing applications’ controllers, so they stand out when
compared to traditional mouse-based operations or button-
based MIDI controllers. They allow improvements in two
directions: increasing task performance by providing both
bimanual interaction [11] and new interaction features (such
as the aforementioned “slider jump”); and lowering learning
curve by maintaining coherence with traditional DJ ges-
tures.
With regard to visual feedback, these proposals have their
own idiosyncrasies: Lemur and SCS are one-way slave con-
trollers and therefore their visualization capabilities are of-
ten limited, and few DJing feedback can be shown to the
user in realtime. On the other hand, Reactable and Multi-
track scratcher do display the song’s waveform, which is of
value to DJs.
In terms of sensory feedback, touch-based controllers cur-
rently lack the tangible feel that Traditional and Hybrid
setups can oﬀer. Also, one must keep in mind that these
controllers are application-driven, thus they do not oﬀer in-
teraction mechanisms for realtime DJ-speciﬁc tasks, such
as adding new tracks, reorganizing setup (Lemur allows it
in oﬄine operation), altering connections between DJ com-
ponents (audio re-routing), and so forth - all those tasks
have to be carried out in the Virtual application, using a
mouse/keyboard input device. Only the Reactable oﬀers
such possibilities, but then it is not driven by traditional
DJ gestures.
3. MULTITOUCH DJ PROTOTYPE
To overcome the problems identiﬁed above, (non-natural in-
teraction of the Virtual and the limitations associated with
the Hybrid) we propose a multitouch interactive DJing ap-
plication. The prototype was developed accounting feed-
back from four DJ experts (more details in [12]). The pro-
4www.scotthobbs.co.uk, last accessed in 02/01/2011
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
369
posed system merges the beneﬁts of Virtual DJing appli-
cations with natural interaction found in Traditional DJing
setups, rather than relying on typical input devices. Addi-
tionally, digital audio manipulation enables us to improve
the DJ’s performance, and also to exercise DJ creativity, by
creating custom setups that are not possible in traditional
live situations.
3.1 Interaction
Our interface is based on the following concepts: sound
players, records, audio manipulators (volume faders, equal-
izer knobs, crossfaders, and so forth) and the relationships
between these objects. These concepts are directly mapped
into visual representations (of the objects) which the DJ
can manipulate within a live performance, as depicted in
Figure 7(a). All objects can be customized (moved, scaled,
rotated) and linked to each other (see Figure 7(b)), allowing
DJs to create a custom sound mixer, accordingly to their
needs.
(a) DJ Mixing
(b) Dynamic Audio Routing
Figure 7: Multitouch prototype in action.
The prototype supports the traditional gesture lexicon,
and additionally our faders support new DJ-oriented fea-
tures that altogether are not found in any previous work,
namely: instant-jump, multiple-touch points and hold-down
control. The instant-jump allows the fader to instantly
jump without having to drag the fader cap manually.
In the multiple-touch points feature, the system not only
registers multiple touches but also their order, returning to
the previous position whenever the (last) ﬁnger is lifted.
This allows instant kills on equalizers and fast crossfader
switches.
The hold-down feature is the ability to control several
faders with the same gesture. Figure 8 shows how to ac-
tivate this feature: while touching a fader, the user can
drag his ﬁnger around the canvas and still maintain control
over the fader, up until that ﬁnger is raised, as depicted in
Figure 8(b). If the user touches another fader with a new
ﬁnger, that same behaviour is observed, thus the user can
execute interesting motions, such as parallel control over
(a) First touch
 (b) Drag ﬁnger
 (c) Control faders
Figure 8: Controlling multiple faders with a single
gesture.
two objects with the same hand, as depicted in Figure 8(c).
Remarkably, our DJ testers took this feature even further;
if one fader is rotated 180 degrees (up means volume 0),
when the user moves both ﬁngers in parallel up/down it is
actually switching between those audio channels, without
the need for the crossfader object.
Regarding record manipulation, the turntable widget mim-
ics the platter’s physical properties. Thus the user can
expect the virtual record to behave as if it is under the
force of the turntable motor, e.g., the record can be slowed
down just by holding the ﬁnger in the label or, conversely,
if one pushes the record forward, it will speed up until it
reaches the normal torque. Both gestures are techniques
that DJs use in analogue turntables to align songs together.
Most techniques from traditional lexicon are also supported
through the physical simulation that we provide, such as
scratching, backspins and slip-cueing (hold and release the
record instantly).
4. EXPERT USER EV ALUATION
Tests were structured in three stages: a pre-test question-
naire to determine the DJ’s proﬁle and experience regarding
multitouch devices; several DJ-oriented tasks; and, ﬁnally,
an interview to get detailed information about interaction
experience. With the users’ permission tests were video-
taped, application audio was recorded, interviews were tran-
scribed from audio recording.
Figure 9: Multimedia room for Expert testing.
4.1 Apparatus
All tests were conducted in a closed environment, a large
multimedia room with a 5.1 surround system, an 1.58x0.87m
tabletop (LLP), a dedicated soundcard and DJ headphones.
A video-camera recorded the test sessions, while a dedicated
hardisk-recorder (with a pair of condenser microphones)
captured audible output and user comments for later anal-
ysis. The room was ﬁtted with all three standard DJ setups
and our prototype. Figure 9 illustrates these setups, with
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
370
Virtual (Mixxx), Traditional (two turntables and a mixer)
and Hybrid (Mixxx with vinyl tracking). Mixxx [1] was se-
lected because none of the DJs had worked with it, thus
levelling the test conditions regarding setup comparison.
4.2 Participants
Evaluation was carried out by ten DJs, four of them am-
ateurs with two years of experience and six semi/profes-
sional DJs, with up to twenty years of knowledge. These
DJs were not part of the aforementioned expert DJ panel
to ensure that no previous knowledge would interfere with
the test outcome. From our survey on DJ performance,
we understood that diﬀerent styles of DJing have speciﬁc
application-requirements, and result in diﬀerent DJ perfor-
mances; therefore we included three Scratch, four Club, and
three Radio-DJs in the testing group. Furthermore, all DJs
were familiar with Traditional, Virtual and Hybrid tools,
except the Scratch DJs that had never used Virtual setups.
4.3 Test Description
The tasks focused on mixing and beatmatching pairs of
songs selected for their overall similarity, although with dif-
ferent tempi (ranging from 100-120 BPM). These songs were
previously tested by consultant DJs to ensure that they had
the same technical diﬃculty level and were indeed match-
able. Songs were randomly selected from our song pool to
guarantee that DJs could not to speed up the alignment
task, in any test, by memorizing the correct pitch values.
Test-DJs were informed that no aesthetics judgement on
the mix would be performed, as well as any skill-evaluation
or score. In fact, DJs had to verbally inform us when they
felt that both songs were aligned and the mix was com-
pleted. To further homogenize results we double-checked
the video recordings of the tests; two diﬀerent DJs (not
part of the test-group) helped us in conﬁrming the tasks’
start and end points.
Each test session had ﬁve tasks, and a tutorial was given
for Mixxx and for our prototype. The ﬁrst four tasks aimed
to mix/beatmatch a pair of songs in each setup, while the
ﬁnal task oﬀered DJs a open session in our prototype, with
songs of their choice. The ﬁrst four tasks allowed us to
develop a novel comparison between setups, and are denoted
as: V (mixing on the Virtual setup); T (mixing on the
Traditional setup); H (mixing on the Hybrid setup); and
Mt (mixing on multitouch prototype).
4.4 Results and Discussion
From the test results we compute both the average and the
standard deviation (σ) of the elapsed time for each task in
every setup, as depicted in Figure 10. Our prototype’s (Mt)
result is better than that of the Virtual setup (V) with over
less 100 seconds of elapsed time, proving that our setup is
indeed more natural than the Virtual. But as expected,
Mttook about 30 seconds more when compared with the
Traditional (T) and the Hybrid ( H), since the majority of
our expert DJs has been using them for many years.
A detailed σ-comparison between all setups in Figure 10
validates not only the previous statement but also our group’s
DJ taxonomy (four Club, three Radio and Scratch), since
DJs that classiﬁed themselves in a category got similar re-
sults (elapsed time) as others in the same class. T and
H show a standard deviation of ≈26, while V ranks much
higher, 76.89, because some users are not highly familiarised
with this setup. This also shows that a separation of the
results, Club/Radio vs. Scratch, is needed in order to eval-
uate the solution more precisely.
The average values shown in Figure 11(a) enable us to
conclude that Club and Radio DJs operate quite well with
Figure 10: Average time needed time to complete
the tasks for each setup.
(a) Club/Radio
 (b) Scratch
Figure 11: Separate analysis of Club/Radio (left)
and Scratch DJs (right).
our solution, showing serious improvements when compared
to the results in V. For Scratch experts, shown in Fig-
ure 11(b), we see that with Mt they only performed better
than V, meaning that they are more eﬃcient with direct
record manipulation. Furthermore it seems that Scratch
DJs perform faster inV than Club/Radio DJs because they
tend to align and crossfade beats faster (as it suits their mix-
ing style more accordingly). Indeed inMt they exhibited a
result very close to T and H, enabling us to conclude that
the implemented physical simulation is worthwhile for those
DJs.
In order to draw a ﬁnal conclusion on the setups compar-
ison, we must account the time diﬀerences for each user in
each setup-pair, as depicted in Figure 12. It is easy to ob-
serve that the Virtual exhibited the worst results in any of
Figure 12: Time diﬀerences to complete tasks, be-
tween pairs of setups.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
371
the comparisons, while in V↔Mt we observe our solution
providing an average of 100 seconds of task improvement.
This shows that touch support, bimanual and horizontal in-
teraction help users to achieve better results with our setup
than with Virtual Setups.
When comparing our setup to the Traditional/Hybrid,
we collected optimistic results. T↔Mt and H↔Mt show
that DJs mixed an average of 33.9 seconds faster in the
Traditional and about 45.6 seconds faster in the Hybrid.
This does not surprise us, since we are virtualzing the as-
sets of the Traditional/Hybrid setup. The haptic feedback
provided by touch surfaces is not good enough for Scratch-
DJs, in particular when compared to the sensory feedback
of the Traditional/Hybrid setups. Therefore, a multi-touch
setup strikes a balance between available feedback and the
digital beneﬁts supported by the traditional lexicon.
Finally T↔H show a slight variation, because users tend
to use the Hybrid solely through its traditional components,
only using the computer for song selection.
4.5 DJ Comments
The overall feeling of DJs towards our multitouch proposal
was promising. All users were keen to stress out the advan-
tages of both bimanual interaction and multi-ﬁnger manip-
ulation of the fader components, and also to denote how a
tabletop environment oﬀers a constant feedback during the
DJ interaction, similar to the Traditional setup.
All users, including those who had no previous multi-
touch experience, mentioned that the interface was easy to
use, and felt that the concepts were aligned the DJ’s mental
model. Manipulating objects around the canvas was recog-
nised as a valuable feature for DJ users that want to exercise
creativity in setup conﬁguration.
5. CONCLUSION
To evaluate the adequacy of multitouch towards the DJing
context, we tested DJ setups (Virtual, Traditional and Hy-
brid) against our proposal, with a panel of DJ experts; we
also made a novel contribution to this subject area by cross-
comparing all the standard setups.
The results suggest that our proposal can suit both ex-
pectations and needs of Club and Radio-DJs, but would fail
against the mental model of Scratch-DJs due to the lack of
haptic feedback of turntable motion. Tests show that Mt-
DJing fared better than Virtual setups for all DJs, and task
duration was reduced by an average of 100 seconds. As for
tests against Traditional and Hybrid, multitouch solution
slowed DJ tasks around 30 to 40 seconds. Our proposal has
been quite favourably reviewed by DJ experts, which also
contributed with additional comments, and have helped us
in validating a set of gestural metaphors for the multitouch
DJing context. From those we highlight: re-arrangeable in-
terface, physical emulation of platter motion, dynamic rout-
ing between components and fader enhancements.
6. FUTURE WORK
Our work essentially studied touch-based interactions within
the DJ context, leaving out many other interesting paradigms
such as tangible or mixed reality scenarios. We plan to ad-
dress these modalities, in order to analyse their contribu-
tions towards DJing.
Although the prototype was primarily targeted at medi-
um/large multitouch tabletops, porting it to other platforms
is possible; one can imagine how hand-held devices are ex-
citing possibilities for DJ users that felt optimistic when
mixing in our multitouch solution.
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was partially funded by the European Commis-
sion’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013)
through project MAXIMUS, grant agreement IST-2007-1-
217039, and by FCT (INESC-ID multiannual funding)
through the PIDDAC Program funds.
8. REFERENCES
[1] T. H. Andersen. Mixxx: towards novel dj interfaces.
In NIME ’03: Proceedings of the 2003 conference on
New interfaces for musical expression, pages 30–35,
Singapore, 2003. National University of Singapore.
[2] T. Beamish, K. Maclean, and S. Fels. Manipulating
music: multimodal interaction for djs. In CHI ’04:
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human
factors in computing systems, pages 327–334, New
York, NY, USA, 2004. ACM.
[3] P. Bell. Interrogating the Live: A DJ Perspective.
PhD thesis, Newcastle University, 2009.
[4] N. Bryan-Kinns. Computers in support of musical
expression. ACM Computing Surveys, 2004.
[5] K. Fukuchi. Multi-track scratch player on a
multi-touch sensing device. In ICEC 2007, volume
4740, pages 211–218. Springer, 2007.
[6] K. Hansen and M. Alonso. More dj techniques on the
reactable. In NIME ’08: Proceedings of the 2008
conference on New interfaces for musical expression,
2008.
[7] K. F. Hansen. The acoustics and performance of DJ
scratching. Analysis and modeling. PhD thesis, Kungl
Tekniska H¨ogskolan, feb 2010.
[8] K. Hayafuchi and K. Suzuki. Musicglove: A wearable
musical controller for massive media library. In NIME
’08: Proceedings of the 2008 conference on New
interfaces for musical expression, 2008.
[9] S. Jord` a, G. Geiger, M. Alonso, and
M. Kaltenbrunner. The reactable: exploring the
synergy between live music performance and tabletop
tangible interfaces. In TEI ’07: Proceedings of the 1st
international conference on Tangible and embedded
interaction, pages 139–146, NY, USA, 2007. ACM.
[10] M. Kaltenbrunner, G. Geiger, and S. Jord` a. Dynamic
patches for live musical performance. In NIME ’04:
Proceedings of the 2004 conference on New interfaces
for musical expression, pages 19–22, Singapore,
Singapore, 2004. National University of Singapore.
[11] K. Kin, M. Agrawala, and T. DeRose. Determining
the beneﬁts of direct-touch, bimanual, and multiﬁnger
input on a multitouch workstation. In GI ’09:
Proceedings of Graphics Interface 2009, pages
119–124, Toronto, Ont., Canada, Canada, 2009.
[12] P. Lopes, A. Ferreira, and J. Pereira. Multitouch
djing surface. In ACE ’10: Proceedings of the 2010
ACM SIGCHI international conference on Advances
in Computer Entertainment Technology. ACM, 2010.
[13] D. Schmidt, F. Block, and H. Gellersen. A
comparison of direct and indirect multi-touch input
for large surfaces. In INTERACT ’09: Proceedings of
the 12th IFIP TC 13 International Conference on
Human-Computer Interaction, pages 582–594, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2009. Springer-Verlag.
[14] N. Villar, H. Gellersen, M. Jervis, and A. Lang. The
colordex dj system: a new interface for live music
mixing. InNIME ’07: Proceedings of the 7th
international conference on New interfaces for
musical expression, pages 264–269, NY, USA, 2007.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
372