Touch Responsive Augmented Violin Interface System II: 
Integrating Sensors into a 3D Printed Fingerboard 
 
 
Chantelle Ko 
 University of Calgary  
Calgary, Alberta, Canada 
chantelle.ko@ucalgary.ca 
 
 
 
Lora Oehlberg 
 University of Calgary 
Calgary, Alberta, Canada 
lora.oehlberg@ucalgary.ca 
 
ABSTRACT
We present TRAVIS II, an augmented acoustic violin with touch 
sensors integrated into its 3D printed fingerboard that track left-
hand finger gestures in real time. The fingerboard has four strips 
of conductive PLA filament  which produce an electric signal 
when fingers press down on each string. While these sensors are 
physically robust, they are mechanically assembled and thus 
easy to replace  if damaged . The performer can also trigger 
presets via four FSRs attached to the body of the violin . The 
instrument is completely wireless, giving the performer the 
freedom to move throughout the performance space. While the 
sensing fingerboard is installed in place of the  traditional 
fingerboard, all other  electronics can be removed  from the 
augmented instrument, maintaining the aesthetics of a traditional 
violin. Our design allows violinists to naturally create music for 
interactive performance and improvisation without requiring 
new instrumental techniques. In t his paper , we  describe the 
design of the instrument , experiments leading to the sensing 
fingerboard, and performative applications of the instrument.   
 
Author Keywords 
Violin, touch sensor, FSR, fingerboard, augmented, 3D printing, 
conductive filament, interactive 
 
CCS Concepts 
• Hardware → Communication hardware, interfaces and storage 
→ Sensors and actuators;  
• Hardware → Communication hardware, interfaces and storage 
→ Sound-based input/output; 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The violin’s design continues to develop into the digital age, with the 
introduction of commercially available electric and MIDI violins. 
Augmented violins combine traditional instruments with computer 
programming, and thus offer new expressive possibilities for 
performers and composers. Some augmented violins also offer new 
ways for violinists to improve their technique [3, 6, 7, 21, 22, 25].  The 
Touch Responsive Augmented Violin Interface System (TRAVIS) II 
presents a new method of designing an augmented violin in which 
conductive strips on the fingerboard detect contact with the strings.   
  Both authors are classically trained violinists, and the first author has 
an extensive background in electroacoustic and interactive music 
composition and performance. As such, the TRAVIS project follows 
an autobiographical design approach where the instrument was built 
to serve the first author’s creative needs [18].  
 TRAVIS II is an iteration on a prior project, TRAVIS I [11]. 
TRAVIS I is an acoustic violin with two linear SoftPot sensors placed 
under the G and E strings, and two FSRs (Force Sensitive Resistors) 
clamped to the right upper bout. The SoftPots in TRAVIS I do not 
cover the areas on the fingerboard below high second position; to sense 
in all positions, the nut and therefore the string height would need to 
be raised to prevent SoftPots from contacting the vibrating strings. 
Also, the player can only use the SoftPots on the G and E strings; there 
is no sensing on the D and A strings. Furthermore, the aesthetic of 
TRAVIS I makes it difficult to use in traditional contexts. Its SoftPots 
and wiring are permanently attached and cannot be removed from the 
violin when stored in its case. Finally, TRAVIS I has only two FSRs 
to trigger presets, which limits its compositional potential. 
 
Figure 1. TRAVIS II with electronics setup.  
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
166
 The TRAVIS II design seeks to address these limitations in 
TRAVIS I and increase the expressive flexibility of TRAVIS as an 
augmented instrument. TRAVIS II uses four strips of conductive PLA 
in a custom 3D printed fingerboard, which can sense the violinist’s 
left-hand gestures on all four strings and for the full length of the 
strings. TRAVIS II includes a set of four  FSRs that can select 
programmed presets for both sound and visuals. We also designed the 
violin to be continually useable in a traditional context such as an 
orchestra ensemble, rehearsal, or sight-reading session. We added all 
additional technology via removeable, 3D printed clamps, and the 
sensing fingerboard does not alter the instrument’s original dimensions 
(e.g. fingerboard thickness, string height). The instrument is physically 
robust and has easily replaceable sensing elements. In this paper, we 
describe the instrument design, experiments in 3D print filament, 
printer settings, string selection, and musical applications of the 
final instrument. 
2. Related Work 
Miranda and Wanderley [17] proposed four categories of new 
digital instruments: alternative gestural controllers, instrument-
inspired gestural controllers, instrument -like gestural 
controllers, and augmented musical i nstruments. We position 
our work as a new augmented musical instrument. Augmented 
instruments are broken down into two groups  [19]. The first 
group are instruments that track traditional playing gestures and 
techniques, such as IRCAM’s Augmented Violin Glove [2, 9]. 
The second group are instruments that require the inv ention of 
new extended gestures, such as Overholt’s Overtone Violin [20].  
 Many augmented violins and cellos have focused on tracking 
the bow or the right hand : IRCAM’s Augmented Violin 
Glove [2, 9 ], Guettler et al. ’s Electronic Violin Bow [ 8], 
McMillen’s K -Bow [ 16], and Young’s Hyperbow [ 25]. 
Moreover, Machover’s Hypercello [13, 14] and Pardue et al.’s 
Tracking System for Violin [2 2] contain components for 
tracking both left and right hands.  
 Another method of capturing violin gestures wa s through 
optical tracking, such as Schoonderwaldt and Demoucron’s 
research in tracking both the left and right hands [23]. Dalmazzo 
and Ramirez’s Air Violin also tracked the left hand with optical 
tracking and an electromyographic (EMG) sensor [3]. Thorn’s 
Transference used an EMG and gyroscope to track the left hand 
finger and arm gestures, as well as an IMU and flex sensors to 
track the right hand [24].  
 The preference for augmenting the bow or tracking th e right 
hand is because, in traditional playing, the bow is where the 
majority of the expression is produced: it determines the timbre, 
articulation, and dynamics of the music. In addition, if 
permanent physical alterations need to be made, it is more cost 
efficient to alter the bow than it is to alter the instrument. 
However, to capture and map the full expression of the player,  
both hands need to be taken into consideration. Attaching 
electronics to the bow may also add extra weight and change the 
balance point [25].  
 Augmenting the fingerboard of string instruments is an 
attractive approach. However, this can present many physical 
and technical challenges. In working on the Hypercello [13, 14], 
Machover found that the cello strings were two abrasive for the 
thermoplastic attached to the fingerboard, and the instrument’s  
calibration changed over time. In the Augmented 
Cello project [4, 5], Freed et al. tried adding touch sensors to the 
fingerboard, but found that the resulting data was non-linear, and 
the data varied between strings, so they abandoned it.  There 
are one augmented bass project and two augmented violin  
projects that successfully added touch sensors to the fingerboard. 
 
1 ProtoPasta’s conductive PLA: https://www.proto-
pasta.com/pages/conductive-pla 
Bahn added a mouse touch pad to the fingerboard of t he 
SBass [1], while Grosshauser and Troester’s sensor fingerboard 
had embedded FSRs [ 6,7]. Grosshauser and Troester’s  
instrument was used to study how violinists play and when they 
were pressing too hard with their fingers. However, the copper 
coloured sensors aesthetically stood out, and we speculate that 
violinists would not be able to continue to use the instrument in 
a traditional context. Pardue et al. sought to solve this problem 
with a low-cost real-time tracking system for violin [2 2]. The 
system intended to help students improve their intonation by 
providing feedback based on the sensors that track left hand 
finger position , combined  with pitch trac king. The touch 
sensitive component of the system was made with velostat on top 
of the fingerboard and a voltage running down the strings. While 
the technology could be attached and removed from any violin, 
the string height had to be raised to ensure that they were clear 
of the velostat when playing open strings. It is important to note 
that in a later iteration of the project, Pardue et al. [2 1] made a 
new violin for beginner violinists that no longer relied on touch 
sensors to detect intonation errors. I nstead, it used digitally 
automated pitch and tone correction, so the violin always played 
in tune.         
 Beyond improving upon the TRAVIS I design, o ur approach 
to augment ation is inspired by both Pardue et al. [2 2] and 
Grosshauser and Troester  [ 6, 7]. We seek  to address design 
challenges presented by the violin ’s geometry  with a novel 
solution: use strips of conductive 3D print filament  embedded 
into a 3D printed fingerboard to create touch sensors . These 
conductive strips are more resistant to damage than 
thermoplastic or velostat, and individually  replaceable if 
damaged. The instrument is aesthetically and geometrically  
close to a classical violin such that it can be played in a 
traditional context. TRAVIS II is primarily used to explore new 
creative, expressive, improvisational, and compositional 
possibilities in interactive music.   
3. TRAVIS II IMPLEMENTATION  
TRAVIS II is a design iteration of the TRAVIS I concept. In this 
section, we discuss the technical implementation of TRAVIS II 
and how it improves upon the TRAVIS I design. In addition to 
starting from better violin model  than TRAVIS I , the 
augmentation includes full-length sensors on all four strings, and 
four FSRs instead of two.  
3.1 The Fingerboard and Sensors 
The primary feature of TRAVIS II is its sensing fingerboard. The 
main fingerboard is 3D printed with black PLA; its geometry 
includes four slots underneath each of the strings.  Due to the 
build volume of the 3D printer, the fingerboard was printed in 
two parts.  Four sensor s trips made from ProtoPasta ’s black 
conductive PLA slide into the slots.
1 The strips are designed to 
slide in and are secured with a press fit. If they become damaged, 
they can slide out to be  replaced. The strips are flush with the 
surface of the fingerboard, so the strings do not need to be raised. 
Within close proximity the differences in texture  between the 
strips and the PLA fingerboard are visible  (see Figure 3) . 
However, from the audience’s more distant perspective this 
difference is not noticeable.  
 For testing, we attached different PLA fingerboards to the neck 
of the violin with double-sided tape. In the first test, the PLA 
fingerboard was too flexible and, when played in high positions, 
it bent from regular finger pressure. Open source designs for 3D 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
167
printed violins have addressed this problem with support rods.2 
However, the slots for the conductive strips leave very little room 
to include a support rod. Therefore, we worked with a luthier 
who placed a thin, flat piece of ebony onto the neck of the violin 
to support the PLA surface. After a few weeks, while the 
fingerboard continued to support the weight of the finger  
pressure, we found the natural placement of the fingerboard 
started to sag. In response, the luthier also placed a small piece 
of wood underneath the fingerboard to prop it up into the correct 
position (see Figures 2 and 3) . A copy of the fingerboard was 
made from PETG filament. It was not noticeably stronger than 
the PLA version. Aesthetically, the PLA version is pr eferred 
because it is not as shiny as the PETG.     
 The aesthetic of the sensing fingerboard more closel y 
resembles the aesthetic of a traditional fingerboard; b oth the 
regular and conductive PLA are black. While some layer lines 
from FDM printing are visible on the PLA surface, the texture of 
these lines against the fingertips do not distract from playing.  
 As documented by Leigh et al. [12] and McGhee et al. [15], 
conductive 3D  printer filament works well as the resistive 
component of touch sensors. Similar to Pardue et al .’s 
design [22], TRAVIS II runs a  3.3V voltage down the strings ; 
when a metal string comes in contact with a conductive strip, the 
string’s voltage changes. 
 W e also placed four small FSRs to a 3D printed clamp and 
mounted it on the right upper bout of the violin (see Figure 1). 
Here they are easily accessible to the performer; violinists rest 
their left hand on the right upper bout of the violin when not 
playing, and the FSRs are directly below the left hand when 
playing in high positions.  
 TRAVIS II uses an Arduino MKR1000 to send data to Max 
MSP/Jitter via OSC messaging. TRAVIS II ’s Arduino  is 
multiplexed for eight sensors and sits inside a custom 3D printed 
case mounted on the left upper bout of the violin. This placement 
is based on the TRAVIS I design. We considered alternative  
placements for the Arduino. The Arduino could clamp onto the 
 
2 Form Labs violin: https://formlabs.com/blog/designing-a-3d-
printed-acoustic-violin/   
left lower bout, where the weight would be less noticeable on the 
shoulder. However, this placement would obstruct the performer 
from bowing behind the bridge; an extended bowing technique. 
Alternatively, the Arduino could attach underneath the shoulder 
rest, as in Grosshauser and Troester’s violin [6, 7 ]. However, 
shoulder rests are not very secure and many accidentally fall off 
mid-performance. Placement near the shoulder rest would also 
limit how the shoulder rest c an be adjusted; some performers 
would not be able to use their preferred shoulder rest height. By 
placing our Arduino and battery on the left upper bout of the 
violin, our added electronics do add some weight to the v iolin. 
However, we have found that this added weight is not  
uncomfortable and keeps all components safely out of the way 
while playing. 
 The wires, the Arduino case, and the FSR clamp easily 
disassemble from the violin, both for storage in the case and 
when playing  the violin in a traditional context. The wires 
connect to the Arduino via an IDC connector , to the 3D 
conductive strips with Swiss machine headers, and to the strings 
with a JST connector. The JST connector sits underneath the chin 
rest and the wires are soldered onto the balls of the strings. 
Strings are easily replaceable by cutting off the wires, then re -
soldering the wires to the new strings.  
4. RESULTS 
Our initial tests ensured that TRAVIS II could work sufficiently 
as an augmented instrument , by producing a distinct range of 
values from the 3D printed touch sensors. We then tested the 3D 
printing settings,  resistors, and strings  to ensure that the 
instrument could produce reliable and stable data for the Arduino 
with the largest range of values between 0-1023. However, we 
placed higher priority on the physical design. This included the 
sensor strips having dimensions that fit into the fingerboard, are 
durable so they do not break when assembling them, and they 
have a smooth, high-quality finish on their surface.    
 We printed different dimensions of the conductive strips and 
used different 3D printing settings to see how the se variables 
affect the strip’s resistance . We tested the resistance with a 
multimeter at the 20kΩ setting. We recorded the resistance at 
three points along the strips. First, we measured the resistance 
across 1 cm of the strip at one end. Then, we measured the 
resistance from one end to the approximate center of the strip 
(appx. 13.2 cm) . Finally, we measured the resistance at either 
end of the strip  (appx. 2 6.4 cm) . After we finalized  the 
dimensions and 3D printer settings, we tested each of the final 
strips for the fingerboard one last time before integr ating them 
with the violin. 
 Afterwards, we tested the range of analog data values read into 
the Arduino with various resistors in the circuit (1kW, 3.3kW, 
4.7kW, 10kW, 22kW, and 47kW). We setup the circuit with the 
test strips, the strings, and resistors; we then recorded sensor 
values resulting from pressing the string at each end of the 
conductive stip. We selected final resistors based on which 
provided the largest range of sensor data.   
4.1 The Conductive 3D Print Filament 
The dimensions of the strips are tightly constrained, particularly 
when fitting four into the geometry of a standard fingerboard. If 
strips are too wide, the slots are too large to fit int o the 
fingerboard. If strips are too narrow, they could break while  
sliding them into the fingerboard, or the string may miss the strip 
surface when pressed.  
 We initially tested a conductive strip that was 265 mm long, 
2.5 mm tall, 5  mm wide at the end closest to the bridge , and 
 
 
Figure 2. Side view of the end of the fingerboard and 
support. 
 
 
Figure 3. Front view of the end of the fingerboard 
without the Arduino and FSRs. 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
168
4 mm wide at the end closest to the nut . However, when 
measuring its resistance, the resultant readings were not stable, 
and we could not record approximate measurements. The next 
test strip was narrower; consistently 3 mm wide at both ends, and 
produced a stable, measurable resistance value.    
 We tested different cross-sectional geometries to identify a 
series of four strips that both fit within the physical constraints 
of the fingerboard  and had a relatively consistently varying 
resistance across the strip. We tested the resistance w ith a 
multimeter (20kΩ setting) at three distances from the nut: 1 cm, 
appx. 13.4 cm (middle), and appx. 268 cm (end to end). In our 
final strips (cross-sectional geometry in Figure 4), the resistance 
changed proportionally across  the length of the strip (see  
Table 2). We tested the resistance again after 10 months and 
found values close to our readings from our initial testing; thus, 
the conductive materials in the filament had not degraded over 
this time span. 
 We also fine-tuned the length of the strips to ensure that they 
could easily be installed; if the end of the strip fit too firmly with 
the nut end of the slot, it was difficult to later remove. The final 
length was 268.5 mm; we are able to slip a sewing needle behind 
the strips at the nut end of the slot to push them out. 
4.2 3D Printing Settings  
Once we had finalized the physical dimensions, we test ed 
various slicing settings in Cura  to see whether printing 
parameters affected resistance. We used the same process as  
above, measuring the resistance at three points along each strip. 
First, we varied the layer heights from 0.1 mm – 0.5 mm. As the 
layer height of each test strip increased , the approximate 
resistance decreased (see Table 1 ). Also, the taller the layer 
height, the lower the quality of the print. We decided to keep the 
layer height at 0.1 mm so that the header holes of the strips had 
the best print quality possible (Figure 3), and so that the surface 
of the strips could be as smooth as possible.  
 We tested three different infill patterns – Triangles, Lines, and 
Cubic – with a 70% infill density . The resistances of these 
patterns were not significantly different from one another. We 
did not test different infill densities because of strength concerns; 
the strips needed to slide in and out of the fingerboard withou t 
breaking.   
 By trial and error, we discovered that sanding the top surface 
of the conductive filament ruined its performance. In an effort to 
minimize the layer lines from 3D printing, we placed the strips 
into their slots in the fingerboard and then sanded the entire 
surface. This damaged the conductivity/resistivity of the sanded 
 
3 Dominant Strings: http://www.thomastik-infeld.com/family-
detail/Dominant%20Violin 
 
surfaces and there were barely any readings from the multimeter. 
We re-printed the fingerboard and all strips after this discovery, 
and no longer attempted post-processing the surface finish.   
4.3 Violin String Sensor Testing 
Each of the four strings on violins are made of different metals, 
and different brands of strings vary in the materials and 
manufacturing of the cores and windings.  We had full sets of 
Dominant3 and Evah Pirazzi4 strings and a Pirastro Gold E. The 
metals that they are made from are in Table 3.   
 We setup these strings in the sensor circuit to test the range of 
data received from them with different resistor values ( 1 kW, 
3.3 kW, 4.7 kW, 10 kW, 22 kW, and 47 kW). The Evah Pirazzi’s 
range of data was sufficient, but we concluded that the  
Dominant pack, with the Pirastro Gold E, had the largest range 
of data (see Table 4). In its final configuration, the E string uses 
a 4.7  k W resistor, and the rest of the strings have a 3.3  k W 
4 Pirastro_Strings:https://www.pirastro.com/public_pirastro/pag
es/en/index.html 
Table 1. Test strip resistance relative to print layer height 
Layer 
Height 
1 cm 
(Close) 
~13.2 cm 
(Middle) 
~26.4 cm 
(Ends) 
0.1 mm 2.55 kΩ 6.1 kΩ 11.6 kΩ 
0.2 mm 3.38 kΩ 6.5 kΩ 8.66 kΩ 
0.3 mm 1.27 kΩ 5.8 kΩ 7.7 kΩ 
0.5 mm 1.64 kΩ 4.06 kΩ 6.82 kΩ 
 
Table 2. Approximate resistance of each of the final conductive 
strips (measured 20kΩ setting). 
String 1 cm 
(Close) 
13.2 cm 
(Middle) 
~26.4 cm  
(Ends) 
G 2.19 kΩ 6.67 kΩ 10.89 kΩ 
D 1.97 kΩ 8.25 kΩ 16.7 kΩ 
A 1.64 kΩ 6.63 kΩ 12.3 kΩ 
E 3.07 kΩ 7.55 kΩ 10.49 kΩ 
 
Table 3.  Summary of tested strings and their materials. 
String Brand String 
Name 
Core Winding 
Pirastro Gold E - Tin-plated 
Carbon Steel 
Dominant 
(135) 
E 130 Steel Aluminum 
 A 131 Synthetic Aluminum 
 D 132 Synthetic Aluminum 
 G 133 Synthetic Silver 
Evah Pirazzi E -  Silvery Steel 
 A Synthetic Aluminum 
 D Synthetic Silver 
 G Synthetic Silver 
 
Table 4. Range of values received from the sensors when 
the violin is completely setup.  
Dominants with 
Pirastro Gold E 
Evah Pirazzi 
String Resistor Values  Range Values  Range 
G 3.3kW 260-720 460 255-685 430 
D 3.3kW 255-645 390 265-640 375 
A 3.3kW 245-630 385 235-490 255 
E 4.7kW 315-765 450 320-660 340 
 
 
Figure 4. Screenshot of the face of the A strip (dark 
outline) from the nut end. The faded outline is the sketch 
for the face of the slot. Measurements are in millimeters. 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
169
resistor. None of the tested completed sensors reached their full 
range of 1023 values. This is not  necessarily a limitation, 
because the values are re-scaled in Max MSP.  
5. APPLICATIONS  
TRAVIS II is curr ently used as a controller for interactive 
compositions made with Max MSP/Jitter. At the time of writing, 
the first author has composed and performed one piece for solo 
TRAVIS II, Dream State, and one duet with both TRAVIS I and 
II, Kindred Dichotomy.5 The duet was performed in the concert 
works category at AWMAS  2020 [10]. The first author  also 
composed and performed five pieces with the initial TRAVIS I 
prototype; these compositions can still be performed on 
TRAVIS II by ignoring the D and A strings  in the Max MSP 
patch. The four FSRs are primarily used to trigger presets  for 
different sections of the composition. However, since they give 
a range of data based on pressure, it is possible to use them to 
scrub audio samples as well.  
 In addition to using finger position to control sound processing 
parameters, different process es can be assigned to each 
individual string sensor; when pressed, it routes the sound to its 
assigned process. This method of mapping different processes to 
each string was employed in both of the pieces for TRAVIS II.  
 TRAVIS II works particularly well with several specific violin 
techniques, such as double stops. If the process routing described 
earlier is implemented, where a different effect is assigned to 
each string, double-stops would route the sound to two effects , 
or scrub through two pre-recorded samples, simultaneously. This 
was employed at the end of Kindred Dichotomy. To achieve 
combined effects, the violinist also does not necessarily have to 
 
5 Videos: https://www.chantelleko.com/travis-videos.html 
6 PETG and ABS comparison: https://all3dp.com/2/petg-vs-
abs-3d-printing-filaments-compared/ 
play both strings with the bow; they could keep their fingers on 
multiple strings while playing a melody with their bow on only 
one string. Keeping this in mind opens a wide range of 
possibilities with this one technique, and c ompositionally this 
method is more interesting than to simply assign two processes 
to one string. 
 The software can also recognize when fingers are either 
changing quickly or playing fast gestures, such as trills, vibrato, 
glissandos, and shifts (see Figure 5). These fast techniques are 
recognized by setting a threshold on the [timer] object in 
Max MSP. However, the program is unable to differentiate these 
techniques from one another; the composer or performer would 
need to take this limitation into consideration during the creative 
process.  The sensitivity of this kind of gesture tracking also must 
be pre-adjusted to the speed of the violinist’s technique.  
6. DISCUSSION  
TRAVIS II achieved its goal in augmenting a violin and 
improved upon TRAVIS I’s design. In comparison to TRAVIS I, 
the violin used to make TRAVIS II is a much higher quality 
violin model. Before augmentation took place, based on the first 
author’s subjective standards, the violin would have been 
considered an intermediate to lower-advanced level instrument. 
It would not have previously been used for situations s uch as a 
solo recital, audition or high-level examination. TRAVIS II has 
more FSRs available to change settings and all four strings can 
be tracked . It expands the composer’s available palette of 
timbres, effects, and recorded samples.  
 One of the main limitations of augmenting a cello with touch 
sensors is the strings are large and thick, therefore any resistive 
film placed on top of the cello fingerboard is more receptive of 
damage than on a violin. We speculate if th is method of 
augmentation with conductive 3D print filament can be 
successfully applied to a cello , and other instruments of the 
violin family. A much larger 3D printer would be needed.  
 T here are some limitations  to the sensor results and 
TRAVIS II’s design. Only packs of Dominant and Evah Pirrazi 
strings, plus a Pirastro Gold E string, were tested. Also, only one 
brand of conductive PLA, by ProtoPasta, was in stock at the time 
of purchase. A more thorough study would include testing 
multiple brands of strings and conductive filament. Other brands 
of conductive filament have different magnitudes of resistivity, 
and therefore could provide different sensor data [15].  
 P rinting only the top half of the fingerboard and sitting  it on 
top of an ebony piece greatly improves the overall strength.  
PETG is a filament for FDM printers that is stronger than PLA 
or ABS.
6 We found the PETG version was not noticeably 
stronger on the violin, it did not hide the layer li nes more than 
the PLA, and it was much shinier. Therefore, we continue using 
the PLA model. Layer lines are visible, and it is speculated that 
a resin filament would make a cleaner looking surface. 
Unfortunately, we did not have a resin 3D printer available and 
ordering models online in resin are quite expensive.  
 The objective of the project was to be able to remove all of the 
technology, with exception of the 3D printed fingerboard and 
hidden JST connector for the strings, in order to still be able to 
play the violin in a traditional context.  There are still a few subtle 
variations that differentiate TRAVIS II from a traditional violin 
geometry. For example, the traditional fingerboard has an 
undercurve. The small PLA header piece does have an 
undercurve (Figure 2 and 3), but the rest of the ebony piece is 
flat. Visually, this difference is not noticeable from the audience 
perspective, so the violin can continue to  be played as a 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Example Max MSP patch, programming finger 
change recognition. 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
170
conventional acoustic violin. However, the flat ebony piece does 
affect the tone of th e violin and makes it sound “tinnier”. The 
tinny quality contributes to why we would not recommend 
playing this violin at a solo recital. 
 While the Max MSP patch in Figure 5 can measure the speed 
of data to recognize when fingers are playing  fast gestures, it 
cannot differentiate vibrato from other fast gestures (e.g., shifts, 
glissandos, trills). It also only recognizes the location of where it 
is pressed, and not which finger is pressing down. Finger 
recognition could be achieved with EMG sensors [3, 24], or with 
a fingertip-less glove that has  flex sensors on each  finger. 
Vibrato recognition may also be more accurately achieved with 
an IMU on the hand [24], or flex sensors on the wrist, and elbow. 
These design concepts may be considered for future research.  
 Overall, TRAVIS II achieved its design goals, and at the time 
of writing this paper, it has been used in two successful 
interactive compositions. It is an example of a new method to 
track the left-hand finger gestures through conductive 3D print 
filament and offers speculation on how th is method could be 
applied to other string instruments. 
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We would like to recognize the luthier, Aaron Pratte , who 
detached the original fingerboard and made the ebony piece.  
 The wireless version of TRAVIS I was a collaboration between 
the first author, Robert Pritchard, and the engineering team o f 
WiRED: Jin Han, Esther Mutinda, Carol Fu, and Lily Shao. 
8. REFERENCES 
[1] Bahn, C. & Trueman, D. 2001. Interface: Electronic Chamber 
Ensemble. In Proceedings of the CHI'01 Workshop on New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME01), Seattle, WA. 19-
23. 
[2] Bevilacqua, F., Rasamimanana, N., Fléty, E., Lemouton, S., & 
Baschet, F. 2006. The Augmented Violin Project: Research, 
Composition and Performance Report. In Proceedings of the 
2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical 
Expression (NIME06), Paris, France. 402-406. 
[3] Dalmazzo, D., & Ramirez R. 2017. Air Violin: A Machine 
Learning Approach to Fingering Gesture Recognition. In 
Proceedings of ACM SIGCHI International Workshop on 
Multimodal Interaction for Education (MIE’17). ACM Press, 
NewYork, NY. 63-66.  
[4] Freed, A., Uitti, F.M., Mansfield, S., & MacCallum, J. 2013. 
“Old” is the new “New”: A fingerboard case study in 
recrudescence as a NIME development strategy. In 
Proceedings of the 2013 International Conference on New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME13). Daejeon, Korea. 
442–445.  
[5] Freed A., Wessel, D., Zbyszynski, M., & Uitti, F. M. 2006. 
Augmenting the Cello. In Proceedings of the 2006 
International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical 
Expression (NIME06), Paris, France. 409-413. 
[6] Grosshauser, T., & Gerhand T. 2014. Musical instrument 
interaction: development of a sensor fingerboard for string 
instruments. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference 
on Tangible, Embedded and Embodied Interaction (TEI'14). 
New York, NY. 177-180.   
[7] Grosshauser, T., Großekathoefer U., & Hermann, T. 2010. New 
Sensors and Pattern Recognition Techniques for String 
Instruments. In Proceedings of the 2010 International 
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression 
(NIME10). Sydney, Australia. 271-276. 
[8] Guettler, K., Wilmers, H., & Johnson, V. 2008. Victoria Counts 
-- a Case Study With Electronic Violin Bow. In Proceedings of 
the 2008 International Computer Music Conference. 569-662.  
[9] Kimura, M., Rasamimanana, N., Bevilacqua, F., Zamborlin, B., 
Schnell, N., & Fléty, E. 2012. Extracting Human Expression for 
Interactive Composition with the Augmented Violin. In 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces 
for Musical Expression (NIME12), University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor.  
[10] Ko, C. 2020. Kindred Dichotomy. Composition performed at 
the Alliance for Women in Media Arts and Sciences Conference 
(AWMAS2020), UC Santa Barbara, 7 February 2020. 
https://awmas2020.wixsite.com/home 
[11] Ko, C. 2018. TRAVIS: Touch responsive augmented violin 
interface system. Poster presented at the Conference for 
Interactive Art Science and Technology (IAST), University of 
Lethbridge. http://iast.ca/tag/research-creation/ 
[12] Leigh S.J., Bradley R.J., Purssell C.P., Billson D.R., & 
Hutchins D.A. 2012. A Simple, Low-Cost Conductive 
Composite Material for 3D Printing of Electronic Sensors. 
Public Library of Science (PLoS ONE), 7, 11.  
[13] Machover, T. 1992. Hyperinstruments: A progress report, 
1987–1991. MIT Media Laboratory, 53-78. 
[14] Machover, T., & Chung, J. 1989. Hyperinstruments: Musically 
intelligent and interactive performance and creativity systems. 
In Proceedings of the 1989 International Computer Music 
Conference. 186-190. 
[15] McGhee, J., Sinclair, M., Southee, D., & Wijayantha, K. 2018. 
Strain sensing characteristics of 3D-printed conductive plastics. 
Electronics Letters 54, 9, 570-571.  
[16] McMillen, K.A. 2008. Stage-Worthy Sensor Bows for Stringed 
Instruments. In Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08). Genova, Italy 
347-348. 
[17] Miranda, E., & Wanderley, M. 2006. New digital musical 
instruments: Control and interaction beyond the keyboard 
(Computer music and digital audio series; v. 21). Middleton, 
Wis.: A-R Editions. 
[18] Neustaedter, C. & Sengers, P. 2012. Autobiographical design in 
HCI research: designing and learning through use-it-yourself. In 
Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference 
(DIS’12). ACM, 514–523.  
[19] Overholt, D. 2011. Violin-Related HCI: A taxonomy elicited by 
the musical interface technology design space. In Arts and 
Technology: Second International Conference (ArtsIT) 2011, 
Esbjerg, Denmark, 80-89. 
[20] Overholt, D. 2005. The Overtone Violin. In Proceedings of the 
2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical 
Expression (NIME05). Vancouver, BC, Canada. 34-37. 
[21] Pardue, L. S., Buys, K., Edinger, M. I., McPherson, A., & 
Overholt, D. 2019. Separating Sound from Source: Sonic 
transformation of the violin through electrodynamic pickups 
and acoustic actuation. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference 
on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME19). Porto 
Alegre, Brazil. 278–283. 
[22] Pardue, L. S., Christopher H., & McPherson, A. P. 2015. A 
Low-Cost Real-Time Tracking System for Violin. Journal of 
New Music Research 44, 4, 1-19.  
[23] Schoonderwaldt, E., & Demoucron, M. 2009. Extraction of 
bowing parameters from violin performance combining motion 
capture and sensors. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of 
America. 126, 5, 2695–2708.  
[24] Thorn, S. 2019. Transference: A Hybrid Computational System 
for Improvised Violin Performance. In Proceedings of the 13th 
International Conference on Tangible, Embedded and 
Embodied Interaction (TEI'19). Tempe, AZ, USA. 541-546. 
[25] Young, D. 2002. The Hyperbow: A Precision Violin Interface. 
In Proceedings of the 2002 International Computer Music 
Conference. 489-492.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
171