Learning Advanced Skills on New Instruments
(or: Practising Scales and Arpeggios on Your NIME)
Sageev Oore
∗
Saint Mary’s University
Halifax, Nova Scotia
sageev@cs.smu.ca
ABSTRACT
When learning a classical instrument, people often either
take lessons in which an existing body of “technique” is de-
livered, evolved over generations of performers, or in some
cases people will “teach themselves” by watching people play
and listening to existing recordings. What does one do with
a complex new digital instrument?
In this paper I address this question drawing on my expe-
rience in learning several very diﬀerent types of sophisticated
instruments: the Glove Talk IIreal-time gesture-to-speech
interface, the Digital Marionette controller for virtual 3D
puppets, and pianos and keyboards. As the primary user
of the ﬁrst two systems, I have spent hundreds of hours
with Digital Marionette and Glove-Talk II, and thousands
of hours with pianos and keyboards (I continue to work as
a professional musician). I will identify some of the under-
lying principles and approaches that I have observed during
my learning and playing experience common to these instru-
ments. While typical accounts of users learning new inter-
faces generally focus on reporting beginner’s experiences, for
various practical reasons, this is fundamentally diﬀerent by
focusing on the expert’s learning experience.
Keywords
performance, learning new instruments
1. INTRODUCTION
While there is a quickly growing number of experimental
new instruments being prototyped and designed, the number
of skilled performers, let alone virtuosi, may not be grow-
ing at the same rate. Prototyping an instrument can, in
some cases, happen in a relatively short concentrated time,
while mastering performance with it, almost by deﬁnition,
requires a certain time commitment of practise. Yet if an
instrument were designed to be “easy-to-master”, it would
quite possibly not be that interesting to play or to listen to
∗Adjunct at Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME05, V ancouver, BC, Canada
Copyright 2005 Copyright remains with the author(s).
more than a few times once the novelty wears oﬀ. These is-
sues and trade-oﬀs are discussed in depth in the literature[5,
3, 14, 6, 13, 15].
When learning a classical instrument, many people either
take lessons in which an existing body of “technique” is de-
livered, evolved over generations of performers, or in some
cases (more with an instrument such as a guitar or piano
than, say, trumpet) people will “teach themselves by ear”.
What does one do with a complex new digital instrument?
In this paper I address this question drawing on my ex-
perience in learning several very diﬀerent types of sophisti-
cated instruments: the Glove Talk II real-time gesture-to-
speech interface[4], the Digital Marionetteinterface for con-
trolling virtual 3D puppets[9] (not a musical interface per
se, but a high-degree-of-freedom continuous controller for
expressive output), and pianos and keyboards. As a user,
I have spent hundreds of hours with each ofDigital Mari-
onette and Glove-Talk II, and thousands of hours with pi-
anos and keyboards, and continue to work as a professional
musician. I will identify some of the underlying principles
and approaches that I have observed during my learning and
playing experience. While typical accounts of learning to use
new interfaces focus on reporting beginner’s experiences, for
various practical reasons, this one is fundamentally diﬀerent
by focusing on the expert’s learning experience.
Most of the examples discussed in this paper can be demon-
strated either in existing video clips or in live performance.
2. LEARNING PROCESS
As this is based on a single user’s extensive experience
with speciﬁc instruments, I will ﬁrst brieﬂy describe the in-
struments themselves and the learning processes for each of
them.
2.1 Glove Talk II
Glove Talk II[4] used neural networks to map hand ges-
tures, acquired via glove sensors and motion trackers, to
allow the user (“speaker”) to create speech in real-time.
One glove measured joint angles of the ﬁngers to deter-
mine whether the hand was open (to create vowel sounds)
or closed (to create consonants). Movement of the hand in a
(2D) horizontal plane corresponded to trajectories through
a continuous vowel space, vertical motion corresponded to
pitch, and diﬀerent hand gestures corresponded to a vari-
ety of consonant sounds. A second glove, built with contact
sensors, triggered additional consonant sounds (the “stop”
consonants), and a foot pedal allowed volume control. Fig-
ure 1 shows a schematic illustration of the system. In order
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
60
Figure 1: The GloveTalk II system. (Figure by Sid
Fels reproduced with permission).
to produce intelligible speech, accurate timing between the
two hands was critical, as was very accurate motion through
a 3-dimensional “fretless” space of vowels and pitch 1.
I logged 100 hours learning and using the system. Fels
[4] accurately described my learning experience with GTII
as a sequence of phases corresponding to (a) phoneme pro-
duction, (b) 2-phonemes, (c) words, (d) phrases, (e) reﬁne-
ment; pointing out that there was substantial overlap be-
tween phases.
The ﬁrst four of these phases correspond to a time-based
hierarchical breakdown of the speech task itself. In Sec-
tion 6, I take a complementary approach by discussing the
general principles driving the learning process, which also
motivates the above breakdown.
2.2 Digital Marionette
Digital Marionette[9] is a two-handed instrument for in-
teractive character animation. The user (“puppeteer”) is
provided with two motion trackers embedded in bamboo
tubing to control a virtual puppets motion. A multi-track
interface is used, controlling layers of the puppet motion
(e.g. legs, arms, spine, etc) in multiple passes. A maximum
of six degrees of freedom (position and orientation) for each
of the two trackers is available for manipulating the vari-
ous continuous parameters (joint angles) for animating each
layer2.
On the order of 100 hours were spent learning this instru-
ment, although this is an approximate ﬁgure since time was
also spent learning early versions of the system during an
iterative development process.
2.3 Pianos and Keyboards
I studied classical piano formally from age 7 through un-
dergraduate university, and studied jazz after that. Presum-
ably, this learning experience strongly inﬂuenced the choices
I made when learning instruments such as Glove Talk IIand
Digital Marionette. An essential element of the learning pro-
cess has been (and continues to be) improvised and scored
1Demonstration videos showing the author playing the sys-
tem are, at time of print, available at [1].
2An on-line demonstration video is available (at time of
printing)[2].
Figure 2: The Digital Marionette system provides the
user with a tangible interface for interactive control
of a 3D articulated character.
performances, both as a soloist and with other artists (sym-
phony orchestras, percussionists, singers, DJ’s, dancers and
others) as well as professional recording sessions. It was only
well after university that I understood playing electric key-
boards as a diﬀerent skill from playing pianos– the primary
similarity is in the front-end of the interface, but this seems
to be a deceptively overshadowing one for many people (for
good reasons).
3. ANALYZING THE EXPERIENCE
The expressiveness of an instruments implies a wide range
of possible ways of using it, which in turn implies a corre-
sponding range of choices during learning. These choices
are driven by a user’s goals, learning style, and individual
or collective deconstruction of the task (e.g. scales). The
individuality of musicians manifests in their learning pro-
cess as much as in their performance. I now give what is
in eﬀect an analysis and description of my own experience
as a user and teacher. (To reﬂect this, I am writing in the
more informal ﬁrst person rather than the more technical
passive voice.) There is a large body of literature on the
cognitive analysis of learning musical instruments[8, 10, 7],
a survey of which would be beyond the scope of this paper.
In contrast, here I focus on experientially-based approaches
to long-term learning and observations.
4. BASIC ELEMENTS
The learning process tends to begin with my attempts at
ﬁnding basic motions or exercises. I typically start with a
task that is too hard, which I then break down to the most
elemental pieces I can think of. WithGlove Talk II, this
meant breaking words into syllables and practicing individ-
ual phoneme production.
With Digital Marionette, where a long-term goal was the
ﬂuid animation of a complex 3D character, a basic goal was
to achieve a bare-bones, functional bipedal locomotion in
which knee and ankle motion was ignored, with intention of
just getting the basic outline right (a kind of waddling). I
then broke this into basic tasks including rotation of single
joints by swinging body parts back and forth (a leg rotating
around the hip, a shin swinging from the knee), and simply
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
61
shifting from one leg to another.
5. REFINEMENT
Once basic motions start becoming crudely realizable, there
comes a point where I feel I can not only add new “basic”
exercises, but also that I am beginning to reﬁne something
I can already do.
In Glove Talk II, the reﬁnement included more accurate
trajectories through the audible pitch and vowel spaces. It
included more accurate coordination and timing of stop con-
sonants within words, and better-sounding transitions be-
tween consonants and vowels. This involved more eﬀective
hand gestures, as well as better coordination of hand transi-
tions as the arm was moving through vowel and pitch space.
In Digital Marionette, the reﬁnement included making
sure the legs were parallel as each one would swing through,
which also meant better timing of the knee bend so that the
swinging foot would not hit the ground. It included prac-
tising of the “falling forward” motion of walking. I spent
time trying to control the speed of the centre of mass of
the character (projected visually) to get steadier pacing. I
experimented with more control over the some of the “ﬁl-
ters” that processed the input signal, and tried to achieve
softer knee action. Note that while these are not musical
output events, they have the same kind of real-time control
aspects as musical instruments on an instinctive level, from
the point of view of someone learning to control this kind of
output.
While the basic elements form the very initial part of the
learning curve, the reﬁnements extend it more, and it is
somewhere during this phase that the much freer and truly
exciting part just begins, driven by personal choices, learn-
ing style, goals, and the kind of general principles I now de-
scribe (which, in fact, also drove some of the choices when
reﬁning).
6. GENERAL CONCEPTS
These concepts are neither inherently “basic” nor “ad-
vanced”. In this user’s experience, they are helpful for mov-
ing beyond plateaus during the learning process. They are a
way of generating new questions while practising, or remem-
bering to re-ask old questions. While given from a personal
perspective, I am drawing on experience from working with
the instruments described above, but also based on stud-
ies of body-activities including Tai Chi with bona ﬁde mar-
tial practitioners, competitive ﬁgure skating, West African
and Cuban drumming and percussion, extended vocal tech-
niques, and collaborations with dancers. Some of the con-
cepts described are more concrete, in the sense that there
are speciﬁc externally-supplied exercises that can help work
on them. Others are more abstract, in that they are less
quantiﬁably describable, yet refer to ways of approaching
any of the other exercises.
6.1 Isolation
The basic elements described in Section 4– single joint
motions for a virtual marionette, single phoneme produc-
tion with a real-time speech controller, single notes for a
classical instrument– are all examples of isolation-based ex-
ercises. The same concept appears in ﬁgure skating, where
free-skaters and ice dancers are critically informed by the
practise of “ﬁgures”, in which the skater practices simply
being on the “inside” and “outside” edges of the skate blade
(by skating a curve on one foot leaning in and out of it), and
switching between these edges. These edges are fundamental
to all other ﬁgure skating moves.
In piano technique, isolation exercises are found in techni-
cal anthologies such as the collection by Isidor Philipp[11],
where 4 ﬁngers hold down keys while the free ﬁnger plays
a repeated note, or while 3 ﬁngers hold down keys in which
case the 2 free ﬁngers slowly alternate their respective notes.
The great jazz pianist Lennie Tristano had an exercise play-
ing scales with just the 4th and 5th ﬁnger alternating, in an-
ticipation of improvisational settings so that one would not
be “limited” by the ﬁnger they happened to be using if they
wanted to go higher. The great virtuoso pianist, Vladimir
Horowitz, had an isolation exercise playing 5-ﬁnger chords,
while weighting the ﬁngers diﬀerently, taking turns so each
ﬁnger would be heard most loudly.
Isolation exerices are extremely valuable, almost univer-
sally across disciplines. Among other beneﬁts, they provide
the individual with a means of exploring, understanding,
and hopefully internalizing the input-output relationship for
a given instrument. They allow discovery of the basic ele-
ments of an instrument, provide the basis for combinatorial
exploration (described below), and are inherently suited for
practise in combination with other concepts, such as, for
example, exaggeration and reduction.
6.2 Exaggeration/Reduction
Once an element has been isolated, an eﬀective way of
learning more about controlling it is by exaggerating it or
reducing it as much as possible– whether in volume, or in
physical motion when carrying it out, or in any other dimen-
sion. In Glove Talk II, once I was reasonably comfortable
with the system, I was able to begin exploring the control of
speech while making my own motions as minimal as possible.
This also allowed (or would potentially lead to) increased
ability for speed, as less motion would be required to pro-
duce the same words. In piano, exaggeration can take the
form of raising the ﬁngers as high as possible before striking
the keys, or “pulling” them oﬀ the keys when releasing. In
Digital Marionette, I explored swinging the leg as high as
possible while walking, and also moving the legs as little as
possible during walking, to gain more control over the leg
motion overall. An interesting vocal exercise for dramatic or
public speaking is practising improvised singing of an entire
speech– this corresponds to great exaggeration of intonation
and rhythm, so that when it is later spoken, there is still an
underlying feeling of freedom with the phrasing, timing, in-
tonation and volume.
6.3 Combinatorial exploration
Having identiﬁed isolated components, it is natural to
then start explore various combinations of them. This also
helps internalize the isolated gestures or elements, as they
can be maintained under various situations, after having
practised them in suﬃcient combinations.
Another combinatorial approach is epitomized by Slonim-
sky’s thesaurus of musical patterns[12], in which he covers
enormous territory in a remarkably systematic way3.
6.4 Slow and Steady
3These patterns grew in popularity when it was became
known that Coltrane would practise from this collection.
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
62
It is a trademark of novice players that they will practise
the easy part of a passage too fast, and slow down unpre-
dictably on the diﬃcult parts. Yet, one of the most help-
ful and well-known practise techniques is working with a
metronome. The key is truly understanding the simple idea
of working at a common denominator so that the full passage
or exercise can be practised completely steadily. Further-
more, the tempo can be chosen so that not only is it possibly
to be unwaveringly steady, but also relaxed. WithDigital
Marionette and Glove Talk II, there were certain movement
phrases or words that were easy to do much faster, but it was
always helpful to practise things at a steady pace. Funda-
mentally, this is about developing suﬃcient internal aware-
ness to recognize when a certain activity feels in control or
not. This is very diﬀerent from whether or not it sounds in
control.
6.5 Rhythms
As an interesting representation of the diﬀerence between
today’s classical versus jazz understanding of time, a jazz
metronome exercise is to set the metronome on a relatively
slow speed, and then play a single note per beat, but try
to nail it so that one doesn’t even hear the tick of the
metronome. Not surprisingly, an invaluable key to achieving
this exercise is by staying relaxed. Even less surprisingly, it
is very diﬃcult to do that (see Section 6.8).
Listing even some of the possible rhythmic exercises (de-
pending of course on the instrument) would be outside the
scope of this paper. However, combinations of accenting
and rhythms can be invaluable in learning to achieve steadi-
ness. Practising short bursts of 2-4 notes followed by a slight
pause allows one to learn to alternate between being active
and relaxing. Practising the same rhythmic pattern starting
at diﬀerent places in the bar is a rhythmic form of isolation
and combination, and can be extremely helpful in achieving
comfort with the instrument.
6.6 Deeper interaction: ﬁnding limits and open-
ings
As the knowledge of one’s instrument deepens, it becomes
interesting to look for both limits and openings for expres-
siveness. For example, the vowel mapping in Glove Talk
II was an opening, in the sense that further exploration in
this regard led to further control over the expressiveness of
the instrument. On the other hand, the foot-ground contact
mechanism inDigital Marionettewas more of a limit, in that
seemed to be something that needed to be overcome when
trying to create ﬂuid choreography. With an instrument
such as the acoustic piano, the fact that a note cannot be
directly controlled after it has been played is a limit, but the
fact that sympathetic vibrations allow other notes to cause
a held note to resonate more strongly is an opening for ad-
ditional expressiveness, as that can help a pianist achieve a
more “singing” tone.
6.7 Awareness
Body-awareness and mind-awareness are fundamental con-
cepts to work with when learning a new instrument. A full
discussion of them is philosophical and outside the scope
of this paper, but a tangible, relevant example is awareness
of posture. In classical technique, while speciﬁc ideas dif-
fer according to the school, one of the ﬁrst elements taught
to the beginning musician is (whatever that school believes
to be) the “correct posture”. While diﬀerent postures have
diﬀerent proponents, each one invariably has some rationale
behind it, with goals of satisfying certain criteria– whether
to allow for more relaxation, or give more power, or give
more physical range, or minimize required physical eﬀort,
etc. When confronted with a new instrument, it is very im-
portant to be aware of one’s posture and give consideration
to it in relation to what is needed in order to play it.
Another example of awareness is in the next concept.
6.8 Balancing relaxation with intention
This is one of the most elusive of the concepts to de-
scribe, yet it is perhaps one of the most fundamental ones
when considering the meaning of mastery over an instru-
ment. Great performers sometimes make their performance
look easy. While what they are doing may be ostensibly dif-
ﬁcult, what they have achieved— either over years of prac-
tise or by happening upon it very quickly— is that they have
found the easein it. It is in some ways useless advice, for
saying it does not help ﬁnd it, yet I believe it is hopeful to
know that the easiness is there. A long search may happen
ﬁrst, but it is ﬁndable.
6.9 Revisiting
Returning to a basic or previous exercise can reveal what
appears to be a brand new exercise, by being able to focus
on new aspects of it or due to higher, revised standards.
The performer may also be able to absorb the information
of the exercise in a diﬀerent way, or have a new kinesthetic
perception of it. Recent research[10], showing the stronger
transferability of skills in advanced users, supports the value
of revisiting basic exercises.
6.10 DeAling wit Mistakes
By “mistake”, I here refer to the occasions when the actual
output was diﬀerent from the intended output (assuming
the performer had an intention in the ﬁrst place). Mistakes
necessarily happen during practise. It only makes sense to
actually give thought to how one will treat them when they
do present themselves. One approach, for example, is to
decide— in advance— to keep going without missing a sin-
gle beat (literally speaking). This is an extremely useful
approach for improvisation. This was also a very important
skill to learn withGlove Talk II, since, if a messed-up syl-
lable was repeated, it became quickly incomprehensible to
the listener who had no way of knowing that the same syl-
lable was being “repeated-until-spoken-correctly”, and was
therefore trying to parse a sequence of sounds that would be
impossible to interpret correctly without mentally deleting a
certain section. The same happens musically when playing
within a metric form. It is an important skill, and not an
easy one to learn.
Another approach is to decide in advance to stop at every
mistake, and repeat it until correct, or even more eﬀectively,
repeat until one has a feeling of physical conﬁdence that
that mistake will simply not happen. This can be extremely
useful. Furthermore, this may be easier said than done, for
it can require considerable focus to stay aware of mistakes
when playing.
6.11 Play
I will not even try to describe how to be playful (best
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
63
done in demonstration), but, based on my experience, it
would be inexcusable to omit mentioning it. It is amazing
how much new territory can be discovered by playing (in
any interpretation of the word).
7. CONCLUSION
Learning to play new musical interfaces is a very diﬀerent
task from designing them, yet no less important if they are
to be used to full eﬀect. While classical instruments come
with an existing body of technique evolved over generations
of master players and master teachers, the new-instrument
performer must often be the initiator and driver of the ex-
ploration of the new instrument. The introductory stages
are but a small part of it— the true creative journey begins
when the user’s own goals and style drive the learning, and
when basic elements begin to be internalized and built upon.
Based on my experience becoming proﬁcient at two com-
plex real-time digitally-based controllers, and on years of
study and performance of a conventional acoustic instru-
ment, and numerous other coordinated movement and body-
based activities, I present a set of general principles for guid-
ing practising and learning a new instrument. While the
principles are of course not meant to be perfectly suitable
for every possible instrument (e.g. rhythmic exercises may
be less relevant for an instrument that only produces very
slowly-changing ambient-type soundscapes, or extremely rel-
evant for a new percussive interface), and they do not pur-
port to comprise all such principles, I believe they are suf-
ﬁcient to cover and inspire a signiﬁcant range of directions
and questions to consider when working. Each principle has
been common in some way to my experience with one or
more of the instruments or activities that I study or teach.
8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author wishes to thank the reviewers for their helpful
comments and suggestions. Thanks to Sid Fels for discus-
sions and help in learning to use GloveTalk II. Numerous
music teachers, musicians and other artists have been and
continue to be highly inﬂuential, of course, in learning to
play piano.
9. REFERENCES
[1] http://hct.ece.ubc.ca/research/glovetalk2/index.html.
[2] http://www.cs.smu.ca/˜sageev/
videos/digitalMarionette1.qt.
[3] T. Blaine and S. Fels. Contexts of collaborative
musical experiences. In Proceedings of the NIME 2003
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression,
Montreal, Canada, 2003.
[4] S. Fels and G. Hinton. Glove-talkII: An adaptive
gesture-to-formant interface. In Proceedings of CHI’95
Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages
456–463. ACM Press, 1995.
[5] S. Jorda. Digital instruments and players: Part I -
eﬃciency and apprenticeship. In Proceedings of New
Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME),
Hamamatsu, Japan, 2005.
[6] T. Machover. Instruments, interactivity, and
inevitability. In Proceedings of the NIME International
Conference, 2002.
[7] R. K. Meyer and C. Palmer. Temporal and motor
transfer in music performance. Music Perception,
21(1):81–104, 2003.
[8] A. Newell and P. Rosenbloom. Mechanisms of skill
acquisition and the law of practice. pages 81–135.
[9] S. Oore, D. Terzopoulos, and G. Hinton. A Desktop
Input Device and Interface for Interactive 3d
Character Animation. In Graphics Interface, pages
133–140, 2002.
[10] C. Palmer and R. K. Meyer. Conceptual and motor
learning in music performance. Psychological Science,
11(1), 2000.
[11] I. Philipp. Complete school of technic for the
pianoforte.
[12] N. Slonimsky. Thesaurus of Scales and Melodic
Patterns.
[13] R. Vertegaal, T. Ungvary, and M. Kieslinger. Towards
a musician’s cockpit: Transducers, feedback and
musical function. InProceedings of the International
Computer Music Conference, pages 308–311, 1996.
[14] M. M. Wanderley and P. Depalle. Gestural control of
sound synthesis. Proceedings of the IEEE, 92(4), April
2004.
[15] M. M. Wanderley and N. Orio. Evaluation of input
devices for musical expression: Borrowing tools from
hci.Computer Music Journal, 26(2):62–76, 2002.
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
64