Low Force Pressure Measurement: Pressure Sensor 
Matrices for Gesture Analysis, Stiffness Recognition and 
Augmented Instruments
Tobias Grosshauser 
IRCAM/ ReactiveS.net 
1, Place Igor Stravinsky, Paris 
ReactiveS Lab, Munich 
+49- 176- 242 99 241 
Tobias@Grosshauser.de
ABSTRACT
The described project is a new approach to use highly sensitive 
low force pressure sensor matrices for malposition, cramping and 
tension of hands and fingers, gesture and keystroke analysis and 
for new musical expression. In the latter, sensors are used as 
additional touch sensitive switches and keys. In pedagogical 
issues, new ways of technology enhanced teaching, self t eaching 
and exercising are described. The used sensors are custom made 
in collaboration with the ReactiveS Sensorlab. 
Keywords
Pressure Measurement, Force, Sensor, Finger, Violin, Strings, 
Piano, Left Hand, Right Hand, Time Line, Cramping, Gesture and 
Posture Analysis. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Many audio and gesture parameters have already been explored 
and described in exercising, teaching and performing of musical 
instruments. The suggested method in this paper extends the 
approved practices. Basic technology is a high sensitive pr essure 
sensor. The line up of several of these extremely light weighted 
sensors in arrays allows a broad field of applications. A 
combination in matrices allows 3-dimensional representation of 
the linearised data with position and pressure visualisation. The 
position, pressure/ force and the data representation with for 
instance time line alignement shows the change of the overall 
energy and is visualised graphically. Alongside the time axis the 
change of the applicated force respectivly the pressure can be 
observed.  
Many different visualisation, recording, sonification and feedback 
tools are programmed in PD and MaxMSP or similar software 
environments and can be applied for the generated data. 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME08, June 4-8, 2008, Genova, Italy 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
All in all, the target group is from beginners up to professional 
musicians in the areas of teaching, performance, composition and 
posture and gesture analysis. 
In music and art, sensors can be an alternative or an enahncement 
for traditional interfaces like computer keyboard, monitor, mouse 
and camera in man-machine interaction. Position, pressure or 
force sensing is a possibility to translate the haptic reality to the 
digital world. There is already a great choice of high performance 
motion and position tracking systems, but techniques for pressure 
recording are still under-represented. Besides the expenses, this is 
due to the complicated measurement technology needed for the 
mostly high capacitance of the industrial sensors and the 
complicated and damageable mechanical setup. After the first 
development period of the pressure sensors, the main goals, high 
sensitivity and low weight, were achieved. Later, also the 
following additional requirements: 
- cheap and stable, “live-performance-proof“ 
- easy to use and to install 
- no distraction of gesture or movements 
- usable in performances with and wit hout computer,
“stand-alone system“ 
- every sensor can be detected autonomously 
- high resolution AD-conversion, but also  
- compatibility to standards like MIDI 
2. STATE OF THE ART OF RESEARCH IN 
GESTURE, PRESSURE AND POSITION 
RECOGNITION 
Poepel shows a summarisation of the extended violins, playing 
with ASDSS sounds, playing with expanded existing instruments 
and playing with new gestures [1]. Askenfelt already measures 
bow motion and force with custom electronic devices [2]. A thin 
resistor wire is among the bow hairs to get position data and bow 
bridge distance with electrified strings. Paradiso uses the first 
wireless measurement system, two oscillators on the bow and an 
antenna combined with a receiver [3]. Also pressure of the 
forefinger and between the hair and wood. Young received 
pressure data from a foil strain placed in the middle of the bow 
[4]. Demoucron attaches accelerometers to the bow and measures 
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
97
the complete pressure of the bow with sensors connected to the 
bow hair [5].  
Maestre presents a gesture tracking system based on a commercial 
EMF device [6]. One Sensor is glued on the bottom near the neck 
of the violin, a second one on the bow. Data of position, pr essure 
by deforming the bow and relating data to this capturing can be 
calculated. A lot more systems exist, but mostly combined with a 
camera, which does not seem to be stable and reliable enough for 
performances and everyday use. 
A different approach is developed at IRCAM by Bevilaqua [7]. 
The sensing capabilities are added to the bow and measure the 
bow acceleration in realtime. A software based recognition system 
detects different bowing styles. 
Guaus measures the bow pressure over all [8] and not each finger, 
which cause the pressure on the bow. Sensors are fixed on the 
hairs of the bow on the tip and the frog. This means additional 
weight on the tip, which could influence professional violin 
playing, because of the leverage effect.  
The recent paper of Young [9] d escribes a data base of bow 
strokes with many sensor data like 3D acceleration, 2D bow force, 
and electric ﬁeld position sensing, again with an over all bow 
force measurement. 
The presented measuring system here shows a setup easy to 
install, just sticking the less than 1mm thick, flexible sensor on the 
bow or finger and connecting it with the convertor box. As every 
single finger itself is measured, besides pressure and force 
allocation and changes between the fingers at different playing 
techniques, muscle cramps and wrong finger position can be 
detected. 
3. BASIC SETUP 
Each sensor is connected directly with a converter box. If less data 
is required, fewer sensors can be plugged into the convertor box. 
Standard stereo jacks are used as plugs, each sensor/ plug has its 
own control channel. This allows individual and minimized setups 
and a better overview, if fewer channels are used, especially with  
younger students. Wireless transmission is partly possible, but not 
always practicable. The connector box can be worn on a belt. Data 
transmission is possible either to a computer or directly to 
synthesizers or other modules via MIDI. The connector box 
provides a power supply for each sensor and direct MIDI out. 
The basic sensor is 5 x 5 x 2 mm, larger dimensions are possible.  
It weights only some grammes, depending on the dimensions of 
the surface area. The sensors are usually combined in 2 to 4 rows 
each consisting of 4 to 8 sensors, sticked on a flexible foil.  
The basic setup consists of at least one 16-channel programmable 
converter and connector box, sensor matrices for shoulder rest, 
chin rest and bow. Further a computer with MaxMSP, MathLab 
or common music software to process, record or display the data. 
4. PRESSURE AND POSITION 
MEASUREMENT 
4.1 Strings 
The basic measurements at the violin (exemplary for strings) are: 
4.1.1 Pressure and Position of each Finger of the 
Right Hand 
Figure 1. Change of force during one bow stroke 
These integrated sensors show when the position and/or pressure 
changes during the movement of the bow (see figure 1) or over a 
certain force limit. This limit can be adjusted individually and 
visual feedback or just data recording is possible. This allows ex 
post playing analysis of the performed music piece, or just 
information for beginners. The sensors of the middle and the ring 
finger can also be used for steering or switching peripheries on/off 
or for constant sound manipulation.  
Figure 2 shows the integration of the sensors into the bow and 
finger posture of the right hand. Every sensor is installed to the 
right place, individually adapted to the ergonomical and technical 
correct position of the musicians’ fingers. For beginners, rather in 
the age over 15 years, this is a simple control for the correctness 
of the posture, if they exercise alone at home and it detects wrong 
exposure or stiffness of the hand and fingers, for example too 
much or wrong directed pressure on the forefinger.
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
98
Figure 2. Pressure sensors on the bow 
4.1.2 Pressure of the left Hand 
This is not an every day solution, because the flexible sensors are 
sticked on each finger. But for several met hodical and technical 
issues useful information is generated. Not the maximum pressure 
itself, but how the pressure changes for example at different types 
of thrills or vibrato and how the pressure is divided between the 
fingers when double stops are played. In combination with bow 
position sensor, left- right hand coordination can be explored very 
accurate. 
4.1.3 Areal Distribution of Pressure and Position of 
the Chin on the Chin Rest 
First measurements of chinrest pressure in violin playing were 
done by M. Okner [10]. Five dependent variables were evaluated: 
peak pressure, maximum force, pressure/time integral and 
force/time integral, and total contact area. Similar variables are 
studied in our measurements and shown in figure 3. 
Figure 3. Pressure Allocation Chin Rest 
Figure 3 shows the chin rest pressure and force sensor matrix 
measurements data in a 3-axis coordinate system. This optical 
representation of the force and pressure data seems to be a pratical 
way of showing the measruement results.  
The sensor matrix enables the detection of the pressure 
distribution over the whole area, compared to the pressure 
measurement in one point only. Both, position changing and  
muscle cramping is detectable and could prevent pain of back and 
neck of beginners and malposition, especially in long-lasting 
exercising situations or general inattentiveness. 
Figure 4. Shoulder Rest Pressure Allocation, SR1 and SR2 
Sensor Array 
Figure 5. Shoulder Rest Malposition, SR1 and SR2 
Sensorposition 
Similar to the above-mentioned chin rest solution, the shoulder 
rest matrix (see figure 4) detects malposition and false posture, 
often caused by disposition of the shoulder. In figure 5, SR2 
shows an incorrect pressure allocation on the shoulder rest, 
compared to SR2 in figure 4. Correct violin position is a basic 
condition precedent to learn the further playing techniques. This 
issue concerns mainly beginners, for advanced musicians it is 
possible to use for example a defined pressure raise of the chin or 
shoulder for switching and steering interactions. (Besides a bad 
positioned shoulder rest, backache can be avoided by good 
shoulder and neck posture.) 
4.1.4 Comparison Shoulder-Chin Rest Pressure and 
Position 
Figure 6 shows the pressure allocation of chin and s houlder in one 
coordinate system. The upper area is the chin pressure, the lower 
area the shoulder rest pr essure allocation area. The optical 
representation is important for a simple every day use. In this case 
wrong posture or mal position would appear in a brighter colour 
or inhomogeneous shape of the 2 areas. 
Postion changes of the violin itself can be detected while playing. 
This enables the musician or teacher to analyse besides pressure 
and force changes, changes of the violin position. Evaluation and 
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
99
studies about expr essive gestures during a live performance or 
practising situations are possible. 
Figure 6. Comparison Shoulder-Chin Rest Pressure and 
Position 
4.1.5 Stiffness Recognition 
A common problem in teaching, especially in beginners’ lessons, 
is too much tension or stiffness in the bow hand. Besides wrong 
posture of the hand, elbow and fingers, often force is applied to 
the wrong fingers, sometimes because of the impression, the bow 
could fall down. The wrong applied force can be detected by the 
sensors. Most of the times, too much pressure is applied to 
fingers, where usually nearly no force is needed. In this example 
on the violin bow the middle and the ring finger. A visualisation 
tool (figure 7) was programmed in PD and MaxMSP. A blue ball 
reacts to the pressure of the ring finger. If there is too much 
pressure, it moves to the right (figure 8) and the color and shape 
changes. Besides that, a sonification is implemented; the more 
force, the louder and more distorted sound is generated. When the 
opposite appears, the ball reacts into the other direction. 
Basically all sensor data can be visualised and sonified with this 
tool, but every student reacts individually to technology in 
teaching situations. First practical experience shows quite good 
acceptance and feedback, even from the younger pupils. 
Figure 7. Visualisation of 3rd Finger, “Stiffness Control” 
Figure 8. Visualisation of 3 rd Fin ge r ,  “ Sti f fn e s s  C o n t r o l”,  t o o  
much force/pressure 
4.1.6 Pedagogical Issues 
The core application right now is the posture and tension control 
for stundents older than 15 years. Usually they like this feedback 
tool and are used to work with computers. A playful approach 
always is important and technical experimentation often ends up 
in long exercising periods. This kind of motivation is not always 
working, but the other positive results like remembering the 
posture learned in the last lesson and being able to record data 
besides music is interesting.  
The possibilities to provide a simple visualisation tool to get 
objective data for self studies or practising scenarios are manifold. 
Some useful scenarios are: 
• Early detecting of too much muscle tension, caused by 
wrong finger position or fatigue 
• Easy feedback for beginners, if their posture of the right 
hand is OK 
• Avoiding of lasting and time consuming postural 
corrections 
With professional violinists, interesting tests are made. After long 
exercising or job-related playing periods, physical fatigue can be 
measured by posture or pressure changes. In exercising situations, 
a visual feedback could inform the student and suggest a short 
recreation phase. 
4.2 Keyboard Instruments 
Several basic measurements are applied in piano playing. The 
main goals are mal position of the hands of fingers and too much 
muscle tension or cramping of the fingers, hands and elbow. 
Furthermore the force of single keystrokes and attacks were 
measured and visualised for analysing. 
With these sensor arrays, augmented pianos are possible and new 
ways of playing techniques and expressions could be found. 
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
100
4.2.1 Pressure/ Keystroke and Fingertip Position of
each Finger of the left and right Hand 
There are two possibilities of keystroke and fingertip position 
recognition. First, sticking the sensor onto the keys (difficult to 
play), second fixing one sensor on each fingertip. Only the result 
of the second variation were useful. 
Keystroke recognition is explored by R. Möller [11] with „High-
speed-camera Recording of Pulp Deformation while Playing 
Piano or Clavichord“. Different sensor types are discussed, but in 
laboratory conditions with precise but usually unaffordable 
equipment and only one playing mode. The low cost system 
described here is fast e nough to detect the maximum for ces and 
the gradient of each finger in different playing modes, like thrills 
or fast scales.  
Common key stroke recognition works with two measure points 
and the delay between them with every stroke (See Figure 9). 
Guido Van den Berghe  describes the system in [12] and mentions 
the unsatisfying possibilities to create differentiated key strokes 
on electric pianos. He also developed a force measurement system 
in combination with a high speed camera: But no easy to use and 
an external tool, where no connections in or on the piano, no 
sensors or fixed parts are needed. Even if there are better systems 
existing now, there is no “force-detection” interface except 
someteimes the MIDI-attack recognition for piano or keyboards, 
to connect to a fine grain and high resolution force and pressure 
measurement. 
Figure 9. Key velocity measurement system in an electric 
piano [10] 
4.2.2 Pedagogical Issues, Stiffness Recognition 
In Figure 10, the changes of the force of slow keystrokes with 
different attacks are shown.  
Figure 10. Piano Key Strokes, from “piano” to “forte”, 
Sensors sticked on the finger tips 
Explanations about key strokes could be assisted with this tool. 
Self studies at home could be compared to the recorded data in the 
music lesson or from other musicians. Several basic pedagogical 
problems were explored. The non-releasing of the keys, a 
common beginner’s fault can be detected and visualised. Fatigue 
and cramping are other reasons for this manner, even at advanced 
pupils or professionals.  
Many examples could be given, one more is the problem of
rhythmical and dynamical irregularity. Time line, score and audio 
alignment of the data with adjustable time resolutions can show 
clearly the problem, which might be difficult to hear. In these 
cases, basic visualizations can simplify long-winded explanations. 
4.2.3 Further Analysis  
First experiments with further combined measurements are made. 
For example: Food pedal usage and pressure m easurement. Two 
aspects of this measurement are useful. Seeing how and when, for 
example a professional player uses the pedals. This could be 
recorded in a commonly used audio software and analysed with 
the sensor data aligned to an audio recording. Self recording helps 
to explore the own usage, or the change of the usage of the pedal 
during a longer exercising period. 
4.3 Extended Music, Enhanced Scores and 
Augmented Instruments 
Figure 11 shows a score with additional fingerings with the 
thumb. The Zero before the conventional fingering is the left hand 
thumb on the violin. It is used like an additional finger.The 
second number next to the “0” gives the position of the thumb, if 
the sensor allows more than one active area. In this case three 
sensitive areas are used and in each the pressure of the thumb is 
detected. This allows not only switching effects on and off, even 
more, adjusting the amount of data or sound manipulation. 
Extended playing techniques, data or sound manipulation and 
more voices are feasible.  
The goal was the integration of sensors in common playing modes 
and gestures. On the one hand thumb-steered real-time interaction 
with electronic peripheries like computers and synthesizers, on the 
other hand switching, manipulating and mixing of sound effects, 
accompaniment and 3d-spatial sound position with integrated 
sensors besides the fingerboard, in the range of the thumb.  
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
101
Similar methods could be applied to the right hand sensors, but it 
is quite difficult to change the pressure wit hout influencing the 
sound too much.  
Figure 11. Extended Score 
This extended score is a part of the piece “concertare” from 
Tobias Grosshauser [13]. 
For keyboard instruments for instance modulation is possible, just 
by changing the finger pressure after the key is already stroken. 
This new playing technique allows new ways of articulation, even 
when the key is already pressed and sound effects like vibrato on 
the piano or keyboard instruments.  
4.4 Further Scenarios and Research 
Further research will be observed with finger pressure 
measurements on wind instruments and drums. In combination 
with position recognition and acceleration sensors, most important 
parameters are detected. 
This pressure and force sensors provide more and more 
possibilities for new music compositions in combination with 
extended scores and simplified real time interaction within 
electronical environments. 
Concerning pedagogic issues, the systems and methods will be 
more and more accurate and user friendly for a wider range of 
usage and target audience. 
The combination of traditional instruments, computer and high 
tech tools like new sensors could motivate a new generation of 
young musicians to learn with new methods they like and they are 
more and more used to. Cheap and easy to use sensor systems 
would support this development. Also if t eaching and pedagogy 
would be more of an adventure and research for new possibilities 
and “unknown terrain”, making music, learning and playing a 
musical instrument and pracitising could be more fascinating. 
5. REFERENCES 
[1] C. Poepel, D. Overholt. Recent Developments in Violin-
related Digital Musical Instruments: Where Are We and 
Where Are We Going? NIME06, 6th International Conference 
on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 2006. 
[2] A. Askenfelt. Measurement of bow motion and bow fo rce in 
violin playing, Journal of Acoustical Society of America, 80, 
1986. 
[3] J. A. Paradiso and N. A. Gershenfeld. Musical applications of 
electric field sensing, Computer Music Journal, 21:2, S 69-89, 
MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1997. 
[4] D. S. Young. Wireless sensor system for measurment of violin 
bowing parameters, Stockholm Music Acoustics Conference, 
2003. 
[5] M. Demoucron, R. Caussé. Sound synthesis of bowed string 
instrumnets using a gesture based control of a physical model,
International Conference on Noise & Vibration Engineering, 
2007. 
[6] E. Maestre, J. Janer, A. R. Jensenius and J. Malloch. 
Extending gdif for instrumental gestures: the case of violin 
performance,I n t e r n a t i o n a l  C o m p u t e r  M u s i c  C o n f e r e n c e ,  
Submitted, 2007. 
[7] F. Bevilaqua, N. Rasamimanana, E. Flety, S. Lemouton, F. 
Baschet. The augmented violin project: research, composition
and performance report , NIME06, 6th International 
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 2006. 
[8] E. Guaus, J. Bonada, A. Perez, E. Maestre, M. Blaauw. 
Measuring the bow pressure force in a real violin 
performance, International Conference on Noise & Vibration 
Engineering, 2007. 
[9] D. Young, A. Deshmane, Bowstroke Database: A Web-
Accessible Archive of Violin Bowing Data, NIME07, 7th 
International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical 
Expression, 2007 
[10] M. Okner, T. Kernozek, Chinrest pressure in violin playing: 
type of music, chin rest, and shoulder pad as possible 
mediators, Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon)., 12(3):S12-S13, 
1997-04 
[11] R. Möller, Wentorf, High-speed-camera Recording of Pulp 
Deformation while Playing Piano or Clavichord . 
Musikphysiologie und Musikermedizin, 2004, 11. Jg., Nr. 4, 
[12] Guido Van den Berghe, Bart De Moor; Willem Minten, 
Modeling a Grand Piano Key Action , Computer Music 
Journal, Vol. 19, No. 2. (Summer, 1995), pp. 15-22, The MIT 
Press 
[13] T. Grosshauser, Concertare,  www.extendedmusic.net, click 
“concertare” 
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
102