 TOWARD ALGORITHMIC COMPOSITION OF 
EXPRESSION IN MUSIC USING FUZZY LOGIC  
 
 
 
Wendy Suiter 
Faculty of Creative Arts 
University of Wollongong 
NSW, Australia 
 
ws999@uow.edu.au 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper introduces the concept of composing expressive 
music using the principles of Fuzzy Logic.  The paper provides 
a conceptual model of a musical work which follows 
compositional decision making processes.  Significant features 
of this Fuzzy Logic framework are its inclusiveness through the 
consideration of all the m any and varied musical details, while 
also incorporating the imprecision that characterises musical 
terminology and discourse.   
A significant attribute of my Fuzzy Logic method is that it 
traces the trajectory of all musical details, since it is both the 
individual elements and their combination over time which is 
significant to the effectiveness of a musical work in achieving 
its goals. 
The goal of this work is to find a set of elements and rules, 
which will ultimately enable the construction of a genrali sed 
algorithmic compositional system which can produce 
expressive music if so desired.  
Keywords 
Fuzzy Logic, Music Composition, Musical Expression, 
Algorithmic Music. 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
This paper outlines  concepts being used to construct a new 
theory of a musi cal work, which explicitly considers 
expressiveness.  This  will ultimately inform the development of  
a new compositional tool which can be implemented in any  
instrumental format: existing or newly designed physical or 
virtual instruments.  There remains c onsiderable work in 
refining the model, and ultimately build the Fuzzy Logic 
compositional system. 
My concern is to reduce the number of micro level 
compositional decisions I need to make , through the  use of  an 
algorithmic comp ositional system which  can pr oduce 
expressive music if so de sired.  In order to  do this I need to 
determine wh at comp ositional element s contribute to 
expression, and the means by which these elements combine to 
produce expressive music .  
Permission to make digital or hard copies of al l or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.  
NIME2010, June 15-18, 2010, Sydney, Australia 
Copyright remains with the author(s).  
 
The algorithmic compostional system I am develop ing is 
based on  Fuzzy Logic principles both as an analytic tool to 
derive inputs to  the s ystem, and also ultimately drive an  
automated Fuzzy Logic decision making /control system.  My 
concern is to build a system which can produce aesthetic 
results, that is, works of art, from new compositional ideas and 
uses of technology. 
Significantly, in this conceptual model, ambiguity in the 
music itself is maintained  while Form is replaced by 
synchroncity of unfolding processes.  During conventional 
music analysis, two things occur which remove ambiguity.  The 
first is the requirement that those elements considered 
significant (such as a chord) to be precisely and uniquely 
defined.  The second is that some elements of the music are 
considered not worth analyzing, yet this introduces a very 
subjective element into music analysis.  
The goal of my conceptual model is to develop a means to 
implement expression in algorithmic music applicable across all 
genres of music, including acoustic music and computer music. .  
This could potentially b ecome a completely new compositional 
method explicitly incorporating expression, or simply an new 
way of thinking about music that will allow the incorporation of 
expression into other algorithmic music.   
It is  evident that although the term " expression" is used 
continuously and widely in conne ction with music.  Examples 
range from the name of this conference “New Interfaces for 
Musical Expression”, or in numerous books and articles on  
music ranging from an  essay on Mozart Operas [3] to a book on 
teaching composition [11] to a history of the string quartet [10] 
to the current article on ‘Expression’ in Groves Online [4].  Yet 
determining what the word actually  means becomes a  
foundational problem when viewed from the compose r’s 
perspective. 
2. CONTEXT 
2.1 Expression in Music 
The current article on “Expression” in Groves Online [4] clearly 
articulates the fundamental question regarding the use of this 
terminology.  “In the simplest sense expression is applied to 
elements of a performance that depend on personal resp onse 
and vary between interpretations.  It is not clear how this use of 
the term relates to the concept that occurs in some music 
criticism…What does it mean to say that a piece of music has 
expression…?”   
The problematic use of the word in musical discou rse, and its 
confusing status in relation to compositional input is 
exemplified by items in other well known music dictionaries. 
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
319
[12] [20]. While other musicologists extend the expressive role 
of composer unambiguously beyond that of determining rhythm 
and pitch, to include Form as an expressive device [3 ] [10]. 
Finally, Roger Scruton in Groves Online  categorically states 
that it is impossible to give rules for expression because all the 
features of music are responsible for its expressive powers, so 
cannot consider factors in isolation.  “It is therefore difficult to 
say, in advance of a particular case, which features can be 
altered with impunity, and which are vital to the effect.” [21].   
Scruton’s summary provides clear support for my Fuzzy 
Logic Compos itional Model which is inclusive of all musical 
features.  Consequently, my work is premised on the basis that 
it is possible to generate rules for expression through using my 
Fuzzy Logic method. 
2.2 Aesthetics 
Musical art is a sounding phenomenon, taking plac e through 
time, it is neither the score itself, nor its initial concept.  
Consequently, experimental methods that explore new 
compositional ideas or uses of technology do not necessarily, 
in themselves, produce aesthetic results.  Once tools have 
been invented, ways of using them to create works of art need 
to be developed. 
This aesthetic requirement provokes a number of questions 
including issues concerning what music intrinsically requires to 
be intelligible, meaningful, coherent and expressive?  
 “Music as it appears to the analyst and the listener might not 
be quite the same thing.  The relationship between the two is 
one of the most problematic issues….in music analysis” [8].  Or 
as Susan McLary puts more graphically: “How is it that 
particular images an d responses are invoked by specific musical 
details, yet examining scores and pitch class sets does not lead 
to the discovery of meaning.” [14]. There are, however, many 
attributes of Fuzzy Logic which make it a very useful method 
for unpicking some of the se knots. 
2.3 Methodological Issues 
Discussion about music, music theory and analysis, including 
its techniques, its description, critiques, and instructions to 
performers are very often described in words.  Common 
musical notation is an attempt at precision, but even some 
elements of notation are vaguely defined.  While words 
themselves have relative meaning, there is no absolute meaning 
of ‘loud’ or ‘cantabile’ or < or 
 .  Fuzzy Logic has been 
formulated specifically to deal with the imprecision and 
‘vagueness’ which is present when using natural language 
descriptors.  
A significant feature of music is that the aesthetic outcome is 
often more than the sum of its technical elements.  Indeed, 
what is the role of timbre, attack, duration, decay, articulation,  
spatialisation, register, texture, voicing, entries and timing, 
rhythm, tempo or meter?  What does musical form, structure, 
or process contribute?  In fact, it is often the means and details 
of the interactions between the distinct elements which 
significantly influence the effectiveness of the whole work.  
This means music is, technically, a non -linear system.  ''Non 
linear systems are systems that cannot be mathematically 
described as the sum of their components.''  This  behaviour can 
be observed across a va riety of disciplines including biology 
and economics as well as physics.  [1]. It is important that the 
modelling methodology allows for all these attributes while 
itself being rule bound, with evolutionary decision making, 
thus providing for variation in t he elements and their 
combination over time.  Fuzzy Logic is good for  modelling  
non-linear systems as little prior knowledge of the original 
system is required [13]. 
Clearly, music is an excellent domain in which to apply 
Fuzzy Logic. The requirements set out by Babbitt [2], that any 
musical theory be logical, coherent, useful, and intelligible are 
also met by Fuzzy Logic Principles. 
3. LITERATURE REVIEW 
Very little work has been done in the detailed application of 
Fuzzy Logic to modelling music composition, a lthough there 
are several papers which outline the need for this work , without 
providing a r ationale for using Fuzzy Logic a s a methodology  
[24]. 
Milicevic has published a series of papers for example [16] 
[17] Each paper is a reframing of the same idea as  new 
philosophical frameworks become available. One of his papers 
uses some elements of Fuzzy Logic as the means to advance his 
argument [18].  His concept of pattern matching as data is input 
is very similar to Fuzzy ART [7], even though this is not 
specifically mentioned by Milicevic.   
Several composer/programmers have incorporat ed Fuzzy 
Logic into their work [6] [9] [22].  Although the software only 
deals with a small number of very specific musical elements, 
this work can potentially be developed into complex 
algorithms for a large range of musical elements.  Yet, more 
significantly, these composers have not engaged here with the 
concept of  modelling  musical systems from an aesthetic 
perspective. 
4. PROTOTYPE THEORETICAL MODEL 
4.1 The Composer’s Viewpoint  
The framework outlines the range of decisions made by a 
composer when starting and continuing work on a new piece of 
music.  This framework and its information flows is shown in 
Figure 1.   
This framework allows for assessment at several levels, the 
construction of a broad range of Western music through two 
lenses simultaneously.  Firstly, the detailed elemental 
perspective, that is the construction of the individual sound 
events in each piece of music.  Secondly, the time domain 
perspective, that is how all t hese elements, and their variations, 
change and combine over time.  Composers already do this kind 
of multidimensional thinking as an intrinsic part of their work.  
What differs from composer to composer and style to style, is 
the amount of, and which deta ils in one or other of the 
dimensions they concern themselves with, the remainder being 
left to compositional algorithms.   
The terminology I am developing has been  generalised  
away from traditional analytical terms which originate from 
notational foundations.  My terminology covers the chief 
characteristics by which sound itself is shaped and processed 
through compositional de cision making.  Terms, such as 
‘articulation: discrete’, which describe the elemental details of 
the music, have been used to  generalise characteristics across 
both acoustic and computer music domains.  Thus the term 
‘sound events’ is used instead of ‘note ’ so that the palette of 
sounds available in computer music, which are likely to be  
unpitched, and a-rhythmic, can be accommodated.  It is likely, 
however, that further refinement of both terminology and 
model will take place as more music is analysed usin g these 
principles.  
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
320
The framework starts from the pre -definition of a sound 
source, i.e. initial timbre, has been identified, then two possible 
types o f treatment can occur.  The first set of treatment 
decisions relate to the segmentation of the timbre itself, both 
through time (for example, creating rhythm) and through 
frequency space, or register (for example, only using the middle 
octaves of the piano , or using a hi -pass filter).  The second set 
of treatment decisions made by the composer relate to changes 
which are externally imposed onto the timbre.  That is the 
changes have no origin in the timbre itself.  These include 
changes to the density of the  sound (for example, by placing a 
solo passage in a  concerto, or by making the spec trum of a 
sound more complex), changes to the amplitude levels, and 
changes to the location of the sound source in performance.  By 
implication these factors together descri be the texture of the 
music, and in their entirety will also determine the Form.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Conceptual Model of Composition  
4.2 Musical Form as Process 
It is tempting to fall into the traditional theoretical mode of 
searching for, and identif ying, Form, as a significant structural 
mould into which the musical elements are made to conform.  
However, Form can be reconceptualised as simply reflecting the 
processes by which both the individual sound events, and the 
relationships between these ele ments, change over time.  
While typical terminology on Form implies an unspecified 
time domain, the difficulty in defining formal sections in so 
many pieces of music indicates that finding a  generalised  way 
to describe how elements and combinations vary ove r time may 
be more useful, particularly for algorithmic composition of 
expression in music.  Consequently, identifying these processes 
and interactions which create the evolutionary trajectory of the 
music as the details unfold (which means deriving the 
connective grammar) becomes another significant goal of 
theoretical modelling of a musical work.   
Other theorists, for example Meyer [15], have suggested that 
process is a significant part of musical expression.  At this 
meta-level of process, the Baroque th eorists [5] [19] [23] were 
also in accord when it came to particular musical genres such as 
the Lament, where the expressiveness was thought to arise from 
the changing harmonic relationships which evolved as the 
melody line and chorus moved in relation to the repeated 
ground bass. 
A significant feature of my analytical model is the inclusion 
of the time points of change in all the various attributes, as a 
preliminary to an overall assessment of how much change is 
occurring in the music from time to time.  T he rationale for 
measuring the amount of change arises from the conceptual 
framework of both the compositional process and the resulting 
product, which underlies this theoretical method.  
The significant point is the  organising principles, themselves, 
are constant across all types of music, but the emphasis varies 
from one types of music to another.  Various styles or genres 
can be distinguished by examining which treatments are 
significant in the organisation of that music.  The  organising  
principles, which can be viewed at least three different levels to 
allow possible significant patterns and interrelationships to 
emerge.   
There is the primary level, or the detail of how the sounds are 
actually placed through time, then th ere is the second, meta -
level, of the patterning over time of the various attributes of 
those sounds.  Finally, then, there is the meta -meta-level of the 
timing of the changes in attribute patterns both individually and 
in relation to each other.  From a practical perspective, from the 
listener’s point of view, actual musical Form is produced by the 
way these changing patterns materially interrelate over time.  
This then is the final step of this model, which groups the 
changes into Change Fuzzy Sets relating to the total number of 
concurrent changes and consequent significance of the changes 
as they occur in relation to one another over time.   
 
5. FUTURE WORK 
The prototype model of a musical work is a tentative first step, 
which has already highlighted some important issues which 
may require detailed investigation in order to allow my research 
to progress to a useful and functional conclusion in the form of 
a compositional method.  These issues include: the further 
refinement of an appropriate feature set and terminology, as 
well as their interaction through a connective grammar, to allow 
implementation through a Fuzzy Logic control system.  
At this stage, the model of a musical work makes no comment 
on the amount of expressiveness, or otherwise, in a particular 
piece of music. However, the m odel has been developed with 
the view to future examination of the contention that 
expressiveness is influenced both by the actual musical 
elements themselves, as well as the amount and significance of 
changes over time.  
6. CONCLUSION 
The goal of my work is to find a set of elements and rules, 
which will ultimately enable me to construct an algorithmic 
compositional system which can produce expressive music if so 
desired.  In order to do this I need to determine what 
compositional elements contribute to expre ssion, and the rules 
by which these elements combine to produce expressive music.  
In conclusion, it is clear that music composition is an 
excellent domain in which to apply fuzzy logic.  As discussed 
previously, musical discourse is filled with imprecise t erms.  
The most striking thing about Fuzzy Logic is its ability to 
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
321
contain, and work with, imprecise or ‘vague’ concepts, hence 
its immediate applicability to musical discourse.  
Although score based analysis is an established method, it  
focuses primarily o n pitch and harmony, while either ignoring 
or giving secondary attention to other musical elements.  
However, my Fuzzy Logic method traces the tr ajectory of all 
individual musical details and their interactions.  This is 
important since it is both the indiv idual elements and their 
combination over time which are significant to the effectiveness 
of the music in achieving its goals .  My Fuzzy Logic method  
takes the actual state of affairs at any moment, with all its 
ambiguity, as its primary building blocks, c reating the Form as 
overall trajectory of the combination of these building blocks.  
This means that the conceptual model when fully developed 
will be easily implementable into a generalized compositional 
decision making system using Fuzzy Logic controller s. 
7. REFERENCES 
[1]  'Non Linear.'  Monash University's Complexity Virtual Lab,  
(accessed 03/08/2009) <http://vlab.infotech. 
monash.edu.au/simulations/non-linear/>. 
[2]  Babbitt, M. 'The Structure and Function of Music Theory 
1.' College Music Symposium: Jou rnal of the College 
Music Society, Vol. Five, Fall 1965, pp49 -60. 
[3]  Brophy, B. 'Introduction’ . Cassell Opera Guides: WA 
Mozart: Die Zauberflaute, Die Entfuhrung aus dem 
Serail. Cassell, London, 1971,3 -11. 
[4]  Baker, N.K. and M. Paddison, ‘Expression: Int roduction 
and Part I'.  (accessed 25/11/2009), <http://www. 
oxfordmusiconline.com/article/grove/music/09138>.  
[5] Bukofzer, M. F. Music in the Baroque Era: From 
Monteverdi to Bach. JM Dent and Sons, London.  1947. 
[6] Cadiz, R.F. Compositional Control of Compu ter Music by 
Fuzzy Logic. Ph.D. thesis, Northwestern University.  2006. 
[7]  Carpenter, G.A, S. Grossberg, et al. (1991a) 'Fuzzy ART: 
Fast Stable Learning and Categorization of Analog 
Patterns by an Adaptive Resonance System.' Neural 
Networks, Vol. 4, 1991, 759-771. 
[8]  Cook, N. A Guide to Music Analysis  Oxford University 
Press, Oxford. 1987. 
[9]   Elsea, P. 'Fuzzy Logic and Musical Decisions.'  (accessed 
08/10/2008), <ftp://arts.ucsc.edu/pub/ems/FUZZY/  
Fuzzy_logic_and_Music.pdf>.  
 [10] Griffiths, P. The Strin g Quartet . Thames and Hudson, 
Bath. 1983. 
[11]  Kaschub, M & J. Smith  Minds On Music : Composition 
for Creative and Critical Thinking . Rowman & Littlefield 
Education, Lanham, Md.  2009. 
[12] Kennedy, M.& J.B. Kennedy The Concise Oxford 
Dictionary of Music . Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
2007,244. 
[13]  Kosko, B. Fuzzy Thinking: The New Science of Fuzzy 
Logic. Flamingo, London. 1994. 
[14] McLary, S. Feminine Endings: Music, Gender and 
Sexuality. University of Minnesota Press, Minnesota.  
1991. 
[15] Meyer, L. B. Emotion and Meaning in Music  University of 
Chicago Press, Chicago.  1956. 
[16] Milicevic, M. ‘Communicating Computer Music Memes .’  
(accessed 22/04/2010), <http://myweb.lmu.edu/ 
mmilicevic/NEWpers/_PAPERS/papers.html>. 
 
[17]  Milicevic, M. ‘Deconstructing  Musical Structure’ 
(accessed 22/04/2010), <http://myweb.lmu.edu/ 
mmilicevic/NEWpers/_PAPERS/papers.html >. 
 
[18]  Milicevic, M. 'Positive Emotion Learning through Music 
Listening.'  accessed 19/02/2009, <http://myweb.lm u.edu/ 
mmilicevic/NEWpers/_PAPERS/papers.html>.  
[19] Palisca, C. V. Baroque Music . Prentice Hall, Englewood 
Cliffs, N.J. 1991. 
[20] Randel, D.M Harvard Concise Dictionary of Music . 
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 
Mass. 1978,162. 
[21] Sc ruton, R ‘Expression: Part II' (accessed 25/11/2009 ), 
<http://www.oxfordmusiconline.com/article/grove/music/
09138>. 
[22] Sorensen, A. &A. Brown 'jMusi c: Music Composition in 
Java.' (accessed 08/04/2009), <http://jmusic.ci. 
qut.edu.au/index.html>.  
[23] Strunk, O. (ed) Source Readings in Music History, Volume 
3: The Baroque Era . WW Norton and Company, New 
York. 1965. 
 [24] Whalley, I. 'Towards a Closed System Automated 
Composition Engine: Linking 'Kansei' and Musical 
Language Recombinicity'. International Compu ter Music 
Conference, Goteborg, Sweden, 2002,200 -203. 
 
 
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
322