What Makes a Good Musical Instrument? A Matter of Processes, 
Ecologies and Specificities 
 
 
Matthew Rodger, Paul Stapleton, Maarten van Walstijn, Miguel Ortiz, Laurel Pardue 
Sonic Arts Research Centre 
Queen’s University Belfast 
{m.rodger, p.stapleton, m.vanwalstijn, m.ortiz, l.pardue}@qub.ac.uk 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Understanding the question of what makes a good musical instrument 
raises several conceptual challenges. Researchers have regularly 
adopted tools from traditional HCI as a framework to address this 
issue, in which instrumental musical activities are taken to comprise a 
device and a user, and should be evaluated as such. We argue that this 
approach is not equipped to fully address the conceptual issues raised 
by this question. It is worth reflecting on what exactly an instrument 
is, and how instruments contribute toward meaningful musical 
experiences. Based on a theoretical framework that incorporates ideas 
from ecological psychology, enactivism, and phenomenology, we 
propose an alternative approach to studying musical instruments. 
According to this approach, instruments are better understood in terms 
of processes rather than as devices, while musicians are not users, but 
rather agents in musical ecologies. A consequence of this reframing is 
that any evaluations of instruments, if warranted, should align with the 
specificities of the relevant processes and ecologies concerned. We 
present an outline of this argument and conclude with a description of 
a current research project to illustrate how our approach can shape the 
design and performance of a musical instrument in-progress. 
 
Author Keywords 
Musical instruments, Musicians, Evaluation, Ecological Psychology 
 
CCS Concepts 
• Human-centered computing → Interaction design → Interaction 
design theory, concepts and paradigms; • Applied computing → 
Sound and music computing; Performing arts; 
 
1. WHAT MAKES A GOOD MUSICAL 
INSTRUMENT? 
This question may seem trivially easy to answer. Or perhaps it seems 
a misguided thing to ask in the first place. If the  former, a little 
reflection should reveal problems with any seemingly simple or 
comprehensive response. ‘It should be playable’ = ‘By whom?’; ‘It 
should be easy to learn’ = ‘Ever heard of the violin?!’; ‘It should allow 
for musical expression’ = ‘Can every meaningful thing that musicians 
do with instruments be called ‘expression’?”. Almost as quickly as 
answers can be generated, counterexamples appear, or important 
conceptual shortcomings are identified. For these reasons, one might 
adopt the second response of dismissing the question itself. However, 
this would overlook some challenging but potentially fruitful lines of 
enquiry that the question demands for those who design, perform with, 
compose for and otherwise engage with musical instruments. (Note: 
we intentionally do not distinguish between different classes of 
instruments, including those that make exclusive or hybrid use 
of acoustic, mechanical, electronic or digital materials.) The 
position of this paper is that expanding the conceptual tools for 
understanding this question beyond those inherited from traditional 
Human-Computer Interaction will be productive for understanding 
musical instruments in their specific contexts. 
2. LIMITATIONS OF THE DEVICE, USER, 
& EVALUATION FRAMEWORK 
A seemingly useful framework to unpack the opening question, 
borrowing concepts from traditional HCI, is to think of a musical 
instrument of the type typically associated with NIME as a device, 
with an intended user, which can then be evaluated on the extent to 
which the instrument-as-device effectively supports the musician-as-
user execute some functional task (e.g. conveying the nostalgia of the 
changing seasons to a packed audience of hopeless romantics). This 
framing of what a musical instrument is may have proved useful for 
some lines of investigation and can still be accommodated within the 
framework proposed here under specific circumstances. However, 
each component of this framework has inherent limitations when 
considering musical instruments, the different contexts in which they 
are engaged with, and the different meanings enacted by musicians 
with instruments. These limitations, along with arguments for different 
approaches within HCI (e.g. [14,29]), as well as in NIME and 
related fields (e.g. [3,13,15,19,33]), motivate us to explore a more 
expansive conceptual framework. 
2.1 Instrument-as-Device 
 In regarding musical instruments as devices, there is a risk of two 
conceptual cul-de-sacs. The first is the implication that an instrument 
is a singular entity with a set of intended functional behaviours, known 
to the designer and employed by the user for the purpose of attaining 
some practical goal. Consequently, the success or failure of a device 
can be assessed by the extent to which it supports the attainment of 
these pre-determined goals. That is, its global function and dysfunction 
can in theory be defined prior to any actual user interaction. This is a 
highly restricted view of the different ways musicians play with 
instruments, and in some cases an inaccurate representation entirely. 
Consider ‘extended technique’, i.e. the playing of an instrument in a 
manner that differs from its design. This is a long standing and 
common practice in many forms of music making, e.g. "col legno" 
(playing a stringed instrument with the wood of the bow rather than 
the hair), which dates at least back to the 17th century [4]. The idea 
that the instrument-as-device should be assessed by how readily it 
supports its intended design function is also challenged by the notion 
of ‘instrument resistance’, by which the effortful-ness of playing an 
instrument may be a source of creativity and animat ion of 
performance. Simon Waters describes the oddities of early flute 
designs and associated playing challenges, but argues that “it is 
precisely the difficulties, the resistances, … which give the repertoire 
its character and ‘meaning’.” [34]. Easy execution of predetermined 
functions is an inappropriate description for either of these examples. 
 A second and related limitation of the instrument-as-device framing 
is the implicit independence of function from the history of its form 
and context of engagement. A device should support a user in carrying 
out a task and the history of how it arrived at its current configuration 
to do so is far less important than whether it performs the relevant task-
supporting functions; it either does the job or it doesn’t. Moreover, the 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
405
success or failure of a device to perform a function generally does not 
depend on the socio-cultural context in which it is used. In most cases, 
one should probably not use an angular saw in a public library but 
doing so does not mean that the saw itself is broken. In the case of a 
musical instrument, the history of selection processes that have shaped 
the current instantiation (including intentional but also implicit, 
distributed design ‘choices’) can have important consequences for 
what it ‘does’ and ‘means’ for those who play it. Likewise, the 
functional behaviours of a musical instrument and the socio-cultural 
context in which it is played are far more entangled than the concept 
‘device’ would typically imply. An illustration is the co-constitutive 
relationship between the saxophone and Jazz music making. Adolphe 
Sax certainly did not foresee John Coltrane's use of multiphonics and 
overtone playing which recast "instrumental deficiencies" as enablers 
of new techniques that went on to be emblematic of the Jazz idiom. 
All such sax timbres would make little sense outside of the complex 
temporal-socio-cultural context of Jazz, or other forms of music 
influenced or responding to Jazz. As a result, it is now difficult to hear 
nearly any sax or sax-like timbre and avoid the connotation of Jazz, 
even while the definition of the idiom is far from stable [6].  
2.2 Musician-as-User 
 Another set of conceptual issues arise from characterising musicians 
as users of musical devices. Firstly, musicians vary in their capacities 
and histories of embodied knowledge (between each other but also 
within themselves across nested timescales of learn ing and 
experience), which alter the corresponding nature(s) of the instrument 
for them. The same guitar will offer different potentialities for an 
accomplished flamenco player than for a child picking it up for the first 
time. Indeed, the functional properties of a given instrument can only 
be meaningfully understood relative to the effective capabilities of a 
specific musician at a specific period in her musical development and 
personal history. Thus, there may be no such person that can be picked 
out as the instruments’ ‘prototypical user’. 
 A second issue with the musician- as-user approach is the 
situationally embedded nature of musical activities. What a musician 
does with the instrument is hard to make sense of if divorced from both 
the immediate and extended socio-cultural context in which she is 
acting. As in the saxophone example above, it is not just the instrument 
that relies on a musical cultural tradition to have meaning, but also the 
actions of the player. This is the case even when bending or breaking 
musical cultural norms, as such transgressions are only legible within 
a given musical context. The idea of a musician ‘using’ a ‘device’ does 
not inherently accommodate the bidirectional influence of musicians 
with their musical and interpersonal environments, which shape and 
guide the interactions between musician and instrument beyond what 
can be captured by functional descriptions of either alone.   In fact, 
there are many instances in which optimal functional usability is not 
even a desirable characteristic of a musical instru ment. Musical 
performances in which an instrument facilitated successful execution 
of the performer’s task with minimal effort might be evaluated as 
‘stale’, ‘clinical’ or ‘boring’. Indeed, some musicians may actively try 
to counteract the optimal functioning of the instrument. In such cases, 
should we say the musician has used the device incorrectly? 
2.3 Evaluation of User Devices 
 The concept of evaluation would seem to flow straightforwardly 
from the ideas of a device and a user. You have a prototypical user 
who needs to accomplish some task, a device designed to support 
achievement of this task, and you should evaluate whether the device 
does in fact support an exemplar user in doing this. If it does, it’s good 
to go; if it doesn’t, more work on the part of the designer is required. 
Other secondary qualities like ‘ease-of-use’ or ‘user preference’ might 
also be measured towards evaluating a device or comparing different 
devices that share functional purposes. 
 In the context of new musical instruments, the role and purpose of 
evaluation is complicated by the issues identified above. Instruments 
can do and mean many different things that are not easily delimited by 
a predetermined functional teleology, and this is affected by their 
evolution among other instruments and musical practices. Musicians 
are too varying to allow for the characterisation of a prototypical user, 
and the messy bi-directional influences between musicians and their 
socio-culturally situated contexts disrupts any neat mappings between 
musicians’ intentions and instrumental functions. Indeed, it becomes 
clear that it is not possible to come up with a ‘canonical’ evaluation of 
a given new musical instrument given the various ways that these 
things interact across different timescales and situations. Some of the 
complications inherent in evaluating digital musical instruments  have 
already been discussed by others [2,16,18,19]. Our concern here is to 
expand our conceptual ontology for considering what makes a good 
musical instrument by incorporating insights from d ifferent-but-
interrelated fields of enquiry: ecological psycholo gy, enactive 
philosophy of cognitive sciences, and phenomenology of skill. 
3. BACKGROUND AND RELEVANT 
CONCEPTS FROM ECOLOGICAL 
PSYCHOLOGY AND NEIGHBOURING 
FIELDS 
One school of thought which informs our approach to studying new 
musical instruments is ecological psychology [5,10,12]. There is not 
sufficient scope to provide a full overview here, but two key premises 
of ecological psychology for current purposes are: the reciprocity of 
organism and environment; and the corresponding tight coupling 
between perception and action.    
 The first key premise is rooted in the recognition that the language 
of physical sciences is not the only scientific means of describing state-
of-affairs; an equally valid description of the world can be given at the 
ecological scale. The language of physics is intentionally independent 
from the perspective of any particular observer – e.g. a solid, extended 
mass reflecting beams of photons. However, an ecological description 
of the same situation is specific to an organism of a particular species 
(hereafter ‘agent’) – e.g. a supportive surface which structures the 
ambient light array sufficiently to be perceived as such by an animal 
of a certain weight with a visual system. This entails a shift from 
thinking of a physical universe in scale-free units, to an environment 
specific to a species with its embodied morphology and evolutionary 
history. The latter is no less ‘objective’ than the  former, but it 
necessarily includes a perspective. The physical extension of liquid 
shows up differently in the environment of a water boatman insect than 
it does in the environment of a collie dog. Thus, the reciprocity of agent 
and environment – the description of one entails the description of the 
other and each is specific to the other. Because of this, ecological 
psychologists consider the agent-environment system the appropriate 
target of psychological scientific study, rather than carving them apart 
and dissecting one without reference to the other. 
 The second key premise is the rejection of a passive serial process 
from sensation (via thought) to motor response as explaining animal 
and human behaviours. Ecological psychology follows in the earlier 
steps of Dewey [8] in rejecting this picture in favour of one which 
starts with an active, seeking agent as the precursor to perception. As 
Dewey argued, identifying when the process of perceiving begins and 
ends is not unproblematic: did the child perceive the flame when she 
recoiled her hand, when she reached out to touch it prior to that, when 
she saw the bright light before then, when she turned her head and eyes 
before that? In accepting this temporal extension of perception, one 
sees that perceiving and moving are (in most living creatures) part of 
an ongoing, overlapping looping function. For example, stepping 
forward shifts our optical field outwards from the point of heading, 
which provides information about the direction and rate of walking, 
which in turn can guide subsequent stepping actions. In walking to a 
distal target, the gap to close may be perceived in terms of the steps 
required to cover it rather than body-scale-free dimensions (such as 
metres). These points lead to the observation that our senses and motor 
behaviours need to be viewed as dynamic systems which overlap in 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
406
their anatomical and functional components [11,23]. For example, the 
visual system comprises the eyes, connected to the brain, in a moving 
head on a locomotory body. 
 A consequence of combining these premises is the concept of 
‘affordance’, introduced by James Gibson to account for what it is that 
populates the environments of active perceiving agents. A subset of 
the physical description of the world can be re-described in terms 
meaningful to a particular agent with its specific embodied form and 
action capabilities. For example, the water described above may be a 
pathway to cross for the water boatman insect or a puddle to splash in 
for the collie dog. The same physical entity affords supported 
locomotion for one agent but ‘splash-ability’ for the other. Because 
organisms are fundamentally active perceivers and because it is 
through the looping function of perception and action that organisms 
are in contact with the world, it is the affordances of the environment 
(including ‘tools’ in the broadest sense) that are primarily perceived. 
The cup is not perceived primarily in abstract spatial dimensions (e.g. 
centimetres or inches). Rather, it is perceived primarily as graspable, 
liftable, drinkable-from, and so on. Moreover, these properties are only 
perceivable to creatures with visual systems attached to arms with 
hands at the end including opposable thumbs, pressu re sensitive 
organs in the finger pads, and so on. Affordances are properties of the 
world that can only be picked out relative to agents with corresponding 
embodied capacities to act on them (sometimes called ‘effectivities’ 
[30]). A cup placed too close to the edge of a table and toppling may 
be perceived as catchable only to someone with the capacity to quickly 
close the spatio-temporal gap between their open ha nd and the 
toppling cup. Among members of the same species, some agents will 
have access to and be capable of acting upon more (or a different set) 
of affordances than others, as a function of their skilful abilities. 
 The relationship between individual action capabil ities and 
affordances led Baggs & Chemero [1] to note that Gibson’s 
conception of the environment could usefully be further subdivided 
into the habitats of species, and the Umwelts (from von Uexkull, [32]) 
of individuals. The habitat consists of affordances that a typical 
member of a species would be capable of interacting  with (e.g. 
graspable objects, walkable distances, etc.), whereas the umwelt 
consists of the affordances specific to the capacities of a particular 
individual, their history of dispositions and skills (e.g. the kit and two 
sticks on a stage for an experienced drummer). The Umwelt concept 
thus allows for understanding the personal perspective/filtering of the 
available affordances for/by a specific agent. The discussion of the 
distinction between habitat and umwelt represents an effort by Baggs 
and Chemero to resolve a tension between ecological psychology and 
the separate-but-related approach to agents and their activities in their 
environments of enactivism.  
 Enactivism shares ecological psychology ’s emphasis on the 
processes of active sensing agents coupled to their environments (e.g. 
[31]). Where it differs is its greater emphases on co-creation of agents 
and their environments, the phenomenology of meaning as emerging 
from sensorimotor engagement with the world, and the constitutive 
roles that interactions between different agents play in forming minds 
and shared meaning. Agents and environments are taken as not  
merely reciprocal (i.e. causally related to each other), but as co-
constituting (i.e. mutually forming each other). Meaning is neither 
inherent in the objects and structures in the world, nor imposed by 
agents through representing the world, but rather i s constructed 
through the bidirectional interactions of agents wi th their 
environments. Enactivism also emphasises the intensely interpersonal 
nature of our experiences and behaviours. The conce pt of 
‘participatory sense-making’ [7] has been introduced into enactivist 
discourse to explain the highly inter-subjective nature of how we act, 
how and what we learn, and the complex of socio-cultural interactions 
that shape even our seemingly ‘rudimentary’ behaviours. 
 At the interface between ecological psychology and enactivism, 
taking inspiration from the phenomenological works of Merleau-
Ponty and Hubert Dreyfus, are a number of researchers  who aim to 
elucidate the ways that humans spontaneously and (m ostly) 
successfully navigate their complex physical/social /cultural 
environments (e.g. [26]). In a basketball game, the player holding the 
ball tunes into the subset of all possible actions which are legal within 
the rules of the game. An experienced driver can hold a conversation 
about politics while simultaneously steering the vehicle through city 
streets. These examples show that coordinating actions in relation to 
the affordances of the environment entails selecting out of the multiple 
available opportunities those that achieve our practical and social aims, 
often simultaneously [24]. Moreover, this skilful engagement often 
occurs ‘prereflectively’ [25], i.e. without first requiring conscious 
deliberation about how best to act. Indeed, the fit between our actions 
and the socio-cultural environment is not only a re sult of skilful 
behaviour, but conversely the socio-cultural environment is a field of 
forces which shapes the development of skilful behavior itself [24]. 
What we choose to do and what we can do is largely determined by 
what we have learned to do, which in turn is shaped and filtered by 
what we have observed can be done and is typically allowed (in 
different types of socio-cultural settings). This highlights the bi-
directional influences of processes which might be intuitively analysed 
at the level of perception-action and those which might seem to be 
‘purely’ socio-cultural. The targets of different modes of analysis 
interact with and influence each other in complex ways. 
4. PROCESSES, ECOLOGIES AND 
SPECIFICITIES 
We now revisit the problems posed by the question of what makes a 
good musical instrument with an alternative conceptual arsenal to that 
provided by traditional HCI. 
4.1 Processes rather than Devices 
To avoid the issues associated with treating musical instruments 
as devices, we should jettison the idea of an instrument as an 
essentialised singular thing, but rather think of it as a 
constellation of processes (affordances) which may be shared 
with other instruments, and which may change over time. The 
instrument as bundle of affordances accommodates the idea that 
the instrument may mean different things to different musicians 
(as a function of their individual effectivities and developmental 
histories). As an example from NIME, in discussing her 
experiences from playing the Hyper-Flute over many years, 
Palacio-Quintin [20] describes how some additions to the 
functional processes of the instrument through motion-sensor-to-
sound mappings required extensive time and learning to 
effectively control in performance. That is, the development of 
corresponding effectivities was required to act upon the new 
affordances of the instrument. Moreover, affordances can 
interact with and constrain each other as a function of the 
coordination required to act upon them concurrently. What the 
instrument affords is not a linear sum of its sonic capacities. 
 Our approach can also side-step the implied functional 
teleology of the device concept. A designer may (attempt to) 
implement certain affordances to facilitate specific task aims, but 
the affordance concept by itself does not require that this (ever) 
be the case. A tree stump can afford sitting for a human, jumping 
onto for a squirrel, and hiding behind for a mouse - whether it 
was designed to support all these activities for each of these 
agents is nonsensical. In a musical context, the prepared piano 
shows how the affordances of an instrument are not 
predetermined by the designer [22]. Placing a heavy object on 
the strings may change the key-able affordances of pitched 
sounds to juddering percussive ones, while getting under the lid 
unwraps affordances not available being sat at the keyboard. 
These dispositional properties were features of the piano prior to 
their discovery but were not part of the piano’s design. 
 In addition to comprising a conglomerate of dispositional 
processes (affordances), the instrument is also a part of a network 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
407
of external processes, including musicians’ development and 
learning, style formation and evolution, cultural creation and 
history. Taking a snapshot of these things may serve some 
practical purposes for the sake of analysis or reflection, but it 
would be a mistake to assume in so doing that these have been 
frozen in time or that they ever could be.  An example is the 
evolutionary history of keyboard instruments, starting with the 
hydraulic organ from Greek antiquity, then onwards (and 
outwards) to the harpsichord, carillon, pianoforte, Hammond 
organ, Moog synthesizer, and so on [4]. The Moog did not 
evolve directly from the Hammond, but like humans and 
chimpanzees, they share common ancestors. An account of the 
history of an instrument and selective processes operating on its 
design can be informative for understanding its current place in 
specific musical ecologies. 
4.2 Ecologies rather than Users 
If the above arguments that musical instruments are better 
thought of in terms of processes hold, it follows that for a given 
musical instrument there is no prototypical ‘user’. The ecological 
and enactive approaches emphasise the reciprocity between 
agent and environment and so the multiplicities of instrumental 
processes have counterparts in multiple (actual or potential) 
agential effectivities and skillful behaviours. This is perhaps the 
most straightforward sense of ecology: a system comprising an 
agent and environment. In this case, between a particular 
musician and their individual capacities to engage and interact 
with a given instrument (i.e. the constellation of affordances it 
instantiates). To use the example from the previous subsection, 
the ecology formed by Palacio-Quintin and the Hyper-Flute is 
different from one formed by an inexperienced flautist and the 
same instrument. 
 A broader sense of ecology comes from recognising that no 
agent is an island, but rather a member of a community of agents 
and that community shapes the capacities and dispositions of the 
agent (as well as that of the instrument). Again, Simon Waters 
[33] illustrates this idea nicely:  
 “Although the modern Boehm clarinet is ‘designed’ as an 
equal temperament device, this cultural expectation is carried as 
much in the performer’s body as in the acoustic system of the 
physical object, and in the hands of a South Indian musician the 
same device affords entirely idiomatic delivery of a music which 
is subject to entirely different principles (of pitch subdivision and 
much else).” 
 All these factors may need to be considered in understanding 
the meaning and practical value that a given instrument has for a 
specific musician in a specific situation. 
4.3 Specificities Determine Evaluations 
A consequence of the above arguments is that the idea of 
evaluating instruments as user devices using some generalised 
methodology becomes untenable. As has already been discussed 
by [19], there are multiple possible stakeholders for a new 
musical instrument with different possible evaluative concerns 
(e.g. performer, audience, etc.), and different qualitative 
dimensions across which evaluative judgments might be mapped 
(e.g. robustness, playability, …). If one takes seriously the 
complex multi-way interactions between the instrument’s 
teeming affordances, the musician’s repertoire of effective 
actions to engage these, her skill in coordinating these actio ns 
within the unfolding musical situation, the fit or tension between 
all these and the broader socio-cultural-historical setting, then 
the aim to perform any conclusive generalisable evaluation 
seems fanciful. What instead should the role and justification for 
any evaluation be? 
 Here we think that the concept of specificities can play an 
important role in drawing attention to the specific configurations 
of instrument, musician- as-agent, and ecological contexts that 
could differentially be described, measured and/or analysed. In 
introducing the term ‘specificities’ into this discussion, we draw 
from how the term is used in different technical contexts. In 
Biology, it is defined as “the narrowness of the range of 
substances with which an antibody or other agent acts or is 
effective”, while its use in medicine is “the extent to which a 
diagnostic test is specific for a particular condition, trait, etc.” 
[35]. These might be translated for present purposes as ‘the 
effective components of the musician-instrument system relative 
to the relevant musical activities and contexts of interest’. 
 In a sense, the term ‘specificities’ combines the preceding 
concepts of processes and ecologies. An instrument can be 
reconsidered as a multitude of dispositional processes, a subset 
of which are accessible to a musician with the reciprocal 
effective capabilities (the instrument’s  affordances for that 
musician). The instrument itself is embedded in processes of 
design, selection, alteration and repurposing, which affect its 
apparent and latent behaviours. The musician+instrument form 
an interactive system with a history, and this system is enmeshed 
in a broader network of other musicians, instruments, perceivers, 
actors, and their histories. At each stage of this story, different 
links and directional effects might be observed and interrogated 
to suit different aims. But any complex system is not reducible 
to its parts and the tightrope between precise analysis and 
distorted representation is ever present. This is why we propose 
that it is important to identify and describe the specificities of 
parts and processes involved at multiple levels. 
 A consequence is that any evaluative method must be 
comparably specific, as must the purpose of the evaluation. This 
does not entail that evaluation is useless for critical analysis, or 
to extend understanding. Rather, for evaluation to be effective it 
must be considered what processes and their aspects are being 
interrogated, what features of the relevant ecologies are likely to 
be playing an effective role, and how will the outcomes of such 
evaluations feed back into the processes and ecologies of the 
instrument subsequently. In some cases, a comparatively 
reductive methodology may align with these considerations 
while minimally distorting the phenomena of interest. For 
example, latency of computational processes in a digital musical 
instrument can affect perception and playability of the 
instrument, and can be quantitatively measured and diagnosed 
with relative precision [17]. However, it is worth noting that the 
effects latency can have on musicians’ performance or audience 
perception is not necessarily consistent across different musical 
styles, contexts and instruments, so even this reductive 
diagnostic should consider these specificities in evaluation. In 
other cases, reductive or context-independent analyses may not 
be possible, and so either different methodological approaches 
will be more appropriate, or indeed the goal of evaluation may 
need to be replaced with a different aim, such as discovery. 
5. VODHRÁN: HISTORY AND MULTIPLE 
SPECIFICITIES OF AN INSTRUMENT-IN-
PROGRESS 
In the spirit of the approach outlined above, we now describe the 
ongoing developmental process of a musical instrument known 
as Vodhrán in terms of antecedent research activities and 
interdisciplinary motivations that led to its creation, as well as 
the situated context in which it is currently performed and 
studied. This description is not presented to validate our 
approach, but as an example of how the approach has shaped the 
design of an ongoing project. We conclude by pointing toward 
our aspirations for how this instrument could open up future 
artistic and scientific research processes that aim to (re)shape our 
understandings of what makes a good musical instrument. 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
408
5.1 Origin Story 
Vodhrán was born from dialogue between researchers involved 
in two previous interdisciplinary research projects taking place 
at the Sonic Arts Research Centre (SARC). One project brought 
together the fields of engineering, instrument design and music 
performance to investigate physical modelling with real-time 
parametric tunability to create complex musical interactions. The 
other was developed by researchers in psychology and music to 
study movement sonification in motor skill learning. We give a 
brief account of each project before discussing their convergence 
from which Vodhrán developed. 
 The first project was motivated by a desire to create virtual-
acoustic instruments that have the sonic material familiarity of 
acoustic instruments, while also allowing for real-time 
transformations and reconfigurations of the Newtonian 
properties of the instrument in ways not possible outside of the 
digital domain. For example, imagine the sound of a violin being 
played where the stiffness of the bridge gradually decreases over 
time while the material of the soundboard slowly phases between 
maple wood and stainless steel. The instrument may still sound 
“violin-like” although perhaps having an uncanny quality. The 
designed instrument known as VASBPI was based on a string-
bridge plate model excited by a string-board interface with 32 
adjustable parameters controlled by individual knobs. A study of 
how experienced musicians interacted with the parameters of the 
instrument revealed two (non-exclusive) modes of engagement: 
1. exploratory: actively testing out the affordances of the 
instrument in relation to each musician’s apparent 
capabilities and curiosities; 
2. performatory: deployment of specific musician-instrument 
configurations including techniques, gestures, and longer-
scale compositional and/or improvisatory strategies [28]. 
 The musicians moved between exploratory and performatory 
modes of engagement during extended periods of interaction 
with previously unfamiliar musical instruments, revealing a 
process of discovery, expectation and confirmation (or 
otherwise), leading to further ‘exploratory information seeking’. 
The instrument was also played and further developed “in the 
wild” through an artistic research project which incorpor ated 
VASBPI into professional improvised music contexts [27]. The 
project identified areas for further research, including improving 
the method of interaction for specific parameters of the model 
(i.e. damping and excitation position), and engaging more deeply 
with how experienced and novice musicians learn to play 
complex physical modeling-based instruments. From the current 
approach, this project highlights how the affordances of the 
instrument are interactive processes of the musician-instrument 
system, and that musicians’ selected affordances transform with 
time and the context of the musical activity. 
 The other antecedent research project was about movement 
sonification as augmented feedback for motor skill acquisition. 
Experiments measured participants learning a bimanual 
coordination task with or without self-generated feedback in the 
form of sounds triggered or modulated by participants’ 
movements [9]. Augmented feedback effectively set up modified 
perceptual-motor task systems depending on the sonification 
condition, which did or did not enhance motor learning as a 
function of the characteristics of these systems. This can be 
interpreted as demonstrating that learning of instrumental actions 
or techniques (effectivities) can be driven by the auditory effects 
of those actions (affordances). Hence, the acoustic ‘materials’ 
and how actions excite/modulate them shapes acquisition of 
instrumental motor coordination, which in turn establishes the 
range and types of affordances available to the learner for 
subsequent performance. The design of an instrument cannot 
necessarily dictate the process of learning to become a coupled 
musician-instrument system, but it may constrain the outcomes 
of training, and trajectories through practice towards those 
outcomes. 
 Discussions between researchers on these projects led to the 
question at the start of this paper: ‘what makes a good musical 
instrument?’ For reasons discussed above, attempts at general 
answers based on isolating the instrument from the different 
systems it is embedded in (musicians, cultures, histories) quickly 
became unsatisfactory. This motivated us to develop a new 
proto-instrument in which the aim is not to achieve optimal 
design for passing a generalised evaluation, but rather to 
systematically probe the effects that different design choices 
may or may not have for different specificities. That is, what 
matters for different musicians and contexts. 
5.2 Current Activities 
The Vodhrán in its current form was developed to allow control 
over the specifications of a plate-based physical model synthesis, 
which is excited and damped by interaction with a two-
dimensional pressure sensor embedded in a wooden box. (For 
technical details, see [21]). As an object, it affords tapping, 
hitting, pressing and other actions, while the physical model 
synthesis engine further defines the musical instrumental 
affordances. Moreover, the digital interface allows measurement 
of the musicians’ interactions with the proto-instrument, and 
how these vary within individuals across time and contexts, and 
between different musicians. 
 Two separate empirical studies are currently underway with 
the Vodhrán, with different process and ecology specificities. 
Study 1 engages experienced musicians with different 
instrumental and performance backgrounds to explore versions 
of the proto-instrument which vary in the way that sound is 
controlled, specifically the mapping between pressure and 
damping of the modelled plate, and the mechano-acoustic 
complexity of the physical model synthesis (e.g. non-linear plate 
coupling vs a linear plate). Participants are asked to explore the 
different versions of the proto-instrument, and to compose and 
perform short pieces with them. Mixed Methods analyses 
(quantitative and qualitative data) are being carried out to 
understand the effects of different design configurations on the 
musicians’ behaviours and experiences, how these may interact 
with the different musical activities they are asked to engage in, 
and any connections made with broader contextual, historical or 
stylistic concerns. Study 2 looks at the effects of different 
configurations for novices practicing a predefined exercise on 
the Vodhrán, akin to a musician-in-training working to pin down 
a fundamental instrumental technique. Any effects of variations 
on outcomes and performance changes over time will inform us 
about the de novo ‘learnability’ of the proto-instrument and how 
learners may try to navigate the structure of its affordances.  
 These two studies indicate the range of specificities that this 
developing instrument allows us to interrogate. No evaluation of 
‘better’ or ‘worse’ configurations is being sought in either study. 
Rather we intend to learn which (if any) of the systematic 
variations to Vodhrán have meaningful effects for our 
participants in the musical situations we have contrived, and in 
what ways these might relate to the different specificities 
involved. Although the specificities we vary in these studies are 
more clearly focussed on the processes (affordances) instantiated 
by the proto-instrument, and broad differences on the musician 
side of the musician-instrument ecosystems, other aspects of 
these concepts may also be considered. In terms of socio-cultural 
ecologies, characteristics of the environments in which 
musicians in studies 1 and 2 might be anticipated to play the 
instrument are completely distinct. Experienced musicians might 
view the instrument in terms of how it would play in a 
performance setting with fellow musicians and discerning 
audiences, whereas for the novices in study 2, the potential 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
409
ecology of performance may be undefined or possibly pedagogic 
in character. In terms of the instrument as embedded in a 
temporally extended history of evolutionary processes, this is a 
central component of this project. Subsequent design iterations 
will reflect the history of decisions and lessons that precede and 
flow from these studies. In comparing outcomes of both studies, 
our approach can also show how these different contexts can 
inform and reshape each other and how these specificities can 
interact in wider ecologies of musical practice. 
5.3 Future Trajectories 
The current project is intended to inaugurate a longer term inter-
disciplinary research programme at SARC, investigating design, 
performance, learning and evolution of new musical instruments 
from the conceptual framework outlined here. Ongoing and 
future research activities include (but are not limited to): 
• Exploring boundaries of the instrument in terms of 
physical model parameters and breaking points for 
different musical activities (and possible new stable 
configurations which might emerge from these); 
• Measuring longer term learning and changes with 
experience of playing the instrument among musicians 
with differing levels of pre-existing skill or expertise; 
• Critical reflection by musicians preparing for and playing 
the instrument in different performance settings, and the 
relationships between the properties of the instrument and 
the characteristics of the musical contexts. 
 These goals are not fixed to the Vodhr án. Rather, it represents 
a first step of our group to apply and test some of the concepts 
discussed, which we hope will generate useful knowledge for 
stakeholders in the different communities of interest. 
 
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work was in part funded by an institutional Interdisciplinary 
Pump-Prime project grant from Queen’s University Belfast.  
 
7. REFERENCES 
[1] E. Baggs and A. Chemero. The third sense of 
environment. In Perception as Information Detection: 
New York: Routledge, 5–20. 2019 
[2] J. Barbosa, J. Malloch, M. Wanderley, and S. Huot. 
What does “‘Evaluation’” mean for the NIME 
community? Proc. NIME '15, 156–161. 2015 
[3] J. Bowers and P. Archer. Not hyper, not meta, not cyber 
but infra-instruments. Proc. NIME '05, 5–10. 2005 
[4] M. Campbell, C. Greated, and A. Myers, Musical 
Instruments. Oxford University Press. 2004 
[5] A. Chemero. Radical Embodied Cognitive Science. MIT 
Press. 2009 
[6] S. Cottrell. The Saxophone. Yale University Press. 2013 
[7] H. De Jaegher and E. Di Paolo. Participatory sense-
making. Phenom Cogn Sci, 6, 485–507. 2007 
[8] J. Dewey. 1896. The reflex arc concept in psychology. 
Psychol Rev, 3, 357–370. 1896 
[9] J. Dyer, P. Stapleton, and M. Rodger. Advantages of 
melodic over rhythmic movement sonification in 
bimanual motor skill learning. Exp brain res 235, 3129–
3140. 2017 
[10] E . Gibson and A. Pick. An Ecological Approach to 
Perceptual Learning and Development. Oxford 
University Press. 2000 
[11] J . Gibson. The Senses Considered as Perceptual 
Systems. Houghton Mifflin, Boston, MA. 1966 
[12] J. Gibson, The ecological approach to visual perception. 
Houghton Mifflin, Boston, MA. 1979 
[13] M . Gurevich and J. Treviño. Expression and Its 
Discontents: Toward an Ecology of Musical Creation. 
Proc NIME '07, 106-111. 2007 
[14] A. Hazzard, C. Greenhalgh, M. Kallionpaa, S. Benford, 
A. Veinberg, Z. Kanga, and A. McPherson. Failing with 
Style: Designing for Aesthetic Failure in Interactive 
Performance. Proc. CHI 2019. 1–14. 2019  
[15] A. Marquez-Borbon. Perceptual Learning and the 
Emergence of Performer-Instrument Interactions with 
Digital Music Systems. Proc. A Body of Knowledge - 
Embodied Cognition and the Arts Conference. 2016 
[16] A. Marquez-Borbon and J. Avila. The Problem of DMI 
Adoption and Longevity: Envisioning a NIME 
Performance Pedagogy. Proc. NIME '18. 190-194. 2018 
[17] A . McPherson, R. Jack, and G. Moro. Action-Sound 
Latency: Are Our Tools Fast Enough? Proc. NIME 2016 
[18] F. Morreale and A . McPherson. Design for Longevity: 
Ongoing Use of Instruments from NIME 2010-14. Proc. 
NIME '17, 192-197. 2017 
[19] S. O’Modhrain. A Framework for the Evaluation of 
Digital Musical Instruments. Comp Music J, 35, 28–42. 
2011  
[20] C. Palacio-Quintin. Eight Years of Practice on the 
Hyper-Flute: Technological and Musical Perspectives. 
Proc. NIME '08, 293-298. 2008 
[21] L. Pardue, M. Ortiz, M. van Walstijn, P. Stapleton and 
M. Rodger. Vodhrán: collaborative design for evolving a 
physical model and interface into a proto-instrument. 
Proc. NIME 2020. 
[22] A. Parkinson. Embodied Listening, Affordances and 
Performing with Computers. Proc. ICMC '13, 162–168. 
2013  
[23] E. Reed. An Outline of a Theory of Action Systems. J 
Motor Behav 14, 98–134. 1982 
[24] E. Reed. The Intention to Use a Specific Affordance: A 
Conceptual Framework for Psychology. In Development 
in Context. Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale, N.J. 1993 
[25] E. Rietveld. Situated Normativity: The Normative 
Aspect of Embodied Cognition in Unreflective Action. 
Mind, 117, 973–1001. 2008 
[26] E. Rietveld and J. Kiverstein. 2014. A Rich Landscape 
of Affordances. Ecol Psychol, 26, 325–352. 2014 
[27] P. Stapleton and A. Melbye. VASPI Performance. NIME 
2017 
[28] P. Stapleton, M. van Walstijn, and S. Mehes. Co-Tuning 
Virtual-Acoustic Performance Ecosystems: observations 
on the development of skill and style in the study of 
musician-instrument relationships. NIME '18. 2018 
[29] L . Suchman. Plans and Situated Actions. Cambridge 
University Press. 1987 
[30] M. Turvey. Affordances and Prospective Control: An 
Outline of the Ontology. Ecol Psychol, 4, 173–187. 1992 
[31] F . Varela, E. Rosch, and E. Thompson. The Embodied 
Mind: MIT Press. 1991 
[32] J. Von Uexküll. A stroll through the worlds of animals 
and men: A picture book of invisible worlds. Semiotica 
89, 319–391. 1992 
[33] S. Waters, Performance Ecosystems: Ecological 
approaches to musical interaction. Proc. EMS: 
Electroacoustic Music Studies Network '07, 2007 
[34] S.Waters. Touching at a Distance: Resistance, Tactility, 
Proxemics and the Development of a Hybrid 
Virtual/Physical Performance System. Contemp Music 
Rev, 32, 119–134. 2013 
[35] Specificity. Lexico. Retrieved from 
https://www.lexico.com/en/definition/specificity 
 
 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
410