A Dimension Space for Evaluating Collaborative Musical
Performance Systems
Ian Hattwick
Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Music
Media and Technology
Input Devices and Music Interaction Laboratory
McGill University
Montreal, QC, Canada
ian.hattwick@mail.mcgill.ca
Marcelo M. Wanderley
Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Music
Media and Technology
Input Devices and Music Interaction Laboratory
McGill University
Montreal, QC, Canada
marcelo.wanderley@mcgill.ca
ABSTRACT
The conﬁgurability and networking abilities of digital musi-
cal instruments increases the possibilities for collaboration
in musical performances. Computer music ensembles such
as laptop orchestras are becoming increasingly common and
provide laboratories for the exploration of these possibil-
ities. However, much of the literature regarding the cre-
ation of DMIs has been focused on individual expressivity,
and their potential for collaborative performance has been
under-utilized. This paper makes the case for the beneﬁts
of an approach to digital musical instrument design that
begins with their collaborative potential, examines several
frameworks and sets of principles for the creation of digital
musical instruments, and proposes a dimension space repre-
sentation of collaborative approaches which can be used to
evaluate and guide future DMI creation. Several examples
of DMIs and compositions are then evaluated and discussed
in the context of this dimension space.
Keywords
dimension space, collaborative, digital musical instrument,
dmi, digital music ensemble, dme
1. INTRODUCTION
Much research has been conducted into the creation of dig-
ital musical instruments, deﬁned by Miranda and Wander-
ley as consisting of an input device and a sound generation
device related to each other with mapping strategies [13].
The design goals for a DMI generally revolve around the en-
abling of personal expressivity [15] [18]. Designs which fo-
cuses on collaborative potential present a diﬀerent approach
to DMIs, one which is orthogonal to personal expressivity
and can contribute substantially to an instrument’s musical
potential.
A digital music ensemble (DME) can be described as an
ensemble whose members all perform with DMIs. This in-
strumentation allows for the utilization of the capabilities
of DMIs to be reconﬁgured and networked. In Miranda and
Wanderley’s description above, both mapping and sound
synthesis are software conﬁgurable. The use of a laptop
computer as the primary input device, typically in lap-
top orchestras, emphasizes that custom hardware is by no
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’12,May 21 – 23, 2012, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
means necessary for the creation of new DMIs [19]. These
two qualities of networkability and reconﬁgurability allow
DMEs to perform research into approaches to collaborative
performance.
1.1 Collaboration
Mirriam-Webster deﬁnes collaborate as“to work jointly with
others or together especially in an intellectual endeavor”
[14]. Anytime musicians perform together they are said to
be collaborating; in a musical context we could say that a
meaningful performance is the endeavor. In every collab-
orative performance there is some kind of structure to the
roles of the musicians, whether implicit or explicit. It is very
common for ensembles to be divided in terms of frequency
range, as in a string quartet. Ensemble performers are often
given speciﬁc roles such as accompanist and soloist, speciﬁc
rhythmic patterns in African and Latin-American ensem-
bles, and are often grouped into sections of similar instru-
ments.
These divisions of ensemble are more than incidental, and
in fact can be seen as having played an important part in
the development of the instruments involved. When de-
signing instruments for a digital music ensemble, the con-
sideration of musical role and sonic space for instruments is
highly important. Dan Trueman notes that in a DME it is
preferable for instruments “to be designed from the outset
knowing that they will be played simultaneously with many
other instruments” [19]. Instruments designed to be played
by themselves will tend to dominate in terms of frequency
spectrum and musical activity, and will ignore the poten-
tial of sharing control of important parameters or privileg-
ing physical interaction with other musicians such that the
experience of playing the instrument is substantially dimin-
ished without the participation of others. Without allowing
for these possibilities, the collaborative potential of DMIs
is diminished. It should be noted that
It should be noted that many DMIs have been used in
ensemble performance without being networked or recon-
ﬁgured, and have utilized traditional approaches to collab-
oration [9][3]. The approach advocated in this paper are
entirely in addition to pre-existing approaches to collabora-
tive music-making.
2. INSTRUMENT AS COMPOSITION
It is frequently the case within a DME that musicians will
use diﬀerent software instruments or patches in order to
perform diﬀerent compositions. This is a striking diﬀerence
from non-electronic instruments, and allows for the sculpt-
ing of musical roles within an ensemble by the composer as
well as the instrument designer. In The Hub, “the content
of the work is being invented by the composers/performers”
[10]; one of the Princeton Laptop Orchestra’s goals is to
“develop a performance practice where instrument building
itself plays a central role” [19]. Tanaka stresses the need for
idiomatic composition for DMIs [18]; this applies equally to
composing for collaborative instruments.
However, the concept of instrument as composition comes
into conﬂict with one of the central goals of DMI design: en-
abling expert performance. Dobrian et al. point out that
“[e]xperimental performances by inexperienced musicians or
by performers who have incompletely mastered a new inter-
face . . . when done on the concert stage are subject to
rigorous musical and aesthetic critique” [8], with the impli-
cation that this critique will not be positive. One solution
to this is to encourage performers to spend the time on a
particular instrument in order to gain this mastery. In The
Digital Orchestra Project at McGill University, which had
the goal of developing “DMIs with musical potential compa-
rable to that of existing acoustic musical instruments”, one
performer was given “approximately a year to develop ex-
pertise on the instrument before performing in concert” [9].
Approaches such as Trueman’s BoSSa [20] embody Perry
Cook’s principle “leveraging expert technique is smart” [6].
The central issue of performative attention, or the cog-
nitive bandwidth of the performer, comes into play here.
A solo performer has multiple needs competing for their
attention. An inexpert performer will often need to place
focusing on their instrument over issues of musicality. In an
ensemble situation they need to be responsive to the musi-
cal contributions of the other performers, and aware of their
role in the overall texture. One consequence is that in an
ensemble setting performers will have even less ability to
perform expertly on a new instrument. A positive view is
that while instruments designed for collaboration may be
technically simpler, and potentially less personally expres-
sive, they may encourage a quality of interaction between
performers which highlights the creation and expression of
relationships; which may help in the creation of a meaning-
ful performance [17].
3. DIGITAL MUSICAL INSTRUMENT CLAS-
SIFICATIONS
Many diﬀerent design guidelines and approaches to classi-
fying DMIs have been presented. For the most part these
focus on the interaction between performer and instrument.
A few, such as Birnbaum et al.’s work on a dimension space
for musical devices [1] and Bonger’s “Interaction Theory”
[4], relate to collaborative performance through analysis of
musical installations. The conceptual framework based on
the way performers process musical information proposed
by Malloch et al. [12] is equally applicable to collaborative
instruments. In Perry Cook’s revisiting of his principles for
designing computer music controllers, he adds the principle
“More can be better! (but hard)” [7]. Paine’s Taxonomy
of Realtime Interfaces for Electronic Musical Performance
takes an approach similar to that of Hornbostel and Sachs,
and includes a category for collaborative instruments; how-
ever, only 1 out of 37 instruments surveyed fell into that
category [16].
Weinberg’s “Interconnected Musical Networks: Toward
a Theoretical Framework” presents several important con-
cepts regarding ensemble structure, balance of power, and
collaborative organization [21]. Weinberg describes the dif-
ference between large- and small-scale local systems as the
degree to which the individual contributions of the perform-
ers are discernible. While we can see how diﬃcult it is to
discern the contribution of a violinist in an orchestra versus
a string trio, in a DME this distinction is fairly arbitrary and
depends a great deal on the physical mode of performance.
What Weinberg is describing is actually the structure of the
ensemble, with homogeneity at one end and heterogeneity
at the other. Heterogeneity can be achieved by numerous
means: sequential performance of musicians; timbral and
registral distinctiveness of individual instruments; indepen-
dent rhythmic parts; contrasting performance gestures, etc.
The way in which heterogeneity is achieved is less important
than the fact itself.
The centralization of a network is also a crucially im-
portant distinction. Closely tied to this is the concept of
equality. Weinberg is correct in describing these as repre-
senting social relationships — Scot Gresham-Lancaster of
the Hub describes how the structural organization of the
Hub grew directly out of the social and political roots of
the Bay area [10]. Weinberg describes diﬀerent combina-
tions of equality and centralization in political terms — a
centralized equal network as being a democracy, centralized
unequal a monarchy, decentralized unequal as anarchy.
4. COLLABORATIVE DIMENSION SPACE
Figure 1: Collaborative Dimension Space
Similar to the dimension space proposed by Birnbaum et
al. [1] here we propose a dimension space for evaluating a
particular conﬁguration of a Digital Music Ensemble. Many
times this conﬁguration will be speciﬁc to a composition or
installation; however, it is possible for conﬁgurations to be
re-used. Note that due to the conﬁgurability of DMIs a
DME may move through diﬀerent conﬁgurations for each
composition. In order to determine a conﬁguration’s loca-
tion in the dimension space shown in Figure 1, the following
questions are asked:
4.1 Proposed Axes
4.1.1 Texture
Axis limits: Homogenous/ Heterogenous How dis-
cernable are individual parts? How individualized are per-
formance styles and instruments? As discussed above, this
axis is similar to Weinberg’s large- and small-scale networks;
it also relates to Blaine & Fels’ Player Interaction.
Figure 2: Princeton Laptop Orchestra
4.1.2 Equality
Axis limits: Equal/ UnequalIs there a conductor/leader?
Do performers’ actions take place on diﬀerent levels - Mal-
loch et al.’s Symbols/Signs/Signals? Do performers have
access to the same data? Equality and Centralization are
drawn directly from Weinberg.
4.1.3 Centralization
Axis limits: Centralized/ Decentralized Is informa-
tion shared through a central server? How important are
global parameters (tempo, form)? Do performers have ac-
cess to the same collection of data? Is there a conductor,
and if so, what role does she play?
4.1.4 Physicality
Axis limits: Fixed/ FreeHow important are visual con-
nections and physical communication/entrainment between
musicians? Are performers located in the same physical
space? This axis relates to Birnbaum et al.’s Distribution
in Space and Blaine & Fel’s Location and Level of Physi-
cality.
4.1.5 Synchrony
Axis limits: Synchronous/ SequentialIs collaboration
real-time/signal based? Is information shared in real-time?
Is interaction turn based? This axis is drawn from Wein-
berg’s Synchronous and Sequential distinction and has some
relation to Blaine & Fel’s Directed Interaction.
4.1.6 Dependence
Axis limits: Independent/ InterdependentIs a per-
former able to create sound without input from other per-
formers? Do performers share control of a musical event?
Is an instrument fulﬁlling to play by itself? This axis has
some relation to Blaine & Fel’s Directed Interaction.
5. APPLICATIONS OF THE COLLABORA-
TIVE DIMENSION SPACE
One of the uses of the Collaborative Dimension Space is to
quickly illustrate similarities between diﬀerent DME conﬁg-
urations. In Figure 2, an evaluation of two Princeton Lap-
top Orchestra compositions, the similarity of these compo-
sitions’ approaches to collaborative performance is revealed
[5]. Similarly, those axes which are not identical can be
quantitatively evaluated as being subtly diﬀerent. A ten-
dency towards a consistent approach to collaborative per-
formance is also seen in Figure 3, an evaluation of two works
in which Atau Tanaka participated [21][1]. Evaluating a
pre-existing conﬁguration serves to clarify the assumptions
made during the development of that conﬁguration. Wein-
berg recognizes that the organization of a musical network
Figure 3: Atau Tanaka
Figure 4: Physical Computing Ensemble
may be informed by a “social philosophy” [21]; if that is
the case, evaluation in the Collaborative Dimension Space
can be a ﬁrst step in understanding the assumptions within
which the conﬁguration was conceived.
Another use of the Collaborative Dimension Space is as a
reference during the design of a collaborative performance
system. In this sense, conﬁgurations which are seen to be
under-explored during the evaluation of DME conﬁgura-
tions can provide a guideline for future research. In ad-
dition, the Dimension Space can provide a focus for those
who are interested in designing collaborative systems. Fig-
ure 4 demonstrates the evaluation of two Physical Comput-
ing Ensemble compositions [11]. The Physical Computing
Ensemble is an ensemble created by the ﬁrst author as a
tool for research into collaborative performance. While the
systems used in these compositions predate the Collabora-
tive Dimension Space, they illustrate an approach to design
experimentation which is consistent with its approach.
6. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
The axes proposed here are a ﬁrst approach to a Collabo-
rative Dimension Space. While many additional axes were
considered, the goal here is to focus on the fewest number of
axes which directly contribute to the character of a collab-
orative performance. Number of performers was considered
as an axis, for example, but was rejected since its eﬀects
are reﬂected onto the other axes, particularly Texture and
Centralization. We encourage suggestions for reﬁnement of
this dimension space, but also recognize that it is diﬃcult
to argue for a deﬁnitive categorization of such a complex
topic.
One axis that needs particular reﬁnement is Physicality.
The use of networks, and in particular the increasing use of
wireless networks and interfaces, provides the possibility for
the ﬂexibility of the physical location of performers, which
can greatly aﬀect the form which collaboration takes. This
manifests itself in two ways: music performed by performers
who aren’t in the same space, and performances in which the
performers are located in the same space but whose relative
physical locations are not ﬁxed. Included on this axis are
also issues of embodied performance, a complex topic whose
eﬀects pervade musical experience.
The positioning and orientation of the axes warrant ad-
ditional research — in particular, thinking about what or-
ganization clearly presents the relevant information. While
the tendency is to think about the axes representing more
or less collaboration, or better and worse collaboration, in
reality each axis merely represents a diﬀerent quality of col-
laboration.
An additional consideration for future work is the need
for more evaluations in order to give a clearer picture of
the trends and assumptions made by composers and system
designers. The evaluations included in this paper are our
own work; their composers, designers, and performers may
evaluate these systems diﬀerently.
7. CONCLUSION
The digital music ensemble provide a laboratory which en-
ables research into the collaborative possibilities of digital
musical instruments. DMIs present a unique potential for
collaborative performance system design due to their con-
ﬁgurability and potential for networking. Frequently, these
abilities give rise to the idea of instrument design as compo-
sition. While this conﬂicts with the computer music com-
munity’s call for stable DMIs which allow for the develop-
ment of expert performance skill, it also allows for the de-
velopment of collaborative instruments whose success is less
dependent upon expert individual performance but instead
rely more upon the relationships created within a perfor-
mance.
This paper presents a Collaborative Dimension Space which
can be used to evaluate and guide the creation of perfor-
mance systems which are used in DME performance. Previ-
ous research has mostly focused on evaluation of DMIs per-
formed individually; two exceptions to this are Weinberg’s
theoretical framework for networked performances [21] and
Blaine & Fel’s descriptive approach to evaluating collabo-
rative music systems [2]. The dimension space presented
here builds upon these previous work to present six axes
which reﬂect varying qualities of collaboration. It can be
used both to evaluate DME conﬁgurations in order to un-
derstand their underlying assumptions, and as a guide for
those interested in exploring the collaborative possibilities
within a digital music ensemble.
8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was partially funded by an NSERC discovery
grant.
9. REFERENCES
[1] D. Birnbaum, R. Fiebrink, J. Malloch, and
M. Wanderley. Towards a dimension space for musical
devices. In Proceedings of the 2005 conference on New
interfaces for musical expression , pages 192–195,
Vancouver, Canada, 2005. National University of
Singapore.
[2] T. Blaine and S. Fels. Contexts of Collaborative
Musical Experiences. In Proceedings of the 2003
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression ,
volume 3, pages 129–134, Montreal, Canada, 2003.
National University of Singapore.
[3] B. Bongers. An interview with Sensorband. Computer
Music Journal, 22(1):13–24, 1998.
[4] B. Bongers. Physical Interfaces in the Electronic Arts:
Interaction Theory and Interfacing Techniques for
Real-time Performance. In M. M. Wanderley and
M. Battier, editors, Trends in Gestural Control of
Music, volume 6, pages 41–70. IRCAM - Centre
Pompidou, Paris, France, 2000.
[5] T. Coﬀey, J. Narveson, N. C. Britt, and S. Friar.
PLOrk @=> Spring 2009 Concert, 2009.
[6] P. Cook. Principles for designing computer music
controllers. In Proceedings of the 2001 conference on
New Interfaces for Musical Expression , pages 1–4,
Seattle, Washington, 2001. National University of
Singapore.
[7] P. Cook. Re-Designing Principles for Computer Music
Controllers: A Case Study of SqueezeVox Maggie. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on New
Interfaces for Musical Expression , pages 218–221,
Pittsburgh, USA, 2009. Carnegie Mellon University.
[8] C. Dobrian and D. Koppelman. The ”E” in NIME :
Musical Expression with New Computer Interfaces. In
Proceedings of the 2006 conference on New interfaces
for musical expression, pages 277–282, Paris, France,
2006. IRCAM - Centre Pompidou in collaboration
with Sorbonne University.
[9] S. Ferguson and M. Wanderley. The McGill Digital
Orchestra: An Interdisciplinary Project on Digital
Musical Instruments. Journal of Interdisciplinary
Music Studies, 4(2):17–35, 2010.
[10] S. Gresham-Lancaster. The Aesthetics and History of
the Hub : The Eﬀects of Changing Technology on
Network Computer Music. Leonardo Music Journal,
8:39–44, 1998.
[11] I. Hattwick. Ian Hattwick’s Vimeo Page, 2010.
[12] J. Malloch, D. Birnbaum, E. Sinyor, and M. M.
Wanderley. Towards a new conceptual framework for
digital musical instruments. In Proceedings of the 9th
International Conference on Digital Audio Eﬀects ,
pages 49–52, Montreal, Canada, 2006.
[13] E. R. Miranda and M. M. Wanderley. New Digital
Musical Instruments: Control And Interaction Beyond
the Keyboard. A-R Editions, Middleton, WI, 2006.
[14] Mirriam-Webster. Collaborate, 2011.
[15] D. Overholt. The Musical Interface Technology Design
Space. Organised Sound, 14(02):217, June 2009.
[16] G. Paine. Towards a taxonomy of realtime interfaces
for electronic music performance. In Proceedings of
the 2010 conference on New interfaces for musical
expression, number Nime, pages 436–439, Sydney,
Australia, 2010. University of Technology, Sydney.
[17] C. Small. Musicking. Wesleyan University Press,
Hanover, New Hampshire, 1998.
[18] A. Tanaka. Musical performance practice on
sensor-based instruments. In M. M. Wanderley and
M. Battier, editors, Trends in Gestural Control of
Music, volume 13, pages 389–405. IRCAM - Centre
Pompidou, Paris, France, 2000.
[19] D. Trueman. Why a laptop orchestra? Organised
Sound, 12(02):171, July 2007.
[20] D. Trueman and P. Cook. BoSSA: The deconstructed
violin reconstructed. Journal of New Music Research ,
29(2):121–130, 2000.
[21] G. Weinberg. Interconnected musical networks:
Toward a theoretical framework. Computer Music
Journal, 29(2):23–39, 2005.