REXband: A Multi-User Interactive Exhibit for Exploring
Medieval Music
Eric Lee, Marius Wolf, Yvonne Jansen and Jan Borchers
Media Computing Group
RWTH Aachen University
52056 Aachen, Germany
{eric, wolf, jansen, borchers }@cs.rwth-aachen.de
ABSTRACT
We present REXband , an interactive music exhibit for collabora-
tive improvisation to medieval music. This audio-only syst em con-
sists of three digitally augmented medieval instrument rep licas: the
hurdy gurdy, harp, and frame drum. The instruments communic ate
with software that provides users with both musical support and
feedback on their performance using a “virtual audience” se t in a
medieval tavern. REXband builds upon previous work in interactive
music exhibits by incorporating aspects of e-learning to ed ucate, in
addition to interaction design patterns to entertain; care was also
taken to ensure historic authenticity. Feedback from user t esting
in both controlled (laboratory) and public (museum) enviro nments
has been extremely positive. REXband is part of the Regensburg
Experience, an exhibition scheduled to open in July 2007 to s how-
case the rich history of Regensburg, Germany.
Keywords
interactive music exhibits, medieval music, augmented ins tru-
ments, e-learning, education
1. INTRODUCTION
Music has been an integral part of our culture for millennia,
and some historians believe music predates even spoken lang uage.
With music being such a popular medium of expression, it is no t
surprising that learning about the music from a certain time pe-
riod can tell us a lot about that culture. With today’s ubiqui tous
computer technology, it is possible for people to relive, pe rsonally,
some of the experiences that could previously only be read ab out
in history books.
REXband is an interactive musical exhibit we designed for the
Regensburg Experience, an exhibition showcasing Regensbu rg, a
city in southeast Germany with a rich medieval history. REXband
is one of a family of exhibits, including REXplorer [2] and Mi n-
nesang [14]; it is, however, the only one that features music .
1.1 Concept and Goals
Anna and Nils are visiting the Regensburg Experience. As the y
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of thi s work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided th at copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage an d that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To cop y otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, re quires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME07, June 7–9, 2007, New Y ork, NY
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Figure 1: A rendering of the REXband exhibit. Credit: Sarah
Mennicken (sarah.mennicken@rwth-aachen.de).
enter , they hear the sounds of instruments from a semi-seclu ded
corner of the room (see Figure 1). As Anna and Nils walk over , t hey
see that the area has been decorated to resemble a medieval ta vern;
they hear shouts, glasses tinkling, and other sounds of merr iment.
In the center are three musical instruments on wooden stands , in-
cluding a harp and a drum – the third instrument, however is un -
familiar: a wooden box with a crank on one side and a row of keys
on another . “How about some music?” says a voice. Nils walks
up to the harp and gently runs his ﬁngers over the strings, cre -
ating a glissando ; accompanying music starts in response. Anna
approaches the box-shaped instrument and turns the crank, c reat-
ing a humming sound. By pressing the keys, she discovers that she
can play melodies. As the pair continue playing, they are rew arded
with sounds of tossed coins and encouraging shouts. When the mu-
sic ends, they are rewarded with applause.
REXband was created to explore a new approach of presenting
medieval music and culture. As music is an important part of m e-
dieval history, we wanted to create an interactive medium fo r visi-
tors. We had three main design goals:
• Authentic : Both the instruments and the musical material
presented must be historically accurate.
• Educational : As a museum exhibit, the primary purpose of
REXband is to educate the audience about medieval music.
• Entertaining : Users must be able to use the system without
any prior training, and ﬁnd the experience enjoyable.
Balancing these goals was one of our major design challenges
for REXband , and we refer the interested reader to [17] for a more
in-depth discussion of this aspect of REXband . We will focus on
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
172
the technical aspects of the exhibit here, beginning with a b rief
overview of related literature, followed by a description o f the de-
sign and implementation of REXband , and concluding with some
results of evaluations with users in various settings.
2. RELATED WORK
REXband is one of many interactive music exhibits explored in
recent years 1 .
Jam-O-Drum , developed by Blaine and Perkis [3], is an inter-
active music exhibit focusing on collaborative rhythmic im provisa-
tion and visualization of musical cues. It consisted of a hex agonal
table with electronic drum pads and a speaker at each of the si x
rounded corners. Using a projector, images and animations c ould
be shown on the table. They experimented with several custom -
made software applications, including “Call and Response” , “Blis-
spaint”, and “HexaPong”. The emphasis is on rhythmic (as op-
posed to REXband ’s melodic) improvisation. REXband is also
unique in its consideration of historical accuracy.
W orldBeat was an exhibit at the Ars Electronica Center in Linz,
Austria [4], and showed how a wide variety of musical applica tions
could be controlled with a relatively simple input device. U sing a
pair of Buchla Lightning II batons, users could conduct a syn the-
sized piece of music, improvise on an “invisible xylophone” , play
a musical memory game, or use the baton as a selection device i n
a menu. Through W orldBeat , novices can explore various aspects
of music using alternative interaction styles. There is no a ttempt to
model speciﬁc instruments realistically.
Seraﬁn et al.’s Croaker is a custom built controller based on Rus-
solo’s Intonarumori [13]. While it is not meant as an interactive ex-
hibit, one of their goals, like REXband , was to preserve the knowl-
edge of the historic instrument and the music it created. The ir pri-
mary focus was to create an instrument to be used in compositi on
and performance.
There is also a large body of work on augmenting tra-
ditional instruments with modern electronics. Brook
(www.myspace.com/neilbrook), for example, modiﬁed a hurd y-
gurdy with magnetic switches, and designed a custom control ler to
translate the output to MIDI. M¨ aki-Patola et al. [9] used a c amera
underneath the drumhead of an acoustic djembe drum to track
players’ hand positions. Finally, light harps (or laser harps) have
become popular in recent years [7], although such instrumen ts
lack the haptic feedback of an acoustic harp. Kortier built a
MIDI-enabled harp (www.kortier.com), using custom hardwa re to
detect the string vibrations.
In contrast to these electronically augmented instruments , ours
were made to resemble an acoustic instrument as much as possi ble
by hiding the electronics; they were also designed to surviv e the
use and abuse of being placed in a museum environment, rather
than for performance.
Our system is thus unique through the following:
• it is historically accurate, and conveys to users historica lly
accurate information
• it supports basic melodic improvisation
• it balances elements of authenticity, education, entertai nment
• it contains electronically modiﬁed instruments that are ro bust
and designed to resemble the original
1 A more extensive literature review can be found in [16].
MIDI &AudioAccompaniment / FeedbackHurdy GurdyFrame DrumHarpFigure 2:REXbandsystem diagram. Three digitally aug-mented instruments communicate with host software usingMIDI, which outputs the instrument sounds to speakers hiddenby each instrument. Accompaniment and feedback are playedon speakers mounted in the room.3. SYSTEM DESIGNFigure 2 shows the system diagram forREXband. The aug-mented instruments communicate to a computer running theREXbandsoftware using MIDI. The audio is produced using acombination of wavetable synthesis (for the instruments) and dig-itally sampled audio (accompaniment track, feedback). Themu-sical piece forREXbandwas chosen after consulting with a me-dieval music historian at the University of Regensburg. It is a dancepiece, with a relatively simple rhythm and compatible with the in-struments we chose for the exhibit (instruments are typically notspeciﬁed in these types of medieval music scores).Interactive exhibit design raises some interesting questions thatare not as pressing in other application areas of computer technol-ogy. An interactive museum exhibit is a “walk up and use” systemwhere only very little training and instruction is possible. Otherchallenges include robustness, transitioning from visitor to visitor,and the selection/design of non-standard input devices. Much ofthe user experience design is based on our previous work on in-teractive exhibits [5, 8], and we refer the interested reader to thisliterature.REXbandis different from many interactive exhibits in that it isan audio-only exhibit. While printed (i.e., static) visuals are usedto decorate the area to resemble a medieval tavern, feedbackfromthe interaction with the system is primarily aural (there issomehaptic feedback from users interacting with the physical instrumentreplicas). This is in contrast with other interactive exhibits [3, 4,8], and was motivated by the fact that producing visuals thatareboth historically accurate and believable would be difﬁcult (andexpensive). More importantly, such visuals would distractfromthe instruments, which are the primary focus of the exhibit.In addition to the sounds of the instruments,REXbandprovidesfeedback to the user using a “virtual audience”. When the systemis idle, users can hear the sounds of glasses tinkling, shouts, andother sounds of merriment, creating the ambiance of a medievaltavern. Users assume the role of a band playing in this tavern; thesystem rates users’ performances, rewarding them with the soundsof tossed coins and cheering shouts.The feedback mechanism is based on a rhythmic analysis of theusers’ input: it checks the rhythmic accuracy of the users’ inputrelative to the rhythm of the accompanying track. The rhythmicpattern of the music was prepared ofﬂine by musical experts,andis stored as metadata in the system. We compute a relative differ-
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
173
Time
Musical Beat
ƋInput
Cumulative Score
ƋƋ
Beat Interval
1 2 1
Figure 3: Rating mechanism based on users’ rhythmic accu-
racy. The ﬁrst two notes played by the user falls within a pre-
deﬁned interval around the beat, increasing the rating; the last
note falls outside this region, decreasing the rating. The r ating
can never fall below zero.
ence between this rhythm metadata with user input, which is u sed
to accumulate a rating of the “rhythmic accuracy” (see Figur e 3). If
this rating exceeds a threshold, then users are rewarded wit h cheer-
ing, encouraging shouts, or the tinkling of tossed coins, an d then
reset. The average rating over the entire piece also inﬂuenc es the
intensity of the applause when users ﬁnish playing.
Aspects of e-learning and psychology also inﬂuenced our de-
sign of the virtual audience to help make our system educational
and entertaining . Reeves and Nass, for example, have shown that
people respond more positively when users receive praise fr om the
system [11]; moreover, there is no perceived difference bet ween
unwarranted and sincere praise (although the same is not tru e for
criticism). Thus, we decided against including any negativ e feed-
back in the system (even though it would have been possible fo r us
to do so).
4. INSTRUMENT DESIGN
As a musical installation, the instruments played a central role in
the design of REXband . The physical shell of the three instruments
(hurdy gurdy, harp and frame drum) were built by a profession al
instrument builder from Regensburg. We then digitally augm ented
these replicas with sensors to send MIDI signals to a compute r run-
ning the REXband software when they are played.
4.1 Hurdy Gurdy
The hurdy gurdy, also known as the wheel ﬁddle, is the most
complex of the three instruments we incorporated into REXband .
While the body shaping and keyboards have changed through th e
centuries, the basic mechanics for sound generation rely on the
same principles. A set of strings is pulled over a wooden whee l
covered with rosin. The wheel is turned using a crank, causin g the
strings to vibrate. Melodies are played using a small keyboa rd on
the side of the instrument (see Figure 4). The strings can be d ivided
into three categories:
Drone Strings: These strings sound while the crank is turned.
They always play the same note, and are not affected by the tur ning
speed of the crank. Drone strings can be tuned to different no tes,
and can be switched on and off as needed for accompaniment.
Melody Strings: The melody strings are shortened at certain
ﬁxed positions using the keyboard, resulting in notes with v ari-
ous pitches. Because of the position of the wooden wheel, onl y
one melody note can be played at the same time, with higher pit ch
notes taking precedence since they are closer to the wheel. T his
property can be used to create a warbler-like sound when play ing.
Like the drone strings, the melody strings are not affected b y the
turning speed of the crank and can be tuned as needed.
Figure 4: Hurdy gurdy. Credit: Wikimedia Commons (com-
mons.wikimedia.org).
Dog Strings: A dog string is a drone string held by a loose
bridge. When the crank is turned slowly, the dog string behav es
like a normal drone string. When the crank is given a stronger im-
pulse, however, the dog string causes the loose bridge to vib rate.
Experienced players often use this feature to add a percussi ve ele-
ment to their play, especially in dance pieces.
For our electronic hurdy gurdy, we tried to maintain as many o f
the acoustic properties described above while still making it usable
by a novice musician:
• Only one note can be played at a time. When two or more
keys are pressed, only the note with the highest pitch (the on e
closest to the crank) is played.
• The hurdy gurdy produces sound only while the crank is
turned.
• The pre-recorded drone and dog strings play continuously
while the crank is turned.
• The range of playable notes is restricted to ensure the outpu t
is harmonious with the accompaniment.
We decided not to allow the users to create their own rhythmic
accents using the dog string. Based on early user tests, we fo und
that few people knew about this subtle detail, and decided th at it
would only confuse people who were not familiar with the inst ru-
ment.
We used a Doepfer CMT64 (www.doepfer.de) board to generate
the MIDI signals sent to the computer. We equipped the wooden
bars attached to the keys with Marquardt snap action switche s.
When one of the keys is pressed, the switch is pushed against t he
inner wall of the hurdy gurdy, triggering a note on-message ( see
Figure 5).
Crank rotation is detected using a light reﬂector consistin g of an
infrared LED and a photo sensor. Operating the crank also tur ns a
small wooden wheel inside the hurdy gurdy with alternating l ight
and dark regions. The light from the LED is reﬂected by this wh eel
and creates a different output from the photo sensor dependi ng on
whether it hit a light or dark region (see Figure 5). Using a sm all
electric circuit, we were able to detect the wheel rotation a s a pitch
wheel controller-message in MIDI.
4.2 Harp
Our harp replica consists of a wooden frame with 12 nylon gui-
tar strings. The sensors are housed inside the resonant body , which
is stuffed with Styrofoam to minimize the acoustic sound fro m the
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
174
Figure 5: Electronically augmented hurdy gurdy. Snap actio n
switches detect key presses, and a light reﬂector with alter nat-
ing black and white regions detect when the crank is turned.
Figure 6: Harp augmented with string vibration sensors. The
resonant body is stuffed with Styrofoam to minimize acousti c
sounds when the strings are plucked.
strings. We use i-CubeX Vibe sensors (one for each string) to detect
the string vibrations; each string is mapped to a different n ote, and
the intensity of the vibration to the velocity. We implement ed an al-
gorithm to detect sudden increases in the string vibration, similar to
a rising edge trigger. The ﬁrst velocity value of a peak is use d as the
note’s velocity. While a peak detection algorithm would be m ore
“correct”, we found it also results in unacceptably large re sponse
times as the falling edge of the peak must be detected before t he
note is recognized.
In earlier prototypes, we also experimented with a “glissan do”
support mechanism, whereby a glissando sample would be trig -
gered when multiple neighboring strings were plucked in suc ces-
sion. However, we found in user tests that such a feature was u n-
necessary – most users were able to create glissandos withou t this
additional support.
4.3 Frame Drum
Our frame drum consists of a wooden body and a leather drum-
head (see Figure 7). A Roland drum trigger sensor coupled wit h a
Roland TMC 6 trigger MIDI converter sends MIDI messages from
the drum to the computer. We used a rubber foam cone to prevent
the sensor from coming into direct contact with the drumhead (see
Figure 7). The body is stuffed with Styrofoam to minimize aco ustic
sound, and the bottom of the drum is sealed.
The intensity of the detected hit is mapped to the velocity pa ram-
eter of the MIDI message. This setup, while simple, unfortun ately
means that we are also unable to distinguish a soft hit at the c enter
of the drum from a hard hit at the rim. We hope to address this
shortcoming in future work.
5. MUSICAL SUPPORT
As an interactive exhibit targeted to a wide audience, music al
support is an essential feature for REXband . During the iterative
Figure 7: Drum trigger mechanism. A rubber foam cone sits
between the sensor and the drumhead to prevent direct contac t.
Time
Musical Beat
ƋInput
Output
Ƌ
Ƌ Ƌ
Ƌ
Ƌ
Correction Interval
Figure 8: Experimental rhythmic correction scheme. The ﬁrs t
note arrives within 110 ms of the beat, and is delayed until th e
beat. The second and third notes are not modiﬁed.
design process, which included frequent evaluations of pro totypes
with users, we examined two aspects of musical support: melo dic
and rhythmic.
5.1 Melodic Support
The musical piece we chose for REXband has a scale of C-major,
and we mapped the keys of the C-major scale to the keys on the
hurdy gurdy and strings on the harp, to ensure the user cannot play
“wrong” notes. This scheme, while simple, is effective and h as
been used successfully in some of our previous systems [4].
5.2 Rhythmic Support
Based on evaluations of early prototypes of REXband , we found
that many users have trouble following the rhythm of the musi c, de-
spite our choice of a piece with a relatively simple rhythmic struc-
ture (according to an expert in medieval music). Thus, we dec ided
to experiment with rhythmic correction of users’ input. Rhy thmic
correction has been explored in the past, most notably by Bla ine
and Perkis [3] in Jam-O-Drum . They found rhythmic quantization
to be undesirable primarily because hitting is a gesture tha t requires
immediate feedback. However, melody is a primary component in
REXband , and we hypothesized that users may perceive their in-
put not as single, isolated events, but as part of a larger mel odic
structure. If so, minor adjustments to timing improve the pe rcep-
tual quality of the resulting music, but still not affect use rs’ sense
of causality. Moreover, rather than quantizing all input from the
user, we only selectively modify user input, by delaying any notes
that are played by the user only when they are within a certain time
interval before a marked rhythm beat. If a note is not within t hat
interval, it will be played without any delay (see Figure 8).
We tested our hypothesis by running thresholding experimen ts
with users. We found that more than two-thirds of our users we re
not able to detect latencies below 110 ms (roughly one-sixth of a
beat). However, correcting user input within this time wind ow did
not signiﬁcantly improve the quality of the performance, an d in the
end, we decided to use a more natural rhythmic support mechan ism
– an optional audio track with the sound of hands clapping to t he
beat of the music.
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
175
6. PHYSICAL SETUP
The software was implemented in Objective-C using Apple’s
Core Audio and Core MIDI software libraries. Our software re n-
ders the audio as a multi-channel audio stream. In the exhibi t, the
ambient sounds and accompaniment are wired to a stereo strea m,
and each of the three instruments to a mono stream. We hid a sma ll
speaker next to each instrument; we found in early user evalu ations
that this addition signiﬁcantly improves the user experien ce. Not
only does having the sound source co-located with the instru ment
more realistically imitate the real instrument, the vibrat ions ema-
nating from the speaker also provide subtle haptic feedback to the
user.
This result is not entirely surprising – previous research i n
human-computer interaction (HCI), for example, has shown t hat
co-location of audio output has an effect on users’ memory an d
comprehension in video conferences [1]. Rowan and Hayward
[12], and O’Modhrain [10] have also studied the importance o f
haptic feedback in musical instruments – our physical instr uments
already provide some tangible feedback when users hit press the
buttons on the hurdy gurdy, pluck the strings of the harp, or h it
the surface of the drum. The additional haptic feedback from the
speaker vibrations reproduce the haptic feedback that is no rmally
obtained when the instrument itself is the sound generator.
7. EV ALUATION
In additional to user testing throughout the design process , we
performed extensive user testing of the ﬁnished system. We p er-
formed user evaluations in both a controlled environment wh ere we
could observe and interview users, and also a public setting similar
to the planned Regensburg Experience. Our main goals were to see
if REXband provides users with an enjoyable experience while still
conveying to them some new information about medieval music .
7.1 Controlled T est
We performed an observation study with a retrospective inte r-
view at the end of each session. Instructions for the 18 parti cipants
divided into groups of 2 or 3 were kept simple: we asked the mem -
bers of each test group to pick one instrument and play it unti l the
end of the accompaniment piece. Users would then move to an-
other instrument, and repeated the test four times, so that e ach user
played each instrument at least once. The interview include d ques-
tions to quantify how well we met our goals, and more general
questions about participants’ musical background. Users w ere also
encouraged to offer suggestions on how to improve the exhibi t.
During the experiment, we did not interrupt users and kept an y
answers to their questions short, so as to not disturb the int erac-
tion. We observed some recurring patterns in users’ behavio rs.
Most users playing the harp or the hurdy gurdy for the ﬁrst tim e
approached them curiously, but carefully. Some users were n ot
sure how to hold and play the hurdy gurdy properly, and some di d
not even ﬁnd the keys on the backside of the instrument at ﬁrst .
Fortunately, this was usually corrected by the other users i n their
group. For the harp, we observed a learning effect when users had
the chance to play it more than once during the four trials. On e
user only plucked single strings in his ﬁrst trial and tried m ultiple
strings in his second one. Another user started with glissan dos, but
played more single notes later, which apparently sounded be tter to
her. With the frame drum, users experimented with both singl e and
double-handed playing styles, as well as drumming with just their
ﬁngers.
When asked afterwards, only three of our 18 participants re-
ported to have seen a hurdy gurdy before, and none had ever pla yed
one. The harp and drum were more familiar: all of our test user s
Figure 9: REXband setup at the Couven Museum in Aachen,
Germany.
had seen or heard of these instruments before. Only one user h ad
ever played a harp before, but did not see himself as an experi enced
player.
When asked for characteristics of the hurdy gurdy, response s var-
ied greatly. Two users confused it with a barrel organ, and no single
user was able to fully explain the hurdy gurdy. Each group tog ether,
however, was able to successfully identify many of the chara cter-
istics (e.g., connection between crank and sound productio n, drone
sound, ability to play only single notes). For the harp, play ing glis-
sandos and plucking single strings were the most common play ing
techniques. Only four users experimented with plucking two or
more strings simultaneously.
7.2 Public T est
REXband was installed as a temporary exhibit for one evening at
the Couven Museum (www.couven-museum.de) in Aachen, Ger-
many (see Figure 9). A few hundred visitors were exposed to
REXbandthat evening. We had initially planned to only observe
people use the system, but soon found this to be difﬁcult due t o
that speciﬁc environment: most of the other exhibits in the m u-
seum were old and valuable, and visitors were not permitted t o
touch them (ours was the only interactive one). Upon realizi ng
this, we began approaching visitors directly, inviting the m to try it
out, which encouraged other visitors to try it out without fu rther
intervention.
Feedback from the visitors was very positive. Many of them
told us that they liked the idea very much, and that it was fun t o
play on the instruments. One visitor told us that she had alwa ys
wanted to play the harp, but never actually took lessons and w as
very happy to have the chance to try one. Many visitors asked
questions about the hurdy gurdy, both about the original instrument
as well as our modiﬁed version. No visitor appeared to be fami liar
with this instrument, and this also led to some users standin g on
the wrong side of the hurdy gurdy; we corrected this by placin g a
photo of the correct standing position close to the instrume nt.
Before trying out the system, some visitors were hesitant ab out
playing the instruments; lack of musical ability was an ofte n-used
excuse, but users were encouraged enough to try the exhibit w hen
told that they are “easier” to play than the original instrum ents.
The hurdy gurdy and harp were the most popular instruments, b ut
visitors with less conﬁdence in their musical abilities oft en started
with the drum ﬁrst.
8. FUTURE WORK
We have identiﬁed the following areas for future work:
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
176
Both the instruments, and the system in general, were create d for
robustness and ease of use, not for depth of artistic express ion. A
system with a focus on artistic expression could allow melod ic cor-
rection to be disabled. The melodic correction algorithm us ed for
REXband is fairly simple and relies on a static mapping of incom-
ing to outgoing notes. Systems like coJIVE [6] and Band-out-of-
the-Box [15] follow a more complex approach that could provide
interesting results when coupled with modiﬁed instruments such as
the ones used for REXband .
Our experiments with rhythmic correction and our literatur e re-
view in this context showed that the perception of rhythm and la-
tency is not yet fully understood. More experiments in that d i-
rection could show how people with varying level of musical e x-
perience perceive rhythm and latency, and how a computer mus ic
system could provide support.
While REXband is a collaborative system, the psychology of col-
laboratively playing music has only been touched on in this w ork.
Further research could provide knowledge about interactio n pat-
terns in this context and show how a system can support player s in
collaboratively playing music.
9. CONCLUSIONS
REXband is an interactive music exhibit featuring replicas of
three medieval instruments augmented with electronics: a h urdy
gurdy, harp, and frame drum. Our design incorporates elemen ts of
e-learning (interactivity, collaboration, and ﬂattery) i n addition to
interaction design principles to make the system fun to use, while
still conveying little-known facts about medieval music an d its in-
struments. Moreover, we sought to maintain historic authen ticity
by including experts in medieval music and history in our des ign
process. Our digitally enhanced replicas are designed to re semble
the original instruments, with the electronics hidden from users’
view. A virtual audience provides both ambiance and a mechan ism
for feedback on users’ performance. We experimented with bo th
melodic and rhythmic support in software to enhance the user ex-
perience; we found that while rhythmic support by adjusting the
timing of user input by up to one-sixth of a beat is possible, i t
does not signiﬁcantly improve a user’s performance. Result s of
user evaluations showed that we were able to satisfy our orig inal
goals of creating a system that provides both an entertainin g and
educating experience.
We hope that our experiences with REXband can serve as both
a reference and inspiration for future work in using technol ogy to
create interesting and novel systems for promoting musical culture.
10. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank all the people who supported our work:
Dr. Julien Biere and Brigitte Weidemann, Professor David Hi ley,
Alois Biberger, Peter “Gecko” G¨ otz, and all the people who p artic-
ipated in the many user studies.
11. REFERENCES
[1] J. J. Baldis. Effects of spatial audio on memory,
comprehension, and preference during desktop conferences .
In Proceedings of the CHI 2001 Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems , pages 166–173, Seattle,
USA, March 2001.
[2] R. Ballagas, S. Walz, S. Kratz, C. Fuhr, E. Y u, M. Tann,
J. Borchers, and L. Hovestadt. REXplorer: A mobile,
pervasive spell-casting game for tourists. In Extended
Abstracts of the CHI 2007 Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems , San Jose, USA, April 2007.
[3] T. Blaine and T. Perkis. The Jam-O-Drum interactive musi c
system: A study in interaction design. In Symposium on
Designing Interactive Systems , pages 165–173, New Y ork,
USA, August 2000.
[4] J. Borchers. WorldBeat: Designing a baton-based interf ace
for an interactive music exhibit. In Proceedings of the CHI
1997 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ,
pages 131–138, Atlanta, USA, March 1997.
[5] J. Borchers. A Pattern Approach to Interaction Design . John
Wiley & Sons, New Y ork, USA, 2001.
[6] J. Buchholz. A software system for computer-aided jazz
improvisation. Master’s thesis, RWTH Aachen University,
Aachen, Germany, May 2005.
[7] S. Favilla and J. Cannon. Children of Grainger: Leather
instruments for free music. In Proceedings of the NIME 2006
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression , pages
370–375, Paris, France, June 2006.
[8] E. Lee, T. Marrin Nakra, and J. Borchers. Y ou’re the
conductor: A realistic interactive conducting system for
children. In Proceedings of the NIME 2004 Conference on
New Interfaces for Musical Expression , pages 68–73,
Hamamatsu, Japan, June 2004.
[9] T. M¨ aki-Patola, P . H¨ am¨ al¨ ainen, and A. Kanerva. The
augmented djembe drum - sculpting rhythms. In Proceedings
of the NIME 2006 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical
Expression , pages 364–369, Paris, France, June 2006.
[10] S. O’Modhrain. Playing by Feel: Incorporating Haptic
Feedback into Computer-Based musical Instruments . PhD
thesis, Stanford University, November 2000.
[11] B. Reeves and C. Nass. The Media Equation: How People
Treat Computers, Television, and New Media Like Real
People and Places . Center for the Study of Language and
Information, Stanford, USA, 1996.
[12] J. Rovan and V . Hayward. Typology of tactile sounds and
their synthesis in gesture-driven computer music
performance. In M. M. Wanderley and M. Battier, editors,
Trends in Gestural Control of Music , pages 389–405, Paris,
France, 2000. IRCAM.
[13] S. Seraﬁn, A. de G¨ otzen, N. B¨ ottcher, and S. Gelineck.
Synthesis and control of everyday sounds reconstructing
Russolo’s Intonarumori. InProceedings of the NIME 2006
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression , pages
240–245, Paris, France, June 2006.
[14] D. Spelmezan and J. Borchers. Minnesang - speak medieva l
german. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI 2006 Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 1355–1360,
Montr´ eal, Canada, April 2006.
[15] B. Thom. BoB: an interactive improvisational music
companion. In Proceedings of the 4th International
Conference on Autonomous Agents , pages 309–316,
Barcelona, Spain, 2000.
[16] M. Wolf. REXband: A multi-user interactive exhibit to
explore medieval music. Master’s thesis, RWTH Aachen
University, Aachen, Germany, August 2006.
[17] M. Wolf, E. Lee, and J. Borchers. Education, entertainm ent
and authenticity: Lessons learned from designing an
interactive exhibit about medieval music. InExtended
Abstracts of the CHI 2007 Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, San Jose, USA, April 2007.
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
177