Interactive Parallax Scrolling Score Interface for
Composed Networked Improvisation
Rob Canning
The Media School
University of Bournemouth
Dorset, BH12 5BB
United Kingdom
rcanning@bournemouth.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
This paper describes the Parallaxis Score System, part of
the authors ongoing research into to the development of
technological tools that foster creative interactions between
improvising musicians and predeﬁned instructional texts.
The Parallaxis platform places these texts within a net-
worked, interactive environment with a generalised set of
controls in order to explore and devise ontologies of net-
work performance. As an interactive tool involved in music
production the score system itself undergoes a functional
transformation and becomes a distributed meta-instrument
in its own right, independent from, yet intrinsically con-
nected to those instruments held by the performers.
Keywords
NIME, NetScore, Realtime Web, FOSS, Improvisation, Com-
position
1. PARALLAXIS SCORE SERVER
The Parallax Score Server (PSS) is a networked score play-
out system targeted at human performers who interpret no-
tational instructions from the web-browser. It is a multi-
nodal server managed network with each performer’s browser
a node, these scores are tightly synchronised with one an-
other over the network using realtime web technologies.
Written as a web-app, no special software is needed to use
the screen score it will run in any standards compliant web
browser[1]. The score may optionally be projected and vis-
ible to both audience and performers but each member of
the ensemble needs a laptop, tablet or touch-screen monitor
placed on a music stand to allow them access to the control
parameters of the score during performance.
This score playback system adopts a familiar[5], horizon-
tal right to left, scrolling score paradigm, including a visual
“playzone” and “playhead”. The novel feature of this sys-
tem is that each of the performance parts within the score
can proceed at diﬀerent speeds from one another. The mul-
tiple procession speeds of the individual parts result in a
sonic equivalent to the parallax scrolling animation eﬀect
used in early side scrolling 8-bit video games such asSuper
Mario Brotherswhere the diﬀering speed of the foreground
and background give the impression of 3D depth in a two
dimensional representation.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’14,June 30 – July 03, 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
The relative starting speeds of the parts are ﬂexible and
these relationships are malleable during a performance. The
score does not function as a ﬁxed set of relationships that
must be maintained but as ﬂuid document which encour-
ages intervention. The system is a type of open form score
but unlike the hypertextual or mobile forms seen in Stock-
hausen’s Klavierstuck XI, Boulez’sTroisieme Sonate, For-
mant III, Constellation / Constellation-miroiror more con-
temporaneously in the generative and network scores of
Freeman[3], Vickery[5] and Hajdu[4], the PSS presents mul-
tiple asynchronous linearities with alternative readings of
the text emerging from the varied and constantly changing
part alignments.
2. SCORE AS META-INSTRUMENT
Figure 1: Parallaxis Live in Graz (Linux Audio Con-
ference 2013).
The synchronisation between the individual score instances
is achieved through bi-directional communications between
the score clients and the score server. This network of mul-
tiple bidirectional links allows multiple forms of interaction
to take place. The score may be approached according to a
traditional top down hierarchical model where a master con-
trol interface has individual control over each of the scores.
In such a scenario a director of a performance “conducts”
by altering the speed of the diﬀerent performers and subse-
quently alters the temporal relationship between the parts.
Alternately, the individual nodes (performers) may exert
agency and interfere with both the progression of their own
part as well as that of their co-performers. These inter-
ventions may represent an act of subversion within the di-
rector based system or provide an opportunity to explore
new structures and strategies in distributed performance
systems. Once the performers are aware of the systems ca-
pabilities in this area, pre-performance discussions around
version development may extend to incorporating game like
strategies as typiﬁed in pieces such as John Zorn’sCobra.
The network synchronised score allows nonstandard spa-
tial arrangements of the ensemble around (and beyond) the
performance space as maintaining eye contact with a con-
ductor or each other may become less relevant. The spatial
arrangement becomes one of the pre-performance composi-
tional decisions to be made by the ensemble in creation of
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
144
LOCAL AREA NETWORK WIDE AREA NETWORK
EMBEDDED LINUX SERVER :
BEAGLEBONE / RASPBERRYPI
NODEJS PARALLAXIS.JS
SSID: PARALLAXIS
LAN WAP ROUTER
MUSICIANS WEBSCORES
LAPTOP/TABLET/PC
OSCHTML5 WEBSERVER
SERVES SCOREWEBSOCKETS
HTML5 WEB BROWSER
192.168.1.2/score.html
SERVER CONTROLED
JAVASCRIPT ANIMATION OF CSS
OSCGROUPS CLIENT
"SERVER CLIENT"
ICECAST STREAMING SERVER
>=2.4-BETA
NON-LOCAL
PERFORMERS
OSCGROUPS SERVER
http://oscgroups.kiben.net
FLUTE
TRUMPET
CLARINET
DIRECTOR
OPUS/VORBIS MULTICHANNEL
STREAM ENCODER / DECODER
(LIQUIDSOAP)
ENCODES A
DECODES B
OPUS/VORBIS MULTICHANNEL
STREAM ENCODER / DECODER
(LIQUIDSOAP)
ENCODES B
DECODES A
C = mix([A,B])
Serverside
Liquidsoap
ONLINE
AUDIENCE
transport
controls
from
director
client
reports
position
to server
OSC CONTROLED
LIVE ELECTRONICS
PD / SC3
OSC CONTROLED
TAPE PART PLAYBACK
/ RECORDING ARDOUR
PARALLAXIS:
NETWORK ROUTING MAP
Figure 2: Network Schematic forParallaxis
Figure 3: Distributed Model
a version. In the interpretation of scores written for this
system there are many such pre and intra-performance de-
cisions which operate on the infrastructural level.
The score ﬁle is loaded on to the server as a series of equal
length vector graphics ﬁles, one SVG ﬁle for each instrumen-
tal/group part. These ﬁles are long strips of notation (not
dissimilar to player piano rolls in proportion). The anima-
tion of the CSS stylesheet rule determining the location of
these elements on the screen works so that the tail of score
joins up with the head creating an inﬁnite loop of music.
Every prepared version may set new starting points within
these cyclical instrumental parts.
The notation streams appear from the right of the screen
and scrolls in a leftwards direction. In the left half of the
screen are the shaded areas called the playzones, in the cen-
tre of these playzones is a vertical line representing the play-
head, as the music passes over the play-head it is executed
by the performer. The playback interfaces includes speed
and direction controls for each part as well as a playzone
and playhead, the playzone also acts as a pause button and
loop area for the part. All performers may operate their
own controls as well as the controls of any other performer
using the system.
Touch screens devices are a preferred score interface along
with an expression foot controller sending speed control
data via OSC. Access to the controls must be quick with
minimal eﬀort or time with hands away from the instru-
ment. More experimental instruments may incorporate score
controls directly into their own performance interface using
OSC which the score is listening for.
The scores prepared for this system by the author to date
have used a combination of traditional proportional “time-
point” notation and graphic notation. Scrolling this nota-
tional style over the ﬁxed playhead demands a ﬁxed moment
of attack assuring an adherence to the precise temporal ﬂow.
Yet ﬂexibility in interpretation of absolute pitch, tone, reg-
ister colour and mode of attack remain under the control of
the individual. Interventions to that ﬂow may be made by,
or directed at, any of the participants in the performance
resulting in a structural and persistent change to the in-
terrelationships between all parts. So the inﬂuence of the
individual on the performance as a whole happens both on
the micro and macro levels.
The independence of these strict temporal ﬂows creates
the parallax oﬀsets and allows complex, organised rhythmic
ensemble playing easily accessible to amateur or improvising
musicians. Each musician may feel they are playing regular
quarter note values, yet one musician may be playing 10%
faster and another 10% slower. None of the musicians are
worried about counting subdivisions of the bar and trying to
execute complex nested duplets, yet very easily Liqetiesque
polyrhythmic ensemble textures become obtainable, even by
musicians who can manage traditional notation well, with-
out the cognitive burden of the rhythmic calculations that
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
145
Figure 4: Example of a single instrumental part showing graphic notation, shaded playzone and the red
playhead
may act to the detriment of the areas left more open to
free. Scores may be created with periodicity and rhythmic
structures in mind as with the author’s Parallaxis II for
Ensemble where the score was created on a grid structure
based on prime number sequences lending itself to exploita-
tion of isorhythmic patterns.
The drifting polymetricism which causes the parts to con-
stantly move in and out of phase with one another may
be seen as analogous to techniques used in Steve Reich’s
early tape worksCome Out and Ain’t Gonna Rain and
more closely, Emmerson’s Spirit of ’76 with its accelerat-
ing delay. However with these works the outcome is ﬁxed,
dependant on the staring conditions (the physical distance
between the play and record heads of the reel-to-reel analog
tape machine) whereas the author’s Parallaxis works allow
a constant ongoing adjustment of metric relationships. This
is perhaps closer to an instrumental analogy of Pierre Scha-
eﬀer’s concept ofjeu as manifested through his studio based
electroacoustic improvisations with turntables and tape ma-
chines.[2]
With the Parallaxis system, these ongoing interventions
(or jeu) are distributed, often performed by multiple indi-
viduals within a group rather than by any one lone indi-
vidual (as in a conducted/directed model). In this sense
the score itself undergoes a functional transformation and
becomes a collective meta-instrument used alongside those
held by the individual participants.
3. NETWORK INFRASTRUCTURE
The score server is publicly available for review/reuse on-
line 1 and is made with open source software (Node.js) and
adheres to the Web Standard technologies HTML5, CSS3,
Javascript, Web Sockets and SVG. It runs on a Local and/or
Wide Area Network with intercommunication between score
instances enabled through sockets.io (a node.js implemen-
tation of WebSockets). The server also sends a stream of
OSC data (node-osc via an OSC Groups server) in tandem
with the WebSockets stream. This allows integration and
synchronisation of live electronics events with notational
events in the score. This OSC layer is also useful to oper-
ate and synchronise with the transport controls of a Digital
Audio Workstation either for alignment with a predeﬁned
tape part or to facilitate the creation of studio a recording.
The score may also be hosted on the public internet and
used in tele-performance scenarios connecting performers
via an high bandwidth audio streams using Jacktrip. Many
networked performance scenarios may be facilitated by such
a score system as illustrated in Fig.2 In Parallaxis for Flutes,
2012 the OSC transport control feature was used to facili-
tate a network collaboration between a ﬂautist and a “scor-
eist” with the ﬂautist using multitrack overdubbing tech-
niques in one location while the score and DAW were ma-
1https://gitorious.org/parallaxis
nipulated live during the recording from another location
2.
The score server runs on the embedded Linux open hard-
ware platform, BeagleBone or on a RaspberryPi, indepen-
dent of the wide area network, so not vulnerable to prob-
lems with the internet connection, ﬁrewall or NAT restric-
tions. The score server is hosted on a specially created LAN
using cheap and easily available T-Link hardware and the
client-side score may run on any platform that is capable
of running a modern web compliant browser including (but
not limited to), Gnu/Linux, OSX, Windows, Android and
iOS devices. The complete score server system weighs less
than 200 grammes and costs under $100 including the wiﬁ
router. It does not depend on the presence of any propri-
etary software such as Max/MSP nor does it require any
complicated software or hardware conﬁguration. As such
it is a very easily deployed, reliable, low cost and ﬂexible
solution.
4. REFERENCES
[1] R. Canning. Realtime web technologies in the
networked performance environment. Proceedings of
the 2012 International Computer Music Conference
(ICMC), 2012.
[2] J. Dack. Instrument und pseudoinstrument -
akusmatische konzepte. In E. Ungeheuer and E. H.
Bottenberg, editors, Elektroakustische Musik, volume
Handbu, pages 243–259. Laaber-Verlag, Jan. 2002.
[3] J. Freeman. Extreme sight-reading, mediated
expression, and audience participation: Real-time
music notation in live performance. Computer Music
Journal, 32(3):25–41, Aug. 2008.
[4] G. Hajdu. Quintet.net: An environment for composing
and performing music on the internet. Leonardo,
38(1):23–30, Feb. 2005.
[5] L. Vickery. The evolution of notational innovations
from the mobile score to the screen score. Organised
Sound, 17(2):128–136, 2012. 128.
2https://archive.org/details/ParallaxisForFlutes
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
146