A Real Time Common Chord Progression Guide on the 
Smartphone for Jamming Pop Song on the Music 
Keyboard
 
 
 
Simon Lui 
Singapore University of Technology 
and Design 
20 Dover Drive, #03-R17, Singapore, 
138682 
simon_lui@sutd.edu.sg 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Pop m usic jamming on the keyboard requires massive music 
knowledge. Musician needs to understand and memorize the 
behavior of each chord in different keys. However, most simple pop 
music follows a common chord progression pattern. This pattern 
applies to most simple pop music on all the 12 keys. We designed an 
app that can reduce the difficulty of music jamming on the keyboard 
by using this pattern. The app displays the current chord in the 
Roman numeral and suggests the expected next chord in an easy to 
understand way on a smartphone. This work investigates into the 
human computer interaction perspective of music performance. We 
use a smartphone app as a bridge, which assists musician to react 
faster in music jamming by transforming the complex music 
knowledge into a simple, unified and easy to understand format. 
Experiment result shows that this app can help the non-keyboardist 
musician to learn pop music jamming. It also shows that the app is 
useful to assist keyboardist in making key transpose and playing 
music in the key with many sharps and flats.  
 
Keywords 
Chord progression, pop music jamming, human computer interaction 
on music, music performance guiding tool 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Many people know how to play a musical instrument as well as 
understand the basic music theory. However not all of them play the 
keyboard. Moreover, not many keyboardists can jam and improvise 
simple music.  It is well known that most pop music follow the 
common chord progression as shown in Figure 1. We call it the 
13642571-pattern. The pattern fits in most simple pop music [1]. It is 
not a strict pattern. Musician can skip some intermediate states in the 
pattern. They can make changes in the chord inversion or adding 7th, 
9th or 6th note. A few chords may not follow the 13642571-pattern, 
but the whole song usually follows the pattern in general. Some pop 
music is not composed in the 13642571-pattern originally. However 
the melody part of that song can usually fit in this pattern as well.  
 The 13642571-pattern can be used for three purposes. Firstly, it 
can be used for causal enjoyment. The 13642571-pattern can fit in 
most simple pop music. Musicians with some basic music theory 
background can jam most simple pop music in this pattern without a 
score. Secondly, it can be used as a music jamming learning tool. It is 
the first step towards learning improvisation. Musicians can first 
practice simple music jamming with the pattern. Then the musicians 
will be familiar with it and hence able to add transition chord within 
the pattern. Eventually they will be able to jam outside this basic 
pattern. Thirdly, it can be used as a real -time assisting tool for 
keyboard performance. For example, in a party or a causal 
performance event, musicians are often requested to play some 
enjoyable music. It c ould be a keyboard solo or singing 
accompaniment. The main challenge is how to perform immediately 
with no score in hand and having no time for preparation. On the 
other hand, the audience usually doesn’t know the original chord 
progression of the song. They only know the melody. They just want 
to listen to some good listening music with a good chord progression. 
In this case, the 13642571-pattern can help the musician to jam a 
good listening performance instantly. Moreover, a well-experienced 
keyboardist might also find it difficult to jam a song with a lot of 
sharps and flats. For example, an untrained male amateur singer 
usually prefer to sing in the C# major instead of D major. It is 
because both low tonic note C#3 (138.6Hz) and D3 (146.8Hz) are 
easy to sing, but the high tonic note C#4 (277.2Hz) is easier to singer 
than D4 (293.7Hz) for male amateur singer. However, C# major 
have 7 sharps which is not easy to jam without preparation. The 
13642571-pattern provide a unified and simple guide for the 
keyboardist to jam instantly to overcome the clumsy mess of a lot of 
sharps and flats.  
 The 13642571-pattern is good enough for jamming simple pop 
music. However there are many possible complex chord transition 
patterns in the other kinds of music. There were a lot of previous 
works researched on this. For example, Paiement [ 2] proposed a 
complete probabilistic model for chord progression using the 
expectation–maximization (EM) algorithm. Absolu [3] summarized 
a set of chord progression data with the top-k queries method. In this 
paper we focus on the presentation of chord progression on a 
smartphone to assist performance. Our interface and system design 
can work on any kind of chord progression. So we first work on the 
13642571-pattern. We can use the same system to guide the user to 
perform music in the other chord progressions.  
 
 
 
Figure 1. The common  chord progression for simple pop 
music 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on 
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME’14, June 30 – July 03, 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
98
2. TARGET AUDIENCE  
There are three kinds of target audience s. 1) Non-keyboardist 
musicians who know music theory. 2) Keyboardists who need a 
chord progression guide during their performance. This is especially 
important when they play music with key transposition or in the key 
having a lot of sharps and flats. 3) Anyone who wants to learn to play 
the common chord progression on the keyboard that can fit in most 
simple pop music.  
3. DESIGN PRINCIPLE 
This is a smartphone app for real-time and instant usage. Hence the 
system display must be simple, easy and quick to read. Firstly, we 
only display one single note per chord and we choose to display the 
root note of each chord, since it is the most essential and simplest 
way to represent a chord. We expect the professional musician to be 
able to derive and come up with the rest of the notes of the chord, no 
matter it is a major, minor, or 7th chord. For amateur user, jamming 
by just playing the root note is also adequate for the enjoyment and 
learning purpose. For the medium level amateur user, jamming with 
a root note, a 5th note, and then an 8th note pattern by the left hand 
also sounds very good for the causal performance purpose, which is 
independent of the chord type but just depends on the root note of the 
chord. Secondly, to make the app quick to read, we avoid additional 
text description. We present every instruction graphically and unified 
as a single symbol. For example, the app highlights the next expected 
chord with a rotating circle with size contrast, and the Roman chord 
numeral is embedded on the key surface in the app. This is to make 
sure that the user can read as many information as possible on one 
sight. Thirdly, we minimize the number of control steps such that the 
user can easily access it during the performance, and yet make the 
app customizable. For example, we only provide one single key 
transpose button. No other button is provided in order not to mess up 
the GUI design. Also, the screen can be swapped horizontally. Some 
users might want to have the root note displayed on the leftmost of 
the screen, while some user might want to display the F note or C 
note on the leftmost instead. Fourthly, we display the next expected 
chord in the simplest way. We avoid additional arrow and text 
description in order not to mess up the display  design. We just 
highlight the current chord in blue and the next expected chords with 
a rotating circle spot.   
4. IMPLEMENTATION 
We implement the app on an iPhone running iOS7, since iPhone is 
portable, widely used, and supported by a lot of MIDI I/O devices. 
We use a Kawai CL20 digital keyboard with MIDI I/O for music 
performance input. We use the iRig MIDI interface that supports the 
iOS CoreMIDI framework to connect iPhone and Keyboard. 
 Firstly, the app initializes the key. User can either input the key 
manually or use the key estimation mode: user can play a melody 
and the app will estimate the key of the piece  by analyzing the 
melody notes. We use the Krumhansl –Schmuckler key-finding 
algorithm [4] to estimate the key. After the key initialization, the app 
will display the Roman chord numeral on the root note of every 
chord respectively as shown in Figure 2. The user can drag the red 
“key” icon left and right to change the key at any time.  
Then, the user can play music on the keyboard. The app will 
display the root note of the current playing chord and the expected 
next chord. For simplicity in this first implementation, we request the 
users to play all chords in the root position only. So the root note of 
the current chord can be easily measured, which is the note with the 
lowest pitch. There are many chord estimation algorithms available. 
For example, Scholz [5] performs chord recognition from symbolic 
data using pattern matching and a rule-based optimization technique. 
Pardo [6] recognizes chord by a graph search based approach. We 
will use one of the most suitable algorithms afterwards. It doesn’t 
affect the design of the app interface, which is the aim of this paper. 
The app displays several next expected chord. They are highlighted 
with rotating circle in different sizes according to their transition 
probability. It is as shown in Figure 3 and Figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 2. After the key initialization.  
 
 
Figure 3. User is playing a vi chord in a music of D major. 
The app suggest s the us er to play  a IV or ii chord 
afterwards.  
 
 
Figure 4. User is playing a IV chord in a music of A major. 
The app suggests the user to play  a iii, V, I or ii  chord 
afterwards.  
 
 For acoustic piano with no MIDI I/O port, user can manually set 
the key of the piece and simp ly use the Roman chord numeral as 
shown in Figure 2 for performance reference. In the future we will 
work on recognizing chord from acoustic piano in real-time with a 
smartphone microphone. For example, Yoshioka [ 7] recognizes 
musical chords from real -world audio signals in compact -disc 
recordings by estimating chord boundary by a hypothesis algorithm. 
He gets an accuracy of 77%. Mauch [8] achieves an accuracy of 71% 
of chord identification with a multi-layered Bayesian network. Sheh 
[9] is able to identify 75% chord correctly by using the expectation–
maximization (EM) algorithm and train it with the HMM model. We 
believe the technique of real-time acoustic chord recognition will be 
mature soon and will have much better accuracy. However it is out of 
the scope of this paper.  
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
99
5. EXPERIMENT 
We invited 10 keyboardists, 10 non-keyboardist musicians, and 10 
non-musicians to participate in the experiment. First, we provided a 
brief introduction about the app followed by a short training of 5 
minutes. They had 3 minutes to try out the app before the experiment. 
We prepared 5 simple songs in major key. All songs have 16 bars 
with sol-fa name melody and Roman chord numeral written on a 
paper. The list of songs is as shown in Table 1, which require two 
13642571-patterns to play each song. The participants were invited 
to pick two songs and choose a key. Then they performed it with the 
app. The keyboardist players randomly chose from all 12 possible 
keys, while the other participants only random chose a key with less 
than or equal to 2 sharps or flats. They were asked to sing the melody 
and play the accompaniment part on the keyboard. After playing the 
songs, they were invited to rate our app on three questions in the 
scale of 1-7 as shown in Table 2. The questions are as shown in 
Table 3. Figure 5 to 7 show  the rating of the participants in a 
histogram. 
 We found that the non-musicians have much less enjoyment on 
using the app compared with musicians. Non-musicians reflected that 
the Roman chord numeral is difficult to und erstand. The n on-
keyboardist musicians gave the highest rating in learning. The app 
design is helpful for non-keyboard musicians who understand music 
theory to pickup keyboard jamming quickly. We also find that the 
keyboardist players gave a high rating for the app as a performance-
assisting tool. They reflected that the app is very helpful for them 
especially when they need to play music in the key with a lot of 
sharps and flats. Overall, non-musicians seem not to like the app very 
much. This app is perceived as a great learning tool for the non -
keyboardist musicians and a good performance-assisting tool for the 
keyboardists. 
 We also invited the participants to give us further comments after 
the experiment. A professional keyboardist was asked to perform 
Moon River in B major with 5 sharps. He found that the app really 
helped him in locating chord when there were so many sharps to 
handle. A non-keyboardist musician suggested that we should also 
display the 13642571-pattern flow chart as in Figure 1 in the a pp 
interactively. However he had no idea of how to combine the chart 
into the app in a unified way. A non-musician participant commented 
that he needed more real-time guide on using the app. For example, 
guide him playing the music with an arrow or with a voice 
instruction. Since he had difficulty to look at both the app and the 
keyboard key at the same time. He suggested that we could use a 
projector to project the Roman chord numeral on the keyboard, or 
design a transparent sheet and stick it on the keyboard. One of the 
non-musicians has difficulty to use the app after more than 10  
minutes of training. Hence we simplified the task and she just need to 
play the root note of each chord with one finger. She eventually can 
play music with the app and found it fun. Now she can sing along 
and play the keyboard accompaniment with one finger in C Major. 
She can do it for a lot of simple pop music without a score. 
 
Table 1. List of songs 
Love me tender 
Try to remember 
Moon river 
The way we were 
My heart will go on 
 
 
Table 2. Rating interpretation 
Value Interpretation 
7 Entirely good 
6 Very good 
5 Quite good 
4 Somewhat good but somewhat bad 
3 Quite bad 
2 Very bad 
1 Entirely bad 
 
Table 3. Participant average rating 
Questions Keyboardist 
rating 
Non-
keyboardist 
musician rating 
Non musician 
rating 
Enjoyment 5.4 5.8 3.9 
Learning 4.2 6.3 4.6 
Performance-
assisting tool 
5.9 4.6 3.6 
 
 
Figure 5. Participants’ rating of the app for Enjoyment. 
 
 
Figure 6. Participants’ rating of the app as a Learning Tool. 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
100
 
Figure 7 . Participants’ rating of the app as a Performance 
Assisting Tool. 
 
6. FUTURE WORK 
Our app will support other chord progressions, for example, the 
simple jazz progressions. In order to display a jazz chord progression, 
we need to provide additional note information other than the root 
note. We will develop the app on an iPad such that more information 
can be displayed on a larger screen. We will work on the music in 
minor key. We will further investigate into the HCI perspective of 
music. For example, how to adjust the de sign of showing the 
expected next chord in different color and size contrast; how to 
display more chord information in a single unified symbol such as 
combining 7th chord and sus chord information with the roman chord 
numeral and the key; how to show the next expected chord in the 
best way, especially to link the app and keyboard in a better way such 
that the user doesn’t need to switch their eye between the app and the 
keyboard frequently. We will also look into the possibility of 
embedding this system into a digital keyboard. For example, compact 
the GUI design and show it on a tiny LED display, or display it with 
a dim light symbol on the key. It will be an interesting extra feature 
for the digital keyboard. We will also invite musician to evaluate the 
performance of non-musician in using this app. The comment from 
people that are not themselves users of the app can help us to further 
improve the app design.  
 
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This work is supported by the SUTD- MIT International design 
center (IDC) Research Grant (IDG31200107 / IDD11200105 / 
IDD61200103). Special thanks for the reviewer’s detail ed and 
invaluable comment.  
8. REFERENCES 
[1] Green, L. (2007). How popular musicians learn: A way ahead 
for music education. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. 
[2] Paiement, J. F., Eck, D., & Bengio, S. (2005). A probabilistic 
model for chord progressions. The 6th International Conference 
on Music Information Retrieval, London, United Kingdom. 
[3] Absolu, B., Li, T., & Ogihara, M. (2010). Analysis of chord 
progression data. In Advances in Music Information Retrieval 
(pp. 165-184). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 
[4] Lui, S., Horner, A., & So, C. (2010). Retargeting expressive 
musical style from classical music recordings using a support 
vector machine. Journal of the Audio Engineering Society, 
58(12), 1032-1044. 
[5] Scholz, R., & Ramalho, G. (2008). COCHONUT: Recognizing 
Complex Chords from MIDI Guitar Sequences. In ISMIR (pp. 
27-32). 
[6] Pardo, B., & Birmingham, W. P. (2001). The chordal analysis 
of tonal music. The University of Michigan, Department of 
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Technical Report 
CSE-TR-439-01. 
[7] Yoshioka, T., Kitahara, T., Komatani, K., Ogata, T., & Okuno, 
H. G. (2004). Automatic Chord Transcription with Concurrent 
Recognition of Chord Symbols and Boundaries. In ISMIR (pp. 
100-105). 
[8] Mauch, M., & Dixon, S. (2010). Simultaneous estimation of 
chords and musical context from audio. Audio, Speech, and 
Language Processing, IEEE Transactions on, 18(6), 1280-1289. 
[9] Sheh, A., & Ellis, D. P. (2003). Chord segmentation and 
recognition using EM-trained hidden Markov models. ISMIR 
2003, 185-191.
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
101