Designing for the iPad: Magic Fiddle 
 
 
Ge Wang §‡  
 
 
Jieun Oh §‡  
 
 
Tom Lieber ‡ 
 
Center for Computer Research in Music and Acoustics (CCRMA) §  
Stanford University 
 
Smule, Inc. ‡ 
Palo Alto, CA, United States 
 
{ge,jieun5}@ccrma.stanford.edu; tom@smule.com 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper describes the origin, design, and implementation of 
Smule's Magic Fiddle, an expressive musical instrument for the 
iPad.  Magic Fiddle takes advantage of the physical aspe cts of 
the device to integrate  g a m e-like and pedagogical eleme nts.  
We describe the origin of Magic Fiddle, chronicle its design 
process, discuss its  i ntegrated music education system, and 
evaluate the overall experience. 
 
Keywords 
Magic Fiddle, iPad, physical interaction design, experiential 
design, music education. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The father of ubiquitous computing Mark Weiser described a 
world where computing evolves from the “personal” to the 
“pervasive”, where technology “disappears into the fabric of 
everyday life...” [16].  Weiser envisioned computing’s 
evolution into “calm technology” that recedes into the 
background of our daily lives, empowering people without 
being noticed, “extending our unconsciousness”.  Today's 
personal mobile devices are becoming more powerful while our 
awareness of them as technology is shrinking. 
 The iPad, for example, engages users through a large multi -
touch display and affords natural interactions that are more 
about “what to do” than “how”.  The iPad has potential to be 
incorporated into physical practice to the point that it is 
perceived by people as an extension of themselves. 
 The concept that people act through tangible artifacts, rather 
than on it, has been articulated by Klemmer et al and Polanyi, 
among others  [7, 9].  We also share the sentiment expressed by 
Dourish that “tang ible computing is of interest precisely 
because it is not purely physical. It is a physical realization of a 
symbolic reality” [4]; we hope to realize a tangible experience 
from our design of a musical instrument on the iPad by 
combining the physical (gest ure and artifact) and the virtual 
(graphical interfaces and digital audio synthesis). 
 We are motivated by prior works that use mobile devices not 
simply as controllers or sensors, but as physical, tangible 
objects calling for meaningful gestural actions by their users 
[5]. One pioneering work that uses a commodity mobile device 
as physical musical instrument is Pocket Gamelan  b y  G r e g  
Schiemer [10]. In Schiemer’s works, mobile phones are 
“mounted in a specially devised pouch attached to a cord and 
physically swung to produce audio chorusing.” 
 Smule’s Ocarina is another example that leverages iPhone’s 
wide array of technologies – m i c r o p h o n e  i n p u t ,  m u l t i-touch, 
accelerometer, real -time sound synthesis, and graphics – to 
create the physical experience of playing an ocarina.  Th e 
Ocarina also creates a location -aware social experience by 
allowing its users to listen remotely to one another [13]. 
 More recently, the Stanford Laptop Orchestra has explored 
possibilities in physical interaction techniques offered by 
mobile phones thr ough their onboard sensors using the Mobile 
Music Toolkit [1]. For instance, Luke Dahl proposes a 
metaphor of “sound as a ball” to design Sound Bounce (2009), 
a gesture-controlled instrument that allows players to “bounce” 
sounds, “throw” them to other pla yers, and compete in a game 
to  “knock out” others’ sound [3]. Another piece, interV (2009) 
by Jorge Herrera, uses the iPhone accelerometer to control 
sound using gestures such as gentle tilts and larger arm 
movements. Wind Chimes (2009) by Nicholas Bryan leverages 
mobile phones as directional controllers within a 8 -channel 
surround sound audio system; the metaphor of wind chimes 
connects “physical" chimes (8 -channel system) to a wind force 
(performer blowing air into the mobile phone’s microphone 
input facing a particular direction) [8].  
 
 
Figure 1. Playing a Magic Fiddle duet. 
2. ORIGINS 
The concept for Magic Fiddle began with a casual question: 
“can we design a violin -like instrument that is so tangible that 
users have to hold the iPad up to their face to play?”  While 
seemingly absurd, this concept was attractive as a challenge to 
design such a physical interaction. 
 Thus we embarked on the research, design, and 
implementation of Magic Fiddle.  The result was a unique and 
expressive musical instrument with  game-like and pedagogical 
elements (Figure 1).  The game aspects invite new users to start 
playing music with the instrument and over time, challenge 
users to engage a larger repertoire and strive for virtuosity.  The 
pedagogical aspects present new and r eturning users with a 
fully-integrated, interactive music “teacher”.  The remainder of 
this paper presents and evaluates the process involved in 
creating the Magic Fiddle. 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distribut ed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME’11, 30 May–1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
197
3. DESIGN PROCESS 
Magic Fiddle was iterative ly designed and implemented . W e  
improved upon interface usability and musical expressivity by 
creating many prototypes. This section describes high -level 
issues we had to address and the implementation approaches we 
considered in response.  
3.1 Fitting a Fiddle into an iPad 
The foremost challenge we faced was re-purposing an iPad into 
something it was perhaps not meant to be.  The iPad is 
physically smaller than a violin, such that “fitting” the 
instrument inside a screen having a diagonal length of 25cm is 
almost impossible. But even more critical th an size is the 
device's affordance: a flat rectangular surface does not naturally 
suggest fingering and bowing as possible gestures. 
 We decided to use the violin as an inspiration, but not as an 
end goal. We began the design process acknowledging that an 
iPad cannot generate the same variety of realistic timbres as a 
physical violin, and cannot offer performers the fine -grained 
control required to reach comparable virtuosity in technique 
and expression. However, we believe that crafting a musical 
experience out of a personal mobile device is still “magical” in 
concept and, when done well, makes music performance more 
fun and accessible to the general public. 
 To make the most out of the device's screen space, and as an 
aesthetic preference, we modeled only the parts of a violin that 
are essential for controlling a violin-like sound – the strings and 
a bowing region – and modified them to suit the iPad. 
3.1.1 Strings 
Instead of having four strings like a traditional violin, the 
Magic Fiddle has three, at intervals a fifth apart.  Because 
strings are more difficult to reach as they lie farther away from 
the edge of the screen, we decided to use fewer strings. Also, 
we felt that the coordination required for four strings might 
overwhelm novice performers. 
 We tested t wo string layouts: vertical (long) along the right 
edge of the iPad, and horizontal (short) along the top edge. 
Strings in the center or across the diagonal of the iPad were 
considered, but rejected because they cannot be reached if the 
iPad is to be held like a violin. We decided on the vertical 
layout to offer more pixels per note for better pitch accuracy 
and fit more notes into a string. The final design has three 
strings fanning out from top to bottom along the right -edge of 
the iPad, with each string having a pitch range of one octave. 
3.1.2 Bow Region 
The intuitive gesture for playing a note is to touch the screen, 
with the note ending when the finger is lifted. However, it is 
not obvious how to associate a particular string with a 
particular touch. On a vi olin, the bowing angle determines 
which string is excited, such that players are free to place their 
fingers on strings that are not being bowed without affecting 
the sound. But on a flat screen device as an iPad, it is not 
possible to bow at a different a ngle, per se. We had to decide 
between two best alternatives: having three separate bowing 
regions each controlling a specific string, or having a single 
bow region that globally controls all strings.  
 The former option presents further complexity in the 
performance mechanics, as performers must touch the bow 
region corresponding to the string they wish to trigger. But it 
has an advantage of making open strings possible. For instance, 
if the player wishes to play D3 (the default fundamental of the 
lowest s tring), the player would simply touch the bow region 
corresponding to the lowest string with the right hand and not 
touch anywhere along the string with the left hand. 
Additionally, this option allows performers to put fingers down 
on strings that are not currently being bowed, in preparation for 
upcoming notes.  
 The latter option of having a single bow region offers simpler 
bowing mechanics, and a touch -on gesture on this general 
region would trigger all “active” strings.  We generally do not 
Figure 2. Preliminary Concept Design. 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
198
want all three strings to sound at all times, hence this approach 
assumes that a string is “active” only if it is touched at one or 
more points. Consequently, we can no longer play open -string 
nor put fingers down on a string that should not be sounding. 
 While the fo rmer option is closer to the mechanics of an 
actual violin and thus preserves much of the playing style on it, 
we chose the latter option for simplicity. We realized that 
fingering the notes correctly on the left hand presented enough 
technical challenge t o the performers, especially considering 
that there is no tactile feedback in playing on an iPad. We 
wanted to provide users with a simple playing mechanics over a 
realistic representation of a violin.  
3.1.3 Chin Rest 
Initially, the plan was to make it mandator y for a user to place 
his or her chin on the corner of the screen (see Figure 2), but as 
it turned out, different chins seem to have varying result with 
the multi-touch (some would not activate, even with no facial 
hair).  So eventually we moved away from this concept. 
 To reward user s who are holding the iPad the “proper”  (and 
possibly t h e  m o r e  d i f f i c u l t )  w a y ,  w e  r e s e r v e d  t h e  b o t t o m  l e f t  
corner of the iPad screen for the chin rest, animating bubbles 
when a touch gesture is detected there. 
3.1.4 Musical Score 
We used the remaining screen space to d isplay a musical score 
for the “Songbook” mode (Figure 3). In a Songbook mode, the 
score is visually depicted as a series of line segments (each 
representing a music note) moving across the screen from left 
to right. Thi s animation of incoming notes guide performers 
when and where to touch the string, and the c olor of the line 
segments guide  w h i c h  o f  t h e  t h r e e  s t r i n g s  s h o u l d  b e  f i n g e r e d .  
Plucking interactions, vibrato, and glissandi are represented 
with different graphic s. T h e  i d e a  o f  a n i m a t i n g  a  s c o r e  a s  a  
series of incoming objects is taken partially from  t h e  Leaf 
Trombone i n s t r u m e n t ,  b u t  t h e  f i d d l e  h a s  a n  a dded complexity 
of having three “layers”  o f  t h e  s c o r e ,  o n e  p e r  s t r i n g .  [15].  
Additionally, a particular track may  p r e s e n t  a  p i a n o 
accompaniment for the performer. 
3.2 Audio Synthesis 
We felt that the Magic Fiddle should support distinct sounds 
corresponding to bowing and plucking. We experimented with 
using STK Bowed instrument, as well as soundfonts and 
custom-synthesized sounds. Though the STK Bowed 
instrument allowed us to directly map bow position, bow 
pressure, and dynamics to the synthesis model, it was difficult 
to control these parameters using touch gestures given a 
relatively small bowing region that we had to w ork with. Also, 
naturally, certain combinations of physical parameters on the 
STK model do not produce pleasant sounds such that the 
performer may feel frustrated by the lack of responsiveness of 
the instrument synthesized using this method. 
 The various s oundfonts we experimented with for plucking 
sounded quite rich and realistic, though soundfonts for bowing 
sounded artificial with their strictly-regular vibratos (or the lack 
thereof). So we continued experimenting with other synthesis 
techniques, in search of a more satisfying bowing sounds.  
 Eventually, we synthesized the bowed string using an 
implementation of commuted waveguide synthesis [11], which 
encapsulates the modeling of excitation, waveguide/resonator, 
body, and air responses.  In the “classic ” model, these 
components are meant to be processed in order, where one 
complexity is the digital filter required to model the body.  
Commuted synthesis takes advantage of the linearity and time -
invariance of these components to combine the body and air 
components into a single impulse response that feed into the 
waveguide.  This approach reduces the complexity of the 
system and is efficient to implement, requiring only an impulse 
responses and a feedback -delay component for each string.  
Ultimately, we als o used this method to model the plucked 
interactions, as it resulted in a sound that is more consistent 
with the bowed interaction. 
 
Figure 3. In Songbook mode, Magic Fiddle soft-prompts 
what and when to play using animated onscreen markers. 
3.3 Customization for Playability 
We wanted to offer flexibility in the design of our instrument, 
to accommodate varying levels and styles of playing. So we 
considered customizing various elements of the i nstrument, as 
described below.  
3.3.1 Angle of string 
The angle of string should be adjustable to accommodate 
different hand sizes. The angle would be tightened for smaller 
hands, and widened for larger hands.  
3.3.2 Pitch snap 
Performers should be able to choose  t h e  e x t e n t  t o  w h i c h  
frequency “snaps” t o  t h e  c l o s e s t  n o t e .  H i g h  p i t c h  s nap would 
help beginners with intonation, such that fingering on the string 
close to the note gets interpreted as fingering exactly on the 
note. On the other hand, turning off pitch snap would offer 
flexibility: advanced players can take advantage of this t o 
perform with vibratos (as a pitch variation), or to play quarter 
tones, for instance.   
3.3.3 Frets 
Although violins do not have frets, the default rendering of the 
instrument would include fret -like horizontal bars drawn over 
the strings, showing the exact pl acement of each note on the 
string. Interestingly, we later found that professional classical 
violin players like to turn this feature off, relying on their ear to 
determine the exact positions that produce correct intonation.  
3.3.4 Songbook Rate 
The songbook r ate should be changeable, to allow performers 
to practice songs at a slower tempo, for instance. The final 
implementation allows customizing the songbook playrate from 
four times as slow as the original tempo to twice as fast. 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
199
3.3.5 Solo key 
The pitch of the low est string to be used in the Solo mode can 
be set to any note between C2 and D4. When set to C2, the 
strings match the lower three strings on a cello, and when set to 
D4, the strings match the top three strings on a violin.  Because 
the overall range of th e instrument over the three strings is just 
over two octaves, allowing adjustments on the key makes it 
possible to cover a greater range of pitch, facilitating playing as 
an ensemble. 
 
Figure 4. Customizing the fiddle. 
3.4 Assisting Beginners 
One of the origi nal motivations for designing musical 
instruments on personal mobile devices is to make music more 
accessible to the general public; that is, people who do not 
necessarily consider themselves as “musicians” . Thus, we 
wanted to ensure that the instrument is  a p p r o a c h a b l e  f o r  
absolute beginners as well. Beyond the songbook mode, which 
allows users to choose songs of varying difficulty levels to 
practice a nd perform, we have included a “Storybook”  m o d e  
for pedagogical purposes. In this mode, the personified fid dle, 
which the user names upon the initial launch of the application, 
becomes a teacher with a personality. This aspect of Magic 
Fiddle is discussed extensively in Section 4. 
3.5 Establishing a “Flow” 
If the Storybook is designed to welcome beginners to start 
playing the instrument, the Songbook mode offers a more 
competitive environment in which users polish their 
performance skills. Our design goal was to generate a flow 
experience, in which players are fully immersed in the 
performance with a strong motivati on to improve. So we 
associated with the Songbook mode a game -like scoring and 
badge mechanism. At the end of each performance, the 
performer is shown accuracy (i.e. “38 of 42 notes hit” ) and the 
corresponding score (i.e. “Total Points: 38” ). The individua l 
performances are aggregated in a summary Profile, showing 
users statistics. A global leaderboard not only shows top -
scoring users with highest aggregate points, but also includes 
the user herself to convey where she stands in relation to the 
top scorers. 
4. A NEW MUSIC TEACHER 
4.1 An Instrument with Personality 
The first time a user launches Magic Fiddle, it plays a short 
tune and greets: “Hello. I am your fiddle.” The text comes from 
nowhere; there is no avatar representing the fiddle. The iPad, 
which becomes a  f i d d l e  w h e n  t h e  a p p l i c a t i o n  i s  l a u n c h e d ,  
introduces itself.  And it probably wants to be your friend. 
 Throughout development, we referred to the fiddle's 
personality as “the voice of the fiddle.”  Much of what makes 
the fiddle likable is the way it “spea ks” to the user, as if from 
one person to another.  The voice engages users by implying a 
depth of character. Where motivation for self -improvement 
failed, the desire to connect with the fiddle would encourage 
users to spend more quality time with the instrument. 
 Since the voice was so important, Magic Fiddle exercises fine 
control over the way in which it is displayed.  When the fiddle 
speaks, its words appear as white text occupying the left side of 
the screen.  It uses complete sentences which start wit h capital 
letters and end in punctuation.  Lines of text fade in at speeds 
which suggest calm, even speech. Though the timing and 
positioning are precisely specified by the writers, they vary 
throughout the app, because they were tuned by feel. 
 The fiddle speaks this way to appear intelligent, friendly, and 
warm.  But that is only its predisposition.  The fiddle can be a 
goofball.  Sometimes it becomes preoccupied, boastful, lonely, 
or pleased.  Its changing emotion is reflected in the writing, but 
also by breaking the rules described above.  For example, the 
fiddle sometimes speaks very slowly to drive home an 
important point or express exasperation.  When the fiddle gets 
excited, the text comes thick and fast. Sometimes the fiddle 
completes a thought, but thinks of a “zinger” and squeezes it in 
by scrolling everything else up by one line.  In certain cases, 
the fiddle displays images and plays sounds to enhance its 
explanations.  Even when its strings are silent, the fiddle has 
plenty of ways to be expressive. 
4.2 Storybook: Integrated Teaching 
The first time the user presses the “Storybook” button on the 
main menu, they are presented with the table of contents of 
“Your Very First Magic Fiddle Book”.  When they tap the first 
section header, “Holding Your Fiddle ,” the fiddle itself begins 
to teach them how to play. 
 This is an important mode. While other main menu options 
float in a general area, storybook's button is the keystone which 
holds the menu together, and it flashes. It is not an integrated 
tutorial whi ch could be summed up in a few screens of text 
(which the user would surely skip). The storybook contains 
hours of content, covering skills as basic as holding the fiddle 
correctly (Figure 5), to advanced techniques like sordino. 
4.2.1 iPad Fiddle Lessons 
“Storybook” is actually a collection of books, each with a 
handful of chapters. There is one chapter per topic (for 
example, “Bowing” or “Upper Body Posture”).  Each chapter 
follows a pattern: introduce a concept, practice some music 
which demonstrates it, then perform a piece which combines 
knowledge gained in this chapter with that of previous chapters. 
The chapter is split into sections so that the user can resume at 
any of these points of transition. 
 Once the user begins a story, however, the only level of 
hierarchy that matters is the book. The story flows from section 
to section, chapter to chapter, until the user reaches the end of 
the book and is sent back to the menu. The user falls into a 
rhythm, although they may not recognize what it is. They can 
back out and see the structure, but it doesn’t matter in context. 
If the user is interrupted, the next time they tap the “Storybook” 
menu item, the book is opened to where they left off. 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
200
 
Figure 5. Magic Fiddle shows a user how it likes to be held. 
4.2.2 Social Homework 
Several of the chapters end with a mission for the user. These 
break up the normal lessons by asking the user to perform tasks 
which require interacting with people and places in the physical 
world. Although playing the fiddle by itself can be a rew arding 
experience, we wanted to encourage users to share the 
experience with others, face -to-face as a performative and 
social act. 
 After the completion of each mission, the user is asked 
questions about their experience. The responses indicate that 
gentle nudges from the fiddle were enough to inspire users to 
have a fantastic time with friends and family. 
 One mission asks the user to play “Mary Had a Little Lamb” 
while standing up to practice correct posture. Afterward, they 
are asked, “Could you sum up your experience in one word?” 
The top five responses were “Fun,” “Awesome,” “Cool,” 
“Great,” and “Nice.” Here are some other notable responses: 
 
“That was awesome. I am going to buy a real fiddle and 
practice what I learn from this app” 
“ඡ” (translation from Chinese: “cool”) 
“A little bit harder than the actual violin” 
“As a violinist, I can say its not even close to the real 
thing, but it was fun :)” 
“The fiddle told me what to do. Awesome.” 
“It was so much fun. It was like playing my own violin!” 
“I feel like a clown” 
“Sounds like I'm making music!!!” 
 
About 15 minutes of game time later, the user is asked to play 
“Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star” in front of a live audience. The 
top five responses were again positive: “Fun,” “Cool,” “Great,” 
“Awesome,” and “Good.” Some more responses are below: 
“It was fun my audience (mom and dad) clapped” 
“I was epic, the crowd cheered and lifted me up after I 
stage dived off my bed. Money and roses were thrown at me. It 
was pretty cool.” 
“Almost got a standing ovation from 2 dogs” 
Unlike most of the storybook, which must be done in order, the 
user is free to skip missions. This gives users enough flexibility 
to comfortably perform the tasks required of them instead of 
faking their way through. This is more important for th e later, 
more demanding missions. One asks the user to invite a friend 
(or potential lover) to a public play and play L’amour est un 
oiseau rebelle. Another asks them to busk outside a coffee shop 
while playing Johnny Has Gone for a Soldier. 
5. IMPLEMENTATION 
Magic Fiddle was developed using the Apple iOS Software 
Development Kit and additional third -party libraries including 
Fluidsynth1 and the Mobile Music Toolkit (MoMu).  The real -
time graphical interface of the Magic Fiddle instrument was 
developed in Open GL ES, and was optimized via additional 
visual cues to provide a natural feeling of fluidity and 
responsiveness. 
 Musical data (e.g., Songbook songs and Storybook snippets) 
is stored as MIDI files augmented with tags specifying the 
score for fiddle and piano accompaniment, as well as meta -data 
for pitch-to-string mappings and articulations.  When rendering 
a Songbook or Storybook performance, a central scheduler 
synchronizes the graphics and audio and maintains a sliding 
window of upcoming notes.  As noted in Section 3.2, the audio 
for the fiddle is an implementation of commuted waveguide 
synthesis.  The piano accompaniment is rendered with 
soundfonts in a Fluidsynth.  As in other Smule applications, 
Magic Fiddle presents a globe visualization that plays bac k 
performances of users playing the instrument around the world. 
 The applications tracks achievements (e.g., getting a perfect 
score on a song, or playing ten performances) and the user’s 
position on a global leaderboard, ranked by total points earned. 
 The server-side components of Magic Fiddle provide storage 
and retrieval of user information, such as their storybook state, 
achievements; and maintains the global leaderboard.  The latest 
version of all Songbook and Storybook information is stored 
and can be updated by the client application. Real -time 
telemetry data is collected from users as they interact with the 
application, providing opportunities for usability analysis. 
6. REFLECTIONS 
In the three months following its release, Magic Fiddle has 
been downloaded onto more than 100,000 devices.  We are able 
to reflect on the user experience based on feedback from 
Storybook social homework responses, engagement data 
gathered via telemetry, reviews in the iPad App Store, and 
informal monitoring of Magic Fiddle-related posts on Twitter. 
6.1 Customization for Playability 
We provide an informal sample of tweets below to illustrate 
some different sentiments expressed about Magic Fiddle.  
6.1.1 Enthusiasm 
heatherlaforce: “Smule's magic fiddle is so much fun! 
Thankfully, it isn 't too frustrating considering my musical 
training. It does strain the wrist however” (12/26/2010).  
aprilynpodd: “I'm hooked on the iPad app: 'Magic Fiddle', 
Practiced for an hour today :)” (12/14/2010) 
swimwims: “Amazing experience! This holiday I've spe nt 
much time to play Vivaldi on my iPad:)” (11/23/2010)  
cjkonecnik: “I just opened Magic Fiddle by Smule for the first 
time and when I exited, 2 hours had gone by!” (11/10/2010) 
6.1.2 Nostalgia of Learning Violin 
MildlyAmused: “It's like being in 4th grade agai n. My 
childhood, I am reliving it”  (1/2/2011) 
RedNinjaTurtl: “All those years of not practicing violin... now 
I'm gassed up about this $3 magic fiddle app. Ridiculous. god 
knows how much mom & dad spent” (12/7/2010 ) 
                                                                  
1 www.fluidsynth.org/ 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
201
6.1.3 Social Engagements 
timmmmyboy: “Ok the  w h o l e  o f f i c e  i s  c r a c k i n g  u p  a t  m y  
attempts playing the magic fiddle now” (11/18/2010) 
Intenso: “this year's christmas eve I'll play Silent Night for my 
family on my #magic Fiddle” (11/26/2010) 
6.1.4 Commentaries on Instruments 
danhadi: “Love Magic Fiddle for iP ad. It's a new breed of 
musical instrument” (11/24/2010) 
heatherlaforce: “Smule Magic Fiddle is challenging, but so 
much fun! Perhaps I should get a real violin...” (12/24/2010) 
e_2productions: “The magic ipad fiddle - a n  i n s u l t  t o  R E A L  
musicians, or a gre at tool to bring music alive to millions?” 
(11/18/2010) 
6.2 Professional vs. Novice Performers 
The members of the St. Lawrence String Quartet 2, an Ensemble 
in Residence at Stanford University, were among the first to try 
out Magic Fiddle. Their initial response noted the lack of tactile 
feedback on individual strings, and that the players missed the 
lateral curvature of the traditional instrument’s neck.  The 
ability to bow indefinitely was appreciated.  Regardless of the 
many differences, these professional mu sicians picked up the 
instrument almost immediately, performing Pachelbel’s Canon 
as an ensemble (Figure 6). 
 
 
 
Figure 6. The St. Lawrence String Quartet on iPads. 
 In contrast, one of the authors had no experience playing a 
string instrument and at first  b e g a n  p l a y i n g  M a g i c  F i d d l e  t h e  
“improper” way, by placing the iPad on a desk and using only 
the index finger to finger the notes. But after several hours of 
practice, she learned to hold the instrument properly, fingering 
with all four fingers on the left  h a n d ,  a n d  r e a l i z e d  t h a t  t h i s  
posture actually allowed her to improve her performance. 
6.3 Concluding Remarks 
The creation of Magic Fiddle was an experiment to craft  a  
tangible artifact that is a physical realization of a symbolic 
reality. I t  c o m b i n e s  p h y s i c a l m e t a p h o r s  o f  a  v i o l i n  w i t h  t h e  
virtual elements of a game and personal music teacher. While 
the preliminary response has been positive  o n  t h e  w h o l e, we 
still have much to learn from the rich data it provides about 
how users relate to the experience. As th e computer co ntinues 
to evolve, and perhaps “disappear” , we strive to find the right 
balance between leveraging its physicality and virtuality. 
 
 
 
 
                                                                  
2 http://www.slsq.com/ 
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Thanks to the Smule team: Jeannie Yang, Tricia Heath, Ari 
Lazier, Mark Ce rquiera, Michael W ang, Perry Cook, Nicholas 
J. Bryan, Jeff Smith, Scott Bonds, Jodi Ropert, Turner Kirk, 
Clara Valenstein, Rob Hamilton, Elon Berger, Erikk Lenfers, 
Nick Rudolfsky, Nick Kruge, Phaedon Sinis, Giancarlo 
Aquilanti, Renee Thomas, Sunil Pareenja, Jim Routh, Ribbit. 
8. REFERENCES 
[1] Bryan, N. Herrera, J., Oh, J., and Wang, G. 2010. “MoMu: 
A Mobile Music Toolkit.” In Proceedings of the 
International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical 
Expression. Sydney Australia.  
[2] Cook, P.  2001.  “Principles for Designing Computer 
Music Controllers.”  In Proceeding of the International 
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression. 
[3] Dahl, L. and Wang, G. 2010. “Sound Bounce: Physical 
Metaphors in Designing Mobile Music Performances.” In 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression. Sydney, Australia. 
[4] Dourish, P. 2001. Where the action is: the foundations of 
embodied interaction: MIT Press.  
[5] Essl, G. and Rohs, M. 2009. “Interactivity for Mobile 
Music Making”, Organised Sound,  14(2): 197-207. 
[6] Gaye, L., Holmquist, E., Behrendt, F., and Tanaka, A.  
2006. “Mobile Music Technology: Report on an Emerging 
Community”, In Proceedings of the International 
Conference on New Instruments for Musical Expression. 
Paris, France.  
[7] Klemmer, S., Hartmann, B., and Takayama, L.  2006.  
“How Bodies Matter: Five Themes for Interaction 
Design.”  In Proceedings Designing Interactive Systems. 
[8] Oh, J., Herrera, H., Bryan, N., Dahl, L., and Wang, G.  
2010.  “Evolving the Mobile Phone Orchestra.”  In 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression.  Sydney, Australia. 
[9] Polanyi, M. 1967. The Tacit Dimension.  London: 
routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd.  
[10] Schiemer, G. and Havryliv, M. “Pocket Gamelan: 
Tuneable trajectories for flying sources in Mandala 3 and 
Mandala 4.” In NIME ’06: Proceedings of the 2006 
conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression. 
Paris, France. 
[11] Smith, J. O., 2010.  Physical Audio Signal Processing.  
W3K Publishing. 
[12] Tanaka, A. 2004. “Mobile Music Making.” In Proceedings 
of the International Conference on New Interfaces for 
Musical Expression, 154–156. Hamamatsu, Japan. 
[13] Wang, G. 2009. “Designing Smule's iPhone Ocarina.” In 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression, Pittsburgh, USA. 
[14] Wang, G., Essl, G., and Pentinnen, H. 2008.  “Do Mobile 
Phones Dream of Electric Orchestras?” In Proceedings of 
the International Computer Music Conference. Belfast, 
Ireland.  
[15] Wang, G., Oh, J. Salazar S., and Hamilton, R.  2011.  
“World Stage: A Crowdsourcing Paradigm for Social / 
Mobile Music.”  International Computer Music 
Conference. 
[16] Weiser, M.  1991.  “The Computer for the 21st Century.”  
Scientific American Special Issue on Communications, 
Computers, and Network.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
202