Proceedings of the 2002 Conference on New Instruments for Musical Expression (NIME-02), Dublin, Ireland, May 24-26,
2002
NIME02-01
 Experimental Controllers for Live Electronic 
Music Performance (vs. Copyright).
David Bernard
School of Television and Imaging,
Duncan of Jordanstone College of Art and Design,
University of Dundee, DD1 4HT, Scotland.
email soundsurgery@ntlworld.com
Abstract
This paper describes the design and development of sev-
eral musical instruments and M IDI controllers built by
David Bernard (as part of The Sound Surgery project:
www.thesoundsurgery.co.uk) and used in club perform-
ances around Glasgow during 1995-2002.  It argues that
changing technologies and copyright are shifting our
understanding of music from “live art” to “recorded me-
dium” whilst blurring the boundaries between sound and
visual production.
Keywords
Live electronic music, experimental instruments, MIDI
controllers, audio-visual synchronisation, copyright,
SKINS digital hand drum.
INTRODUCTION
Throughout history, new instrument designs have trig-
gered the creation of new musical genres, and, digital
technology has enabled practical ways to control com-
plex sounds and rhythms. However, electronic key-
boards and computers have also tended to limit the level
of physical interaction that exists between a musician
and his/her instrument.  That relationship is what tran-
spires during a live performance.  This illustrates how
the link between performers and their audience can be
engineered by the instruments’ designers/manufacturers.
In the case of electronic music, the possibilities seem
infinite, however after 20 odd years of commercial suc-
cess, the turntable+mixer setup has become the trade
mark instrument for performing electronic music whilst
the “live set” still suffers the “2 guys twiddling black
boxes” stereotype. 
BACKGROUND
Late ‘80s. The first rave. What’s going on?  No more
guitar soloist to worship, no more MC to deliver atti-
tude, no more stage.  The dancefloor’s layout tricks the
audience’s attention to shift inwards and realise it is
actually they who are performing, all under the watchful
eye of the music “selector” (not creator), whose mission
statements are “can you feel it?” and “move your
body”[1].  Goodbye the Artist’s self-centered exhibition.
A page is turned enabling us to rethink the performer-
audience link and what should/shouldn’t transpire dur-
ing the human+computer music making process.
DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS
Qualities required for instruments/controllers dedicated
to electronic music performances in club venues:
•  Complement (not compete with) the role of the DJ
to  enable harmonious integration of the clubbing
and concert experiences.
•  Take into consideration the aesthetic side of per-
forming from an audience’s perspective by empha-
sising the critical human-computer interaction (un-
like tiny desktop controllers).
•  Demonstrate a unique musical property unlike
“master keyboards” and other products claiming to
emulate any other instrument.
•  Be physically satisfying to play (musi-
cian/instrument bond).
PERFORMANCE INSTRUMENTS 1995-97
•  Skitar (1995): four stringed electro-acoustic ski
enabling vibrato effects using shoulder pressure.
See Figure 1.a.
•  Sound Bin (1995): self-powered sound system in a
dustbin pulled by 3 street sweepers activating
rhythmical sound effects as they brush over different
textures. See Figure 1.b.
•  Headscan (1996): electro-acoustic percussion with
effect controller and laser pattern generator housed
in a hard hat.  Different rhythms trigger different
patterns. See Figure 2.a.
•  Bleeper (1997): disturbingly simple hand-held fre-
quency generator. See Figure 2.b.

NIME02-02
•  Traffic Drum  (1997): a performance drum with
both M IDI and processed acoustic sound capabili-
ties made with a traffic cone. See Figure 3.a.
•  Drum Wheel (1996): free standing compact MIDI
drum kit made with car wheels and hubcaps. See
Figure 3.b.
•  MIDI Hoover(1997):sitar-like, percussive/harmonic
MIDI controller with tunable keys and made with a
Hoover. See Figure 3.c.
SKINS (1998)
SKINS (Figure 4.a) [2] is a digital hand drum that com-
bines traditional percussion skills with up-to-date sound
manipulations.  Designed as a practical performance tool
for both percussionists and electronic musicians, the
instrument features sensitive playing surfaces, 500 CD
quality editable sounds, real tim e sequencing and full
MIDI specs, enabling intuitive creation of wide range of
rhythmic soundscapes.  Designed in collaboration with
Ben Smith, the product received the John Logie Baird
and Millennium Product Innovation Awards. SKINS is
used regularly in performances, but, despite enthusiastic
feedback from musicians and audiences alike, the in-
strument failed to attract commercial backing from es-
tablished musical instrument manufacturers
VISUAL MUSIC
In 1910, Skyryabin (1872-1915) composed a musical
piece for “clavier a lum ières”[3]: an imaginary instru-
ment featuring pitch to light conversion.  Synchronised
lighting can be used with great effect to enhance a musi-
cal composition, creating an “expanded sound system”.
Indeed one can argue that musical rules extend beyond
both sides of the audible spectrum, it is therefore possi-
ble to compose music with infra bass, heat or light.
Video sampler software now enable real time integration
of audio and video, i.e. it is possible to play video from
a MIDI controller.  The VIDEO SW ITCHBOARD
(2000) (Figure 4.b) is a video sample/digital effect con-
troller designed as a portable unit for multi-screen audio-
visual performance.  Giving visual capabilities to a mu-
sical instrument optimises the potential of the “ex-
panded sound system” particularly with regard to per-
formance.  As more music is created via editing with a
graphic interface, real-time video production (such as
multi-camera live sporting events or client attended 3D
modeling sessions) will benefit from the skills of tradi-
tional musicians. Imagine being able to trigger video
sequences and effects with the timing and accuracy of a
tabla player.
LIVE ART VS. COPYRIGHT
The invention of the recording technology initiated radi-
cal, unreversible change for musical practices: all music
(apart maybe from musical automatons and mechanical
pianos) used to be live; from then on, music had be-
come the combination of live art and its art of recording.
As copyright and publishing rights were introduced
along with the proliferation of mass media technologies,
the recorded medium (production) gained in value whilst
the performing has been increasingly used as promo-
tional exercise aimed at selling records.  Since the intro-
duction of multitracking and computers, the “editing”
practice began to take over, rehearsing and improvising
consequently becoming lesser skills. In the end, the
dominant [recording]  part of the “industry” has been
preventing the full development of performance instru-
ments for electronic music.
CONCLUSION
Innovation gave birth to the record and film industries;
today further inventions are threatening their business
model with new practices such as peer to peer online
sharing and sampling[4].
Maybe it’s time to re-define (or even abandon) copy-
right, taking into consideration the wider interest of the
media creators (recording artists and film makers), the
performers and their audiences at global and local level.
Performance and improvisation skills are at the heart of
what we understand music to be. Only by providing
opportunities for such practices we can allow new de-
signs to mature into “real” instruments.
REFERENCES
[1] Fingers Inc, Can You Feel It, Jack Tracks, 1988.
[2] <http://www.digitalcow.net>.
[3] Griffith, P., “Modern music: a concise anthology
from Debussy to Boulez”, Thames+Hudson, 1978.
[4] Toynbee, J., Creating problems: Social Author-
ship, Copyright and the production of culture.
Pavis paper number 3, 2001
