Hex Player—A Virtual Musical Controller
Andrew J. Milne
Computing Department
The Open University
Milton Keynes, UK
andymilne@tonalcentre.org
Anna Xambó
Computing Department
The Open University
Milton Keynes, UK
a.xambo@open.ac.uk
Robin Laney
Computing Department
The Open University
Milton Keynes, UK
r.c.laney@open.ac.uk
David B. Sharp
Department of DDEM
The Open University
Milton Keynes, UK
d.sharp@open.ac.uk
Anthony Prechtl
Independent Researcher
California, USA
aprechtl@gmail.com
Simon Holland
Computing Department
The Open University
Milton Keynes, UK
s.holland@open.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we describe a playable musical interface for
tablets and multi-touch tables. The interface is a general-
ized keyboard, inspired by the Thummer, and consists of an
array of virtual buttons. On a generalized keyboard, any
given interval always has the same shape (and therefore ﬁn-
gering); furthermore, the ﬁngering is consistent over a broad
range of tunings. Compared to a physical generalized key-
board, a virtual version has some advantages—notably, that
the spatial location of the buttons can be transformed by
shears and rotations, and their colouring can be changed to
reﬂect their musical function in diﬀerent scales.
We exploit these ﬂexibilities to facilitate the playing not
just of conventional Western scales but also a wide variety of
microtonal generalized diatonic scales known as moment of
symmetry, or well-formed, scales. A user can choose such a
scale, and the buttons are automatically arranged so their
spatial height corresponds to their pitch, and buttons an
octave apart are always vertically above each other. Fur-
thermore, the most numerous scale steps run along rows,
while buttons within the scale are light-coloured, and those
outside are dark or removed.
These features can aid beginners; for example, the chosen
scale might be the diatonic, in which case the piano’s famil-
iar white and black colouring of the seven diatonic and ﬁve
chromatic notes is used, but only one scale ﬁngering need
ever be learned (unlike a piano where every key needs a
diﬀerent ﬁngering). Alternatively, it can assist advanced
composers and musicians seeking to explore the universe of
unfamiliar microtonal scales.
Keywords
generalized keyboard, isomorphic layout, multi-touch sur-
face, tablet, musical interface design, iPad, microtonality
1. INTRODUCTION
Hex Player is a virtual musical controller. It is played by
the ﬁngers and sends standard MIDI messages to control
any software or hardware synthesizer. It is designed to
make playing music easier without imposing a ceiling on
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’11,30 May–1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Figure 1: Hex Player on a tablet. The white/grey
buttons are generalized diatonic/chromatic notes.
expressiveness and creative possibilities. Hex Player lives
on a multi-touch surface such as a tablet (e.g., iPad) or ta-
ble (e.g., Evoluce or Microsoft Surface), and consists of a
lattice (array) of hexagonal buttons (see Figure 1).
Pressing any of these virtual buttons sends a MIDI note
event to a software, or external hardware, synthesizer. The
blank areas to the left and right of the buttons are a control
surface that can be operated by the thumb or pinkie (little
ﬁnger) of each hand; these can be used to control a number
of expressive parameters such as timbre, volume, vibrato, or
tuning, while the four ﬁngers (or three ﬁngers and thumb)
play notes. This means that an expressive lead part (with
pitch bends, and vibrato, etc.) can be played with one
hand, and a bass line or chords with the other. Contrast
this with a piano-style keyboard, where an expressive lead
part typically requires two hands—one to play the notes, the
other to operate the pitch-bend/modulation wheel/joystick.
Hex Player’s note layouts and use of a thumb-operated
controller are based upon the design of Thumtronic Inc.’s
prototypical hardware instrument, the Thummer (http://
thummer.com). The Thummer project is now open source
and, in this paper, we describe how we have transferred
many of the design features of the hardware Thummer to
a software virtual interface, and how we have further ex-
tended its capabilities in ways that would not be possible
in a hardware device.
Like the Thummer, Hex Player provides a generalized
keyboard and uses an isomorphic note layout. Generalized
keyboards have their keys, or buttons, arranged in a regu-
lar (typically two-dimensional) lattice. Such keyboards date
back at least as far as the nineteenth century; many exam-
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
244
ples of which are given in [6]. On a generalized keyboard, it
is possible to arrange pitches isomorphically, which ensures
that the same interval, scale, or chord, always has the same
geometrical shape regardless of transposition [2, 7]. Fur-
thermore, intervals, scales, and chords (when categorized
according to reasonable criteria) have the same geometrical
shape over a wide range of tunings, thus enabling tuning to
be altered without aﬀecting note layout [8].
In this paper, we describe four novel extensions to the cur-
rent theory of generalized keyboards and isomorphic note
layouts: ﬁrstly, we introduce a class ofadjacent seconds
note layouts, which generalize many of the useful proper-
ties of the Wicki accordion button layout (the layout used
by the Thummer) over a wide variety of microtonal scales;
secondly, we describe how shears and rotations of the lay-
outs ensure the pitch height of each button is shown by its
spatial height, and that buttons an octave apart are ver-
tically aligned; thirdly, we show how the amount of shear
applied to the layout (and hence its tuning) can be dy-
namically controlled while playing; fourthly, we show how
alterable button colouration can be used to indicate gener-
alized diatonic and chromatic scales (well-formed or MOS
scales—formally deﬁned in Section 2.1.4).
In the next section, we provide some of the music theo-
retical and mathematical underpinnings required to under-
stand these innovations. After that, we discuss some of the
potential beneﬁts of an interface like Hex Player.
2. GENERALIZED KEYBOARDS AND ISO-
MORPHIC NOTE LAYOUTS
Generalized keyboards with isomorphic layouts have a num-
ber of properties that may facilitate the comprehension and
playing of music.
2.1 Basic Deﬁnitions
Before proceeding to a full description of the interface and
its properties, some formal deﬁnitions may be helpful.
2.1.1 Generalized Keyboard
As pictured in Figure 2, a generalized keyboard or button-
lattice consists of a regular array of (real or virtual) buttons
[7], each of which plays a musical tone. The buttons could
be arranged in one-, two-, or three-dimensional space, but
we will restrict this discussion to two-dimensional lattices
(because these can be implemented on a surface).
2.1.2 Two-dimensional Tuning System
A two-dimensional tuning system is one that is generated
from two intervals—a period (typically the octave), and
a generator (typically a perfect ﬁfth). For example, the
pentatonic scale can be generated by stacking four perfect
ﬁfths (e.g., C–G–D–A–E) and reducing them by octaves so
all tones lie within one octave (e.g., in pitch order, C, D,
E, G, A); the diatonic scale can be generated by stacking
six perfect ﬁfths (F–C–G–D–A–E–B) and reducing them
by octaves (e.g., in pitch order, C, D, E, F, G, A, B); the
chromatic scale by stacking eleven such ﬁfths (e.g., E♭–B♭–
F–C–G–D–A–E–B–F♯–C♯–G♯) and reducing them (e.g., in
pitch order, C, C ♯, D, E ♭, E, F, F ♯, G, G ♯, A, B ♭, B). The
period and generator can, however, take any size (not just
octave and ﬁfth), and diﬀerent sizes can generate unfamiliar
scales that share a number of properties with the familiar
pentatonic, diatonic, and chromatic.
2.1.3 Isomorphic Layout
An isomorphic layout is one in which the period and gener-
ator of the tuning system are mapped to a spatial basis of
Figure 2: An isomorphic note layout (the Wicki lay-
out) on a virtual generalized keyboard.
the button-lattice [8]. There are several possible bases, and
hence several possible mappings (and each diﬀerent map-
ping constitutes a diﬀerent note layout), but one of the most
historically successful (at least in the case of the chromatic
scale) can be found in the Wicki accordion button layout
[13]. The key to understanding the Wicki mapping is to
note how the period and generator (here octave and ﬁfth)
are mapped spatially (see Figure 2—the arrows show the
spatial vectors corresponding to the period and generator).
2.1.4 Moment of Symmetry/Well-formed Scales
A moment of symmetry(MOS) [14] or well-formed [4] scale
is a generated scale containing exactly two step sizes that
are distributed with maximal evenness. A generated scale
is produced by repeatedly adding a generator interval (typ-
ically a perfect ﬁfth) and then reducing all such intervals
by repeatedly subtracting a period interval (typically the
octave) so all intervals are smaller than the period.
The number of times the generator can be stacked so as
to produce just two step sizes depends on the ratio of the
generator and period. For example, if the generator is 702
cents and the period is 1200 cents (a generator/period ratio
of 0.585), then well-formed scales are available with 3 tones
(e.g., C, D, G), 5 tones (e.g., C, D, E, G, A), 7 tones (e.g.,
C, D, E, F ♯, G, A, B), 12 tones (e.g., C, C ♯, D, D ♯, E, E♯,
F♯, G, G♯, A, A♯, B), 17 tones, and so forth [4]. A diﬀerent
generator/period ratio requires diﬀerent numbers of tones
to produce a well-formed scale—when the generator is 316
cents (a just intonation “minor third”) and the period is
1200 cents, the following numbers of tones are well-formed:
3, 4, 7, 11, 15, 19, and so forth. With no loss of generality,
whenever the size of the period is not explicitly mentioned,
it is assumed to be 1200 cents.
MOS scales have a number of properties that are thought
to give them æsthetic value. There is not space to discuss
these properties in depth but, brieﬂy: every scale span—
generic interval size—comes in exactly two speciﬁc interval
sizes (Myhill’s property [5]); the two scale step sizes are
evenly distributed throughout the period; within the pe-
riod, every scale degree has a unique pattern of intervals
surrounding it [1]—this may be necessary for any scale to
support tonal functionality; when transposed by the gener-
ator, the resulting scale shares all but one tone, facilitating
modulation [1]; collectively, these features suggest a good
compromise between the excessive simplicity of equal step
scales and the complexity of completely irregular scales [3].
An MOS, therefore, provides an eﬀective way to choose a
scale (a set of notes) from any abstract 2-D tuning.
2.2 General Properties of Isomorphic Layouts
An isomorphic layout has a number of musically useful prop-
erties discussed in the subsections below.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
245
2.2.1 Transpositional Invariance
Any given interval, chord, or scale, has the same geomet-
rical shape (and hence ﬁngering) regardless of its location
(transposition) on the keyboard. So, a musician need learn
the ﬁngering for a major scale, or harmonic minor scale, or
third inversion of a dominant seventh chord, just once, and
then apply that same shape to any key or root note. Com-
pare this to the piano, where every diﬀerent major scale
requires a diﬀerent pattern of notes to be memorized [8].
2.2.2 Tuning Invariance
The ﬁngering of a wide range of scales can remain invari-
ant over a wide range of tunings. For example, the ﬁn-
gering of diatonic/chromatic music will stay essentially in-
variant when the generator has any size between 685.714
and 720 cents. This continuum of tunings includes many
notable tunings, such as 19-tone equal temperament (19-
tet), various meantone tunings, 12- tet, Pythagorean, 17-
tet and 22-tet, so consistent ﬁngering may facilitate the
exploration of alternative tunings [8]. There are many dif-
ferent tuning continua, each of which smoothly connects a
wide variety of notable tunings [9].
2.2.3 Pitch Axis
Any isomorphic layout has a pitch axis, and the position
of any button centre in relation to this axis indicates its
pitch. The angle of this axis depends on the note layout
(spatial mapping of the period and generator) used and the
tuning ratio of the generator and period [9]. For example, in
Figure 2, the pitch axis for a generator of 700 cents (which
corresponds to a 12-tet tuning) is identiﬁed by the dashed
white line—note how the distance, measured along this line,
between D3 and E3 is two thirds of the distance between
D3 and F3 (draw three lines between the pitch axis and D3,
E3, and F3, such that all three lines are orthogonal to the
pitch axis; the distance between the D3 and E3 lines is two
thirds the distance between the D3 and F3 lines).
2.2.4 Generator-Span Axis
The generator-span axis is a novel concept introduced in
this paper. Any isomorphic layout also has a generator-
span axis, such that the distance between any two button
centres, as measured on this axis, indicates the number of
generators between them. For example, in Figure 2 the
generator-span axis is shown with a black dashed line—the
distance, measured on this axis, between D3 and A3 is half
the distance of D3 and E3 (there is one ﬁfth between the
former, and two ﬁfths between the latter).
Assuming the period and generator are linearly indepen-
dent, any two notes a period (octave) apart have zero gen-
erator distance, hence the generator-span axis is orthogonal
to the spatial mapping of the period.
Pitch distance and generator distance are two important
musical metrics. The importance of the former is obvious;
one importance of the latter is that any given MOS scale
always forms a strip running parallel with the octaves.
3. HEX PLAYER
In Hex Player, the pitch and generator-span axes are ori-
ented, and a speciﬁc isomorphic layout is selected, so as to
maximize certain useful criteria described below.
3.1 Orthogonal Axes
Due to their importance, we have endeavoured to make the
pitch and generator-span axes easy to discern, visually and
haptically. To do this, we use a novel approach: applying
shear and rotation transforms of the lattice to make the
pitch axis vertical and the generator-span axis horizontal,
regardless of the isomorphic layout or tuning being used.
The vertical pitch axis means it is easy to know, in advance
of playing, the pitch of any button and that, as the hand
plays an ascending scale, it moves gradually away from the
body. Furthermore, the horizontal generator-span axis en-
sures that notes an octave apart are vertically aligned.
3.2 Adjacent Seconds Layouts
Adjacent seconds layoutsare a novel concept, and general-
ize, for any possible MOS scale, some of the useful features
of the Wicki layout: a notable property of the Wicki layout,
when used for the pentatonic and diatonic scales, is that the
most numerous scale step (the whole-tone) runs along each
row (in Figure 2, observe the scale runs C-D-E and F-G-
A-B), while the least numerous scale step (“minor third” in
the pentatonic, and semitone in the diatonic) is reached by
a “carriage return” skip up to the next row (in Figure 2,
observe the steps E-F and B-C).
For the Wicki layout, this neat property breaks down for
most other MOS scales. For example, Figure 3a shows the
Wicki layout of the MOS scale with 4 large and 7 small
steps (the generator is 320 cents)—the most numerous sec-
onds now skip buttons, the scale’s pattern is more diﬃcult
to make out, and is not spatially compact. However, by
choosing an appropriate isomorphic layout, it is possible for
any MOS scale to have the adjacent seconds property. In-
deed, for the 120 diﬀerent possible MOS scales with nineteen
or fewer tones, only 13 diﬀerent layouts are required.
Figure 3b shows how an adjacent seconds layout for the 4
large 7 small MOS scale gives a far more compact and easy
to understand layout than the Wicki. In Hex Player, a user
can ﬁrst choose an MOS scale (by inputting the number
of large and small steps in the scale), and then click on
“Optimize Layout” to switch to an adjacent seconds layout.
3.3 Dynamic Tuning
The horizontal generator-span axis ensures all MOS scales
form a vertical strip of buttons. The space on either side
can, therefore, be used as a control surface accessible to the
thumb and pinkie; either of these ﬁngers can change the
shear of the lattice, and send a correlated MIDI CC value,
while the remaining ﬁngers are playing. The CC message
can ensure the synth’s tuning matches that implied by the
lattice’s shear.1 This opens up the possibility of players
dynamically mimicking the expressive intonations used by
advanced string and aerophone players. For example, the
thumb can be used to move smoothly between meantone
tunings that are ideal for sustained chords, and Pythagorean
tunings suitable for expressive melodies [11].
Outside of these familiar Western tunings, the performer
can move dynamically, and smoothly, to non-Western tun-
ings such as 5- tet (as used in Indonesian slendro [12]) or
7-tet (as used in traditional Thai music [10]).
These large thumb-/pinkie-operated control surface areas
can also be mapped to any parameter, so may also control
other pitch or timbral features (e.g., vibrato or brightness).
3.4 Generalized Chromatic Embeddings
Any MOS scale with m large steps and n small can be
embedded in an MOS scale with 2m+n steps. For example,
the pentatonic scale can be embedded within the diatonic
scale, which can be embedded within the chromatic, and
so on [4]. This provides a neat method to generalize the
1Dynamic tuning changes such as these require the use of
a Dynamic Tonality synthesizer such as TransFormSynth,
The Viking, and 2032, which can be downloaded fromhttp:
//www.dynamictonality.com.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
246
Figure 3: The scale degrees of the 4 large, 7 small steps MOS scale (the generator is 320 cents) in a) the
Wicki layout, and b) an adjacent seconds layout. The horizontal lines show the pitch height of every button.
“chromatic” embedding of any MOS scale. In Hex Player,
when an MOS scale is chosen (by entering the number of
large and small steps), it is automatically displayed as light-
coloured buttons (in a central vertical band), surrounded by
dark-coloured “chromatic” notes.
This allows for scales of increasing complexity to be pre-
sented to a beginner in a consistent fashion. For example,
children are frequently taught the pentatonic scale (e.g., C,
D, E, G, A) as a ﬁrst step in their musical education (e.g.,
the Orﬀ and Kod´ aly methods). In Hex Player, the penta-
tonic scale can be shown as a light coloured vertical strip of
buttons, while the more challenging diatonic notes (in this
case, F and B) are dark-coloured buttons on either side of
this strip. When the student is ready, the diatonic scale can
be shown as vertical strip of light-coloured buttons, with the
more challenging chromatic tones shown in a dark colour ei-
ther side. All of these representations are consistent—the
same spatial shape always plays the same interval—but, as
the scales become more complex, the strip just gets wider.
4. CONCLUSIONS
This paper presents a novel virtual musical interface de-
signed to facilitate the playing of both familiar and unfa-
miliar musics by musicians at all levels: from beginners to
advanced microtonalists. We do this by combining many
of the well-established advantages of generalized keyboards
with some novel extensions.
In summary, the interface allows a user to select any MOS
scale, and its tuning, such that: a) all intervals have the
same shape regardless of transposition; b) all intervals (cat-
egorized by reasonable criteria) have the same shape over a
wide range of tunings; c) the layout ensures the pitch axis
and generator-span axis are vertical and horizontal, respec-
tively, and so are visually and haptically salient and distinct;
d) the most numerous scale steps run along rows, the less
numerous are “carriage returns” up to the next row; e) the
notes in the scale and the “chromatic” scale, within which
it is embedded, are displayed as light- and dark-coloured
buttons lying in a vertical strip at the centre of the dis-
play; f) the space either side of the note strip can be used
as a control surface, enabling the thumb or pinkie to dy-
namically alter the tuning (and correspondingly change the
shear of the lattice so as to reﬂect the resulting pitches of
the buttons) while the remaining ﬁngers play.
The dynamically changing shears, rotations, and button
colourings are diﬃcult to implement in a hardware interface,
hence the usefulness of the virtual realisations made possible
by multi-touch surfaces. A drawback of current surfaces,
however, is the lack of tactile feedback and velocity and
pressure sensitivity. It is unknown, at this stage, to what
extent this impacts upon their utility; we intend to explore
these issues in future research.
5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to Jim Plamondon for the original inspiration.
6. REFERENCES
[1] G. J. Balzano. The pitch set as a level of description
for studying musical perception. In M. Clynes, editor,
Music, Mind, and Brain. Plenum Press, New York,
1982.
[2] R. H. M. Bosanquet. Elementary Treatise on Musical
Intervals and Temperament. Macmillan, London,
1877.
[3] N. Carey. Coherence and sameness in well-formed and
pairwise well-formed scales. Journal of Mathematics
and Music, 1(2):79–98, 2007.
[4] N. Carey and D. Clampitt. Aspects of well-formed
scales. Music Theory Spectrum, 11(2):187–206, 1989.
[5] J. Clough, N. Engebretsen, and J. Kochavi. Scales,
sets, and interval cycles: A taxonomy. Music Theory
Spectrum, 21(1):74–104, 1999.
[6] H. L. F. Helmholtz. On the Sensations of Tone as a
Physiological Basis for the Theory of Music. Dover,
New York, 1877.
[7] D. Keislar. History and principles of microtonal
keyboards. Computer Music Journal, 11(1):18–28,
1987.
[8] A. J. Milne, W. A. Sethares, and J. Plamondon.
Isomorphic controllers and Dynamic Tuning:
Invariant ﬁngering over a tuning continuum.
Computer Music Journal, 31(4):15–32, 2007.
[9] A. J. Milne, W. A. Sethares, and J. Plamondon.
Tuning continua and keyboard layouts. Journal of
Mathematics and Music, 2(1):1–19, 2008.
[10] D. Morton. The music of Thailand. In E. May, editor,
Music of Many Cultures, pages 63–82. University of
California Press, Berkeley, CA, 1980.
[11] J. Sundberg, A. Friberg, and L. Fryd´ en. Rules for
automated performance of ensemble music.
Contemporary Music Review, 3(1):89–109, 1989.
[12] W. Surjodiningrat, P. J. Sudarjana, and A. Susanto.
Tone Measurements of Outstanding Javanese
Gamelan in Yogyakarta and Surakarta. Gadjah Mada
University Press, Yogyakarta, Indonesia, 1993.
[13] K. Wicki. Tastatur f ¨ur musikinstrumente, Oct. 1896.
[14] E. Wilson. Letter to Chalmers pertaining to
moments-of-symmetry/Tanabe cycle, 1975.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
247