A Look at the Design and Creation of a 
Graphically Controlled Digital Musical Instrument 
Daniel Gómez
Cultural Studies
Universidad EAFIT
Medellín Colombia
dgomezm1@eafit.edu.co
Tjebbe Donner
Cultural Studies
Universidad EAFIT
Medellín Colombia
t_donner@yahoo.com
Andrés Posada
Cultural Studies
Universidad EAFIT
Medellín Colombia
anposada@eafit.edu.co
Abstract
In this article we want to show how graphical languages can be 
used successfully for monitoring and controlling a digital 
musical instrument.  An overview of the design and development 
stages of this instrument shows how we can create models 
which will simplify the control and use of different kinds of 
musical algorithms for synthesis and sequencing.  
1. INTRODUCTION
Programs which allow users to write their own algorithms for 
generating and controlling sound (Pure Data, Max/MSP, 
Supercollider among others) are an advance in musical creation 
for musical composers and enthusiasts with programming 
knowledge [1]. Nonetheless prior knowledge needed for using 
these programs, including mathematics, physics and logic, have 
created a perception that their access is limited to persons with 
this knowledge and that musician’s cannot have access to them 
[2], [3]. For this reason, people with good musical ideas and 
skills decide not to use these programs due to the high learning 
curve associated with them.  We can see therefore how the 
creation of new instruments with the power and flexibility of 
algorithmic programs but that are easier to manipulate and 
program becomes an important task for digital luthiers [4][5].
We will present some of the characteristics we believe these 
instruments should possess in this paper, where we will talk 
about the design and creation of the SIMTE instrument, 
created to try and solve some of these accessibility and 
comprehension issues.  
2. DEVELOPMENT
During 2006 we carried out a number of activities aiming at 
designing and developing this musical instrument.  
2.1 Preliminary Research:
We began by studying graphic notations from 20th and 21st 
Century composers [6],[17] surveying their compositions and 
symbols with the following questions in mind:  Why did they 
need this symbol?  What can we infer from it in designing 
graphical objects of use in our instrument?  What ideas of 
control, mapping, sonority and temporality do these symbols 
imply?  
Alongside this, we developed algorithms of Subtractive, FM 
and Granular synthesis that would offer mappable control 
variables.  
We sought alternatives for sharing data between our graphical 
interface, to be designed in Java, and our synthesis engine, 
developed in Pure Data [22], and decided to use the OSC 
protocol. [18]
A number of ideas arose from this initial stage which we 
applied during the development process.  These ideas affected 
the interface, synthesis operation and internal variable mapping:  
 Permanent graphical feedback for receiving information 
regarding the instrument’s state and controlling it with the 
least possible latency between gestures made on the 
interface and the sonic response.[4]  
 Use of basic geometrical figures (Morton Feldman, Cage) 
in designing the interface.  
 Possibility of randomness and non-linearity (Cage  
“Concert for piano and orchestra”)
 Possibility of Indetermination at the moment of 
interpretation, using a continuous line that draws a 
dynamic or melodic profile. [6],[20]
 Use of color to demonstrate the connection between 
different graphical elements.  
 Creation of a framework which will allow the user to 
control all the Synthesizers and use them to create 
sequences.  
Using these guidelines we began a process of experimentation 
where we approached each kind of synthesis independently 
analyzing both their general processes of sonic transformation 
and the particular elements each one presents.  
Some of these elements are common to the different types of 
synthesis (envelopes, oscillators), but the relationships between 
them vary depending on the kind of synthesis.  Thus, the 
particular elements that make up a “general interpretation” of 
synthesis were mapped differently to the algorithms, seeking to 
exploit to the highest degree the variables in each graphic 
(color, shape, position, size and relation to other elements), 
using them for sonic control.  
2.2 The Instrument
2.2.1 The Interface
Our general idea with the interface was using it as a surface for 
both monitoring and controlling the application. 
This need arises from experience with hardware synthesizers (or 
their digital emulations), where the number of elements 
assigned to different variables makes it difficult to understand 
how a sound is programmed with a glance at the control 
surface.  This happens because: All the knobs look the same, 
they hold information pertaining to a single variable, and the 
manner in which modulators (LFOs, envelopes, modulation 
wheel) are assigned to variables (frequencies, times, volumes, 
etc.) isn’t permanently visible.  
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
NIME07, June 7-9, 2007, New York, NY
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
327
So we decided that:
 The controls for all the variables of our algorithms 
must be visible.
 These controls must offer the possibility of 
manipulation in a number of dimensions.  
 We will use color for indicating a connection between 
a modulator and its affected variable.  
2.2.2 Sequencing
SIMTE has a central interface where the user can organize 
sequences of sound in time and other interfaces which allow the 
user to modify the timbre of the generated sounds.  
Seeking simplicity in the sequencing interface we used color 
squares to symbolize a sonic event and to store its variables.  
These colored squares have an air of Mondriaan paintings or of 
Molton Feldman’s scores, especially the composition called
“projection I” [8].
The squares with musical information can be connected to each 
other in order to organize cells of small musical phrases which 
can be looped.  An unlimited number of cells can operate in 
parallel.  See Figure 1 for an example of a musical cell in 
SIMTE’s Sequencer.
Playback for each cell can be activated using any of its elements 
as a starting point, offering new orders of playback within the 
same cell.  An element was also created that allow random 
playback within the cell. 
Figure 1: Fragment of a cell in SIMTE’s Sequencer 
interface
2.2.3 Elements of Synthesis
We have designed the graphical elements for controlling the 
synthesis algorithms to allow simpler and more intuitive 
manipulation than on finds in classical synthesizers. [19]
Filters, for example, are colored objects than can become a 
resonant low pass, high pass or band pass filter by modifying 
their width and position in x-y space.  
LFOs can be freely drawn by the user, and with a single stroke 
can control oscillation speed, amplitude, amount of modulation 
and a personalized waveform.  [19]
2.2.4 Synthesizers
SIMTE contains subtractive, FM [23] and granular synthesis 
modules.  The following is an example of how we implemented 
graphical FM synthesis: Ever since the commercial introduction 
of FM synthesizers [9], programming (but not using) this 
synthesis has been the realm of experts, since the behavior of 
the harmonics it generates is more complicated than subtraction 
with filters or addition using oscillators. [10] 
Nonetheless, the rich tones achievable with FM synthesis and 
the small number of elements necessary for achieving them 
make them a fundamental part of our instrument.  
Using 3 rings as metaphors for the modulating oscillators whose 
position controls amplitude and tuning regarding a carrier wave, 
we have a simple method for manipulating FM synthesis 
without using sound banks but rather working at the heart itself 
of sound generation.  Each modulator has a sub-modulator, an 
envelope and can have controlled random “vibration”.  
3. FUTURE WORK
This first version of SIMTE hasn’t left the lab yet.  One of the 
next steps will be placing this musical instrument into the hands 
of professional and amateur musicians who will carry out 
different exercises in composition which will reveal different 
uses which haven’t been thought of by the work group, design 
failures, and directions in which the instrument should grow, 
according to different musical contexts.  
We will also be working on connecting different SIMTE 
instruments over the Internet in order to create networks of 
remote musicians who can make music in real time.  
SIMTE’s reduced size (only a few hundred KB) and its 
interface programmed in Java, allow us to consider 
incorporating SIMTE into mobile devices that could control 
remote audio engines.  
Finally, the work done on the graphical representation of 
complex data and musical algorithms, allows us to foresee 
simpler and more efficient interfaces for representing and 
controlling musical instruments.  
4. CONCLUSIONS
The creation of digital instruments is a science that is only just 
bearing its first fruits, especially as regards overcoming the 
paradigm of imitating the analog world and starting to make 
proper use of the advantages offered by computers, such as 
powerful graphics generation and processing power.  
Nonetheless there are still a number of paradigms to overcome 
such as the division between Synthesis and Sequencing 
inherited from the separation between Composition and 
Interpretation.  One could imagine the development of complex 
instruments where sequencer variables are interleaved with 
synthesis variables in order to create instruments for future 
music.  
Finally, the graphical representation of the synthesis process 
allows us to understand sonic generation in terms of spatial and 
chromatic relationships between a limited set of elements.  This 
permits a faster interpretation and operation of synthesis 
algorithms and can therefore become a powerful teaching tool.  
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank the Department of Music at EAFIT 
University, and composers Nicolás Wills and Juan Fernando 
Ossa for their priceless collaboration as regards sonic 
experimentation with the Instrument.  
6. BIBLIOGRAPHY
[1] Puckette, Miller.  Using Pd as a score language
[2] Schnell, Norbert & Battier, Marc. “Introducing Composed 
Instruments, Technical and Musicological Implications” in 
Proceedings NIME 2002.
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
328
[3] Berio, Luciano, “Prospettive nella musica,” Elettronica, 
5(3), 1956.
[4] Magnusson, Thor.  ixi software: The Interface as Instrument
[5] Jordá, Sergi.  “Digital Instruments and Players: Part I –
Efficiency and Apprenticeship” in Proceedings of NIME 2004.
[6] READ, Gardner. “Pictographic Score Notation: A 
Compendium”. Greenwood Press (May 30, 1998) preface.
[7] Pritchett, James, “The music of John Cage”. Cambridge
University Press (1996)
[8] DeLio, Thomas, “Music of Morton Feldman”. Routledge 
(2001)
[9] Dodge, C.,Jerse,T., “Computer music: Syntheis, 
Composition and performance.”
[10] Roads, Curtis, "Computer music tutorial". MIT press 
(1996)
[11] Jordá, S., “Interactive music systems for everyone: 
exploring visual feedback as a way for creating more intuitive, 
efficient and learnable instruments” Proceedings of the 
Stockholm Music Acoustics Conference, August 6-9, 2003 
(SMAC 03)
[12] Wanderley, Marcelo. “Gestural Control of Music.”
IRCAM, Centre Pompidou, Paris
[13] Cook. P., "Principles for Designing Computer Music 
Controllers", NIME Workshop – CHI, 2001.
[14] Jordà, S. “Improvising with Computers: A personal Survey
(1989-2001).” Proceedings of the 2001 International Computer 
Music Conference. San Francisco: International Computer 
Music Association.
[15] Jordá S. “Sonigraphical Instruments: From FMOL to the 
reacTable*”
[16] Miranda, Eduardo. “Composing Music with Computers” 
(Music Technology Series) Focal Press (2001)
[17] http://sourceforge.net/projects/iannix
[18] Wright, Matthew & Freed, Adrian "Open SoundControl: A 
New Protocol for Communicating with Sound Synthesizers". 
Center for New Music and Audio Technologies, U.C. Berkeley. 
ICM97
[19] Zadel, Marc. “Different Strokes: a Prototype Software 
System forLaptop Performance and Improvisation” in 
Proceedings NIME 2006
[20] Read, Gardner. “Compendium of Modern Instrumental 
Techniques” Greenwood Press (1993)
[21] Jorda, Sergi. “Digital Lutherie Crafting musical computers 
for new musics’ performance and improvisation“ PHD Thesis 
(Technollogy and digital communication) Universitat Pompeu 
Fabra, Technology Department 2005.
[22] http://crca.ucsd.edu/~msp/software.html
[23] Chowning, J.,"The Synthesis of Complex Audio Spectra by 
Means of Frequency Modulation", Journal Of the Audio 
Engineering Society,vol 21,1973.
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
329