VESBALL: A ball-shaped instrument for music therapy  
 
Ajit NATH 
Laboratory of Ubiquitous Musical Expression 
City University of Hong Kong 
Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon Tong, 
Hong Kong 
nath.ajit01@gmail.com 
 
Samson YOUNG 
Laboratory of Ubiquitous Musical Expression 
City University of Hong Kong 
Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon Tong 
Hong Kong 
skfyoung@cityu.edu.hk 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
In this paper the authors describe the VESBALL, which is a ball-
shaped musical interface designed for group music therapy. Therapy 
sessions take the form of “musical ensembles” comprised of 
individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), typically led by 
one or more certified music therapists. VESBALL had been 
developed in close consultation with therapists, clients, and other 
stakeholders, and had undergone several phases of trials at a music 
therapy facility over a period of 6 months. VESBALL has an 
advantage over other related work in terms of its robustness, ease of 
operation and setup (for clients and therapists), sound source 
integration, and low cost of production. The authors hope 
VESBALL would positively impact the  conditions of 
individuals with ASD, and pave way for new research in 
custom-designed NIME for communities with specific 
therapeutic needs. 
 
Keywords 
 
NIME, music therapy, ensemble music making, Autism Spectrum 
Disorder (ASD). 
 
  
 
Figure 1. VESBALL. 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
The authors designed a musical interface called VESBALL for 
people with mild to moderate Autism Spectrum Disorder 
(ASD), who received regular music therapy in groups at a 
government community health center. These individuals 
(“clients”) have reduced co -ordination skills, diminished 
attention span, and diminished abilities to follow instructions. 
Typically, simple percussive instruments (such as drums, 
woodblocks and cymbals) are used in these sessions. 
Traditional instruments however are not c ustomizable, and 
therapists are limited in terms of sound by the range of 
instruments that the facility could afford. Often times, a single 
instrument is generalized to serve a wide variety of therapeutic 
as well as musical goals. There is a need for a cheap alternative 
that is easy to setup, yet customizable in terms of sound and 
modes of interaction. 
VESBALL has been developed for and in close collaboration 
with music therapy professionals. It is a ball shaped instrument 
with a soft exterior. Its construction is simple, and is consisted 
of (1) soft foam form factor, (2) a microcontroller connected to 
an accelerometer and a piezoelectric sensor, and (3) an 
embedded loud speaker. VESBALL had undergone several 
phases of testing over a period of six months in group music 
therapy sessions for people with ASD, under the supervision of 
a certified music therapist. It has been designed for ensemble 
music making. The documented positive effects of ensemble 
music making on people with ASD include [10]: 
• Increased appropriate social behaviors and decreased 
inappropriate, stereotypical and self-stimulatory behaviors 
• Increased attention to task [9] 
• Increased vocalizations, verbalizations, gestures, and 
vocabulary comprehension [4] 
• Increased communicative acts and engagement with others 
[5] 
• Enhanced body awareness and coordination 
• Improved self-care skills and symbolic play 
• Anxiety reduction 
 
 
2. RELATED WORK 
 
A number of NIME had been developed in recent times for 
individuals with therapeutic needs. In this section the authors 
describe several examples that are relevant to their work.  
 
 
2.1 Skoog 
 
Skoog [16] is a “soft, squeezable object” that responds to a light 
touch or a compression of its malleable interface. Skoog is 
multi-touch sensitive, and has five color -coded responsive 
zones. Using physical modeling software developed within 
Max/MSP, it is possible to dynamically manipulate 
instrumental sounds though pressing, squeezing, rubbing, 
stroking, tilting or manipulating the Skoog. To play, user has to 
connect the interface to a computer, which interprets sensor 
387
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
information and also plays the sounds. Skoog has been designed 
for individual exploration in a solo setting. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Skoog Interface. 
 
 
2.2 Sound=Space 
 
Sound=Space is a webcam -based system that captures the  
movement of persons in the view of a camera, which is 
suspended from the ceiling. A musical topology is generated 
through the analysis of information gathered about the 
movement of a body, or several bodies, in a “sensorized space” 
[13]. This information is fed as control variables to a computer 
executing compositional algorithms. While Sound=Space has 
been used in group mus ic therapy sessions with promising 
results, the source of sound (speakers) and the object of 
interaction (the “sensorized space”) are separated. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Children interacting with Sound=space. 
 
2.3 Soundbeam 
 
Soundbeam [14][3] is a MIDI hardware and software system 
developed by the Soundb eam Project / EMS. Movements 
detected by a series of ultrasonic beams are used to control 
multimedia outputs. Soundbeam uses a combination of ultra 
(sonar) and tangible (foot controller) inputs to generate MIDI 
messages. Again, the use of Soundbeam requires connection to 
a computer. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Soundbeam. 
 
2.4 Others 
 
Several other NIME for music therapy are briefly discussed 
below. 
 
2.4.1 BrainFingers   
 
A headband fitted with sensors detects electrical signals from 
facial muscles, eye movements, and brainwaves. The Software 
converts signals into computer controls or "Brainfingers," 
which are used to control MIDI software [1]. Individuals with 
ASD have used BrainFingers in performance [6]. 
 
2.4.2 BCMI-Piano System 
 
BCMI-Piano system converts EEG signals to MIDI data that 
drives music software. BCMI system allows individuals with 
disabilities to generate music with their mind [7]. This system 
could potentially be used in music therapy to reinforce attention 
and focus. 
 
2.4.3 MidiCreator 
 
Another MIDI interface commonly used in music therapy 
sessions across the UK, consisted of a range of sensory inputs 
that send data to a computer to produce sounds [7]. 
 
 
2.5. Comparison with VESBALL 
 
A significant drawback of the instruments listed above is their 
high cost of production and maintenance. Many are also 
difficult to set up, especially for music therapy professionals 
with little to no technical background. The majority of music 
therapy centers are not-for-profit entities funded by foundations 
and/or charitable organizations that cannot afford expensive 
equipment or technical personnel. These facilities lack access to 
storage, high-end computers, and high fidelity audio monitors, 
making many of the aforementioned NIMEs impractical. 
Designs that require connection to a computer are also not 
ideal, as clients with reduced motor skills and/or co-ordination 
388
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
could accidentally dislodge and damage expensive computer 
equipment.  
 
Additionally, the majority of these NIMEs cannot be used to 
support “ active music therapy”  (with the excep tion of 
sound=space) that calls for a range of bodily motions as well as 
group interactions, which is a common music therapy approach 
especially with children [2]. VESBALL is robust, portable, 
requires no computer and no power cable, can be thrown 
around, and is cheap to produce. Authors estimate that cost of 
producing each of these would be around 50 to 60 USD, which 
is significantly lower than the above-mentioned instruments. 
Additionally, the source of sound (speaker) is embedded inside 
of the interface, which makes for a motion -to-sound 
relationship that feels natural to the clients. This design also 
eliminates audio setup time, and makes for better sound 
blending in ensemble music-making situations. 
 
3. DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION 
 
3.1 Hardware organization  
 
VESBALL’s Hardware is organized into three units as follows. 
 
3.1.1 Sensing unit 
 
The sensing unit has an accelerometer and a piezoelectric 
sensor. The data from the two sensors is received by the micro-
controller when the ball is hit, tilted or moved. Based on the 
program and the input from the mode switch, the 
microcontroller sends MIDI data to a tone-bank (VS1053 IC), 
which then plays the sounds through the speaker. 
 
3.1.2 Main unit 
 
A 2200 mAh lithium ion polymer battery powers an Arduino 
Uno. The battery is rechargeable through a micro USB inlet on 
the surface of the ball. The string toggle switch is used to toggle 
between play modes. 
 
3.1.3 Sound synthesis unit 
 
The musical instrument shield sonifies MIDI data coming from 
the Arduino Uno. The VS1053 chip contains two large tone-
banks that include such sounds as piano, woodwind, brass, 
synth, SFX and percussion. The audio output is connected to an 
amplifier breakout board, which is powered by the Arduino. 
The amplifier drives an 8-ohm speaker that has been carefully 
positioned at the center of the ball. 
 
 
Figure 5. VESBALL: hardware organization. 
3.2 Construction 
 
The speaker is attached to a circular fiberglass frame, and this 
frame also physically supports all the electronic circuitries. The 
frame is protected by EVA foam that has openings for a power 
switch, a mode-changing toggle switch and a port for battery 
charging and communication with the micro-controller. A soft 
fabric jacket covers the EVA foam.   
 
 
 
Figure 6.  The speaker, microcontroller, sound chip and 
other components inside the fiberglass frame.    
 
 
 
Figure 7. The EVA foam. 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Soft fabric jacket. 
389
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
4. MODES AND SOUND SYNTHESIS 
 
VESBALL operates in two modes:  
4.1 Percussion mode  
 
In “percussion mode” user triggers sounds by moving or hitting 
the object. By default, moving the ball in a fixed direction with 
speed triggers the cymbal sound and hitting it would produce 
snare drum sound. Other sounds and input triggers may be set 
using a simple software interface. In music therapy, individuals 
lacking in musical knowledge often find it easier to produce 
satisfying results with simple percussive instruments [8]. It has 
been noted that highly structured interventions, s uch as 
following strict rhythmic patterns, can lead to successful 
developmental gains for people with ASD [12]. These benefits 
are especially prominent in modifying maladaptive behaviors, 
shaping self-help skills as well as linguistic skills [15]. With 
traditional percussive instruments, sounds are produced through 
the striking of surfaces. With the VESBALL sounds are 
triggered through motions and striking actions. Therapists using 
VESBALL can drill simple to complex physical gestures and 
motion patterns, while urging the players to keep a steady 
tempo. 
 
4.2 Melody mode  
 
In “melody mode” the user changes notes or modulates the 
pitch of the notes being played at a fixed tempo by tilting or 
moving the ball. The pitches are set to the intervals of a major 
pentatonic scale. This mode is most suited to free play and 
improvisation. Free improvisation has also been widely used in 
music therapy to provide the players with sensory stimulus and 
means of self-expression. Improvisation also promotes on-the-
fly decision-making [11]. 
 
Table 1. Comparison of the two modes.  
 
“Percussion mode” 
 
 
“Melody mode” 
 
 
Piezo-electric triggers snare drum 
sound by default when hit (tone 
generated may be changed). 
Sensitivity may be adjusted. 
 
 
 
Play the notes of the C 
major pentatonic scale 
by default when t ilted 
(pitches generated may 
be changed). 
  
 
 
Accelerometer triggers crash 
cymbal by default when 
acceleration along certain directions 
is higher than some threshold value 
defined by the user. 
 
Pitch-bend by varying 
the acceleration speed of 
the object. 
 
5. VESBALL IN THERAPY 
 
5.1 Development cycle  
 
5.1.1 First prototype  
 
The initial prototype of VESBALL was developed over a period 
of three months. During which, the design team noted the needs 
of the clients as well as the music therapist through interviews, 
therapy session observations and regular meetings. The initial 
construction consisted of an air filled ball with a wireless audio 
transmitter, accelerometer Arduino Uno and a VS1053 chip. 
The construction was robust, however use of an external 
speaker meant it was difficult to use multiple balls together as 
each had to be connected to a separate speaker.  It also made 
the interaction with the instrument unintuitive for the clients 
 
5.1.2 Second prototype 
 
In the second prototype the developers moved the source of 
sound inside the ball. The inflated ball was replaced by a foam 
covering. A piezo sensor and string switch to change the mode 
was included to make the instrument more versatile.  2nd stage 
prototype was tested in a series of music therapy sessions over 
a period of six months.  During prolonged period of testing the 
developers observed that different groups responded differently 
to the instrument depending on their age and severity of their 
condition. Thus the developers began working on an easy to use 
software interface for therapist to customize the functionality 
and usability of the ball. Work on the software interface is 
currently ongoing. 
 
5.2 Therapy sessions  
 
Therapy sessions took the form of “musical ensembles” comprised of 
individuals with ASD led by a certified music therapist. Activities 
included passing the VESBALL around, “play-along” in which 
the clients attempted to perform timed percussive events, and 
group improvisation. Clients learned to switch between modes. 
These sessions resulted in a group performance directed by the 
music therapist. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Group improvisation (faces of clients masked out 
to protect privacy). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Clients learn to pass the ball around. 
390
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
6.CHALLENGES  
  
One of the major challenges of designing NIME for music 
therapy is to strike a good balance between practicality and 
functionality. When dealing with people with special needs it 
becomes all the more difficult to strike a balance between the 
two because their physical and mental capability depends on 
the severity of their conditions. A single design solution cannot 
be generalized to serve different therapeutic needs. Thus it is 
important for the music therapist to have a level of control over 
ease of play, and to be fully integrated in the design process. 
 
7. BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 
 
[1] A.M. Junker, J. R. Wegner and T. Sudkamp. 
"Cyberlink brainfingers for people with no means of 
access, NIH study results." Proceedings of the 17th 
Annual International Conference on Technology & 
Persons with Disabilities. 2002. 
[2] B.J. Crowe in ed. S. Spring. “Effective clinical 
practice in     music therapy: music therapy for 
children, adolescents, and adults with mental 
disorders.” American Music Therapy Association, 
2007. Pp. 204–205.  
[3] B.P. Challis and K. Challis. “Applications for 
proximity sensors in music and sound performance”. 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008. 
[4] Gold, T. Wigram and C. Elefant. "Music therapy for 
autistic spectrum disorder." Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev 2 (2006). 
[5] C.L. Edgerton. "The effect of improvisational music 
therapy on the communicative behaviors of autistic 
children." Journal of music therapy 31.1 (1994): 31-
62. 
[6] “Drake music Scotland website “ last accessed 25 Jan 
2015, http://www.drakemusicscotland.org/. 
[7] E.R Miranda and A. Brouse. "Interfacing the Brain 
Directly with Musical Systems: On developing 
systems for making music with brain signals." 
Leonardo 38.4 (2005): 331-336. 
[8] J. Alvin. (1966) “Music therapy”, Hutchison, London 
[9] J. Kim, T. Wigram and C. Gold. "The effects of 
improvisational music therapy on joint attention 
behaviors in autistic children: a randomized 
controlled study." Journal of autism and 
developmental disorders 38.9 (2008): 1758-1766. 
[10] J. Whipple. "Music in intervention for children and 
adolescents with autism: A meta-analysis." Journal of 
music therapy 41.2 (2004): 90-106. 
[11] K. E. Bruscia. “Defining music therapy”. Barcelona 
Publishers, 1998. 
[12] M. Peter and M. Crowson. "Joint attention and early 
social communication: Implications for research on 
intervention with autism." Journal of Autism and 
Developmental disorders 27.6 (1997): 653-676. 
[13] R. Gehlhaar. "Sound= Space: an interactive musical 
environment." Contemporary Music Review 6.1 
(1991): 59-72. 
[14] R. Gehlhaar. "Instruments for Everyone: Designing 
New Means of Musical Expression for Disabled 
Creators." Technologies of Inclusive Well-Being. 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2014. 167-196. 
[15] S. Baron-Cohen and P. Bolton. “Autism: the facts.” 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993. 
[16] “Skoogmusic website,” last accessed 23 Jan, 2015, 
http://www.skoogmusic.com/skoog/. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
391
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 