From toy to tutor: Note-Scroller is a game to teach music
Robert Macrae
Centre for Digital Music
Department of Electronic Engineering
Queen Mary, University of London
robert.macrae@elec.qmul.ac.uk
Simon Dixon
Centre for Digital Music
Department of Electronic Engineering
Queen Mary, University of London
simon.dixon@elec.qmul.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
The computer games industry has recently been producing
titles in a new genre called ‘music’ that toys with engag-
ing the user in musical expression. The technology used in
these games has allowed for novel interfaces for represent-
ing musical instructions which has yet to be tried within
musical practice and tuition. The games themselves have
greatly simpliﬁed the instruments and the music created to
the point where the skills learnt are not transferrable to the
actual instruments that they seek to recreate.
The aim of this work is to explore the potential to move
from this category of entertainment systems based on mu-
sical expression towards tutoring applications that support
learning musical instruments in an entertaining and reward-
ing experience. Note-Scroller (Figure 1) is an interface that
has been designed to bridge this gap and act as a case study
for evaluating the potential of such a movement. It is hoped
that Note-Scroller will be fun and intuitive to use, teaching
users how to play music on a piano-style keyboard.
Keywords
Graphical Interface, Computer Game, MIDI Display
1. INTRODUCTION
In this paper, we describe an interactive system for pro-
viding the user with musical instructions using methods in-
spired by video games. This system also has the purpose of
acting as a learning aid that can evaluate the users perfor-
mance in real-time to provide visual feedback. As MIDI ﬁles
often contain the full range of instruments and instructions
used in a musical piece, the option of having the computer
play selected instruments means Note-Scroller can also ac-
company the player.
Previous work in this area includes examples of computer
based musical learning aids [2]. Work by Guillaume Denis
and Pierre Jouvelot [3, 4] demonstrates the opportunity to
create video games with the purpose of teaching music. The
use of visual feedback in musical expression and its impli-
cations on mental workload was explored in Fran¸cois et al’s
Mimi tool [5]. Also, games that already go some way as to
use musical expression on a more simpliﬁed level are proving
immensely popular. TheGuitar Herofranchise (see Figure
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME08, Genova, Italy
Copyright 2008 Copyright remains with the author(s).
Figure 1: A front and back view of the projected
display
2) for example, is the ﬁrst video game franchise to generate
more than $1bn in revenue and the titleDance Dance Revo-
lution (with a similar instructive interface) alone sold more
than 7.5 million units. Recreating the elements that make
these games successful in educational platforms would be
the next logical step.
The motivations for incorporating this set of features into
one package are varied but ultimately stem from the hope
of making music more accessible to a wider audience:
• The display methods used in these popular video games
may be more intuitive to non music-literate users than
standard music notation.
• Computer games incorporating modern features have
been shown to increase students’ motivation [7].
• Adding visual cues to the users’ auditory feedback
loop may result in an increase in performance.
• As an interface to the vast MIDI content already avail-
able on the internet, students will be able to choose
musical pieces from an almost limitless source.
By making the performance of music more accessible it
was intended that such a system will remove the typical
barriers that deter people from learning to play instruments
such as the cost of tuition, availability and the requirement
of reading standard music notation. However, Note-Scroller
would also ideally be used in conjunction with other learn-
ing methods.
2. DESIGN
Similar to the displays featured in video games such as
Guitar Hero, Frets on Fireand Dance Dance Revolution,
the instructions ﬂow to the user as and when they need to
be executed. As these video games show, providing users
with visual cues of what is coming next allows the user to
prepare more eﬃciently for their subsequent actions utiliz-
ing any spare attention [8]. Another beneﬁt to the animated
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
364
Figure 2: From left to right: The interface forGui-
tar Hero, Dance Dance Revolutionand Note Scroller
display over static music sheets is that the user doesn’t have
to change their point of focus as the required information
moves itself to where the user’s gaze already is.
Using a MIDI connection to the keyboard, or a Moog
PianoBar [9], the proposed system keeps track of which
notes are being played correctly. By changing the display
of the notes to green or red, (depending on whether they are
being played), the system will provide the user with visual
feedback. This colour code follows the familiar ‘traﬃc light’
convention that will be recognizable by users [10].
The musical instructions will be projected onto a screen
above the keyboard/piano, ﬂowing down to where the keys
are. Therefore when a note needs to be played, the graphic
representing that note is close to the keys. As the note
graphics are vertically aligned with the keys they corre-
spond to, there is a clear natural mapping [10] between
the musical instructions and their executions.
3. IMPLEMENTATION
Note-Scroller is designed to be used in conjunction with
a projector, screen, keyboard and MIDI input cable. The
interface loads MIDI ﬁles by drawing all notes on a verti-
cal piano roll that then ﬂows down the screen. The user
presses a key whenever a note graphic reaches the keys on
the piano-style keyboard. The user can select which of the
used MIDI instruments are shown and also the instruments
played by the computer. When the notes pass by the play-
ing line, the interface looks to see whether that particular
note is being played and changes the display accordingly.
The user is marked on whether or not they have played
the correct notes. The user then has the option of choos-
ing whether playing additional notes detracts from his/her
score as some users may wish to intentionally improvise
within a performance.
The system is designed to be simple to use in that the
user opens the MIDI ﬁle and uses start, stop, tempo, zoom
and position sliders to fully control the ﬂow of information.
The display is customizable so the user can conﬁgure how
much information is shown to suit themselves.
A core MIDI library of basic piano pieces was assembled
from freely available MIDI ﬁles on the internet. The user
can then ﬁnd and load more MIDI ﬁles as they see ﬁt.
4. CONCLUSIONS & FUTURE WORK
Preliminary testing of the Note-Scroller system has so far
been promising, showing that music-illiterate players could
perform basic pieces and on average thought the system was
better for them to learn music rather than reading scores.
Work on improving Note-Scroller is ongoing as there are
many opportunities arising within digital music that may
add to the functionality of Note-Scroller and similar sys-
tems. One example would be in using live audio synchro-
nization to provide a means of controlling the playback
speed of the instructions by simply playing faster or slower.
There are also interesting developments in haptic interfaces
[6] that could pave the way for a touch sensitive feedback
loop to the system.
The main drawback with the Note-Scroller interface is in
setting it up as the system requires a projector, computer
and a suitable keyboard/piano screen to project the image
onto. This also entails a lot of trial and error getting the
virtual keys in line with the keyboard and ﬁnding space be-
hind the instrument to position the projector. This problem
could be mediated with a resizable display and with the ad-
vancement of ﬂat screen monitors the projector will at some
point be no longer necessary.
Adapting commercially successful games to suit educa-
tional needs isn’t new, with an example beingNeverwinter
Nights [7] being transformed into a historical and politcal
educational game for students.Dance Dance Revolutionis
also being used in schools in West Virginia to aid Physical
Exercise lessons [1].
It is the long term goal of this work to use the popular-
ity of video games, and their ability to reach and motivate
millions of people, to teach transferable skills. Learning mu-
sical instruments using Note-Scroller has provided a clear
example of how this could be done.
5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
With thanks to Andrew Robertson for his feedback. RM
is supported by a studentship from EPSRC.
6. REFERENCES
[1] R. R. Borja. Dance video games hit the ﬂoor in
schools. Education Week, 25(22):1, February 2006.
[2] R. B. Dannenberg, M. Sanchez, A. Joseph, R. Joseph,
R. Saul, and P. Capell. A computer-based multimedia
tutor for beginning piano students.Journal of New
Music Research, 19(2-3):155–173, 1990.
[3] G. Denis and P. Jouvelot. Building the case for video
games in music education. InIn Second International
Computer Game and Technology Workshop, 2004.
[4] G. Denis and P. Jouvelot. Motivation-driven
educational game design: applying best practices to
music education. InProceedings of the 2005 ACM
SIGCHI International Conference on Advances in
computer entertainment technology, volume 265,
pages 462–465. ACM, 2005.
[5] A. Fran¸cois, E. Chew, and D. Thurmond. Visual
feedback in performance-machine interaction for
musical improvisation. InProceedings of the 2007
Conference on new Interfaces for Musical Expression
(NIME07),p a g e s2 7 7 – 2 8 0 ,2 0 0 7 .
[6] K. S. Hale and K. M. Stanney. Deriving haptic design
guidelines from human physiological, psychophysical
and neurological foundations.IEEE Computer
Graphics and Applications, 24(2):33–39, March 2004.
[7] H. Jenkins, E. Klopfer, K. Squire, and P. Tan.
Entering the education arcade.Computers in
Entertainment (CIE), 1(1):17–17, October 2003.
[8] N. Lavie and Y. Tsal. Perceptual load as a major
determinant of the locus of selection in visual
attention. Perception & Psychophysics,5 6 : 1 8 3 – 1 9 7 ,
1994.
[9] Moog. Moog pianobar. http://www.moogmusic.com.
[10] D. Norman.The design of everyday things. Basic
Books, 2002.
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
365