Kritaanjli: A Robotic Harmonium for Performance,
Pedogogy and Research
Ajay Kapur1,2
[1] California Institute of the
Arts
24700 McBean Parkway
Valencia, California
ajay@karmetik.com
Jim Murphy2
[2] Victoria University of
Wellington
New Zealand School of Music
Wellington, New Zealand
jim.w.murphy@gmail.com
Dale Carnegie2
[2] Victoria University of
Wellington
School of ECS
Wellington, New Zealand
dale.carnegie@ecs.vuw.ac.nz
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we introduce Kritaanjli, a robotic harmo-
nium. Details concerning the design, construction, and use
of Kritaanjli are discussed. After an examination of related
work, quantitative research concerning the hardware chosen
in the construction of the instrument is shown, as is a thor-
ough exposition of the design process and use of CAD/CAM
techniques in the design lifecycle of the instrument. Addi-
tionally, avenues for future work and compositional prac-
tices are focused upon, with particular emphasis placed on
human/robot interaction, pedagogical techniques aﬀorded
by the robotic instrument, and compositional avenues made
accessible through the use of Kritaanjli.
Keywords
Musical Robotics, pedagogy, North Indian Classical Music,
augmented instruments
1. INTRODUCTION
To date, many musical robots detailed within the NIME
community have relied upon percussion instruments as sound
sources. The authors’ previous works [9] as well as those of
Gil Weinberg and associates [17] and much of Eric Singer’s
work with his LEMUR collective [13] have explored musi-
cal expression as derived from percussive sources. In an
eﬀort to introduce musical robotic systems in diﬀering in-
strument families to the community, we introduce Kritaan-
jali, a robotic harmonium.
Prior to the introduction of Kritaanjli, the ﬁrst two au-
thors’ works have consisted only of instruments in which
sound is derived from solenoid-powered drum beaters and
percussion mallets striking surfaces such as drums and tuned
bars [8]. With the authors’ increasing focus upon creating a
full robotic ensemble in the Machine Orchestra [9], the need
for robots with wider timbral diversity has become evident.
To address this need, Kritaanjli was developed.
Kritaanjli is a robotic harmonium with 44 solenoid ac-
tuators and a variable-speed bellows pumping mechanism.
Each key of the harmonium has an accompanying solenoid:
this parallel actuator conﬁguration aﬀords extended tech-
nique compositional practices wherein large tone clusters
can be created. This ability to create tone clusters and
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’12,May 21 – 23, 2012, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
dense timbres introduces elements of sonic diversity into
the otherwise percussion-dominated Machine Orchestra.
A harmonium was chosen as the ﬁrst non-percussive in-
strument in the authors’ robotic ensemble for three reasons.
Primarily, the harmonium is a relatively simple keyboard
instrument which avoids many engineering problems asso-
ciated with more complex keyboard instruments. While
complex instruments such as the piano allow for individual
dynamic control on each note, the harmonium keys simply
serve as momentary switches, permitting air to ﬂow past
reeds at a rate governed by the amount of air forced by
the bellows. Secondly, the harmonium’s established role
as a North Indian classical instrument ﬁts within the con-
ceptual and aesthetic framework of the ﬁrst author’s previ-
ous works [7]. Further, the harmonium is a central instru-
ment in North Indian classical music pedagogy: the authors
are interested in exploring musical robotics as a means by
which such pedagogy can be enhanced. Finally, the design
of the harmonium allows for non-destructive augmentation:
an existing harmonium can be converted to a Kritaanjli-
style robot with no permanent modiﬁcations. This ﬁnal
feature allows for existing instruments to be temporarily
used as musical robots and then reconverted to traditional
human-operated harmoniums.
This paper will begin with a discussion of related work
in non-percussive musical robotics. Section 3 provides a
technical overview of Kritaanjali, complete with quantita-
tive studies undertaken in the design phase of the project
as well as a thorough discussion of the design lifecycle of
the instrument. The paper concludes with an exposition of
a series of current and future applications of Kritaanjli.
Figure 1: Kritanjali’s actuator array
2. RELATED WORK
The design of Kritaanjli owes much to the fully mechanical
player pianos and organs of the Industrial Revolution. Such
organs typically combined keyboard actuating mechanisms
with mechanically-driven bellows pumps [4]. The 1970’s,
though, saw modern musical robotics begin in earnest with
the works of Godfried-Willem Raes of the Logos Foundation
[10] and sound artist Trimpin [3]. Both of these artists have
done much over the past four decades to advance both the
artistic and technical aspects of the ﬁeld of musical robotics:
Trimpin’s prepared piano assemblyContraption IPP served
as a major inspiration in the design and execution of Kri-
taanjli.
The last twenty years have seen much new work per-
taining to musical robotics, with the team of researchers
at Waseda University in Japan remaining consistently at
the forefront of research [12]. Eric Singer’s robotic collec-
tive LEMUR, founded in 2000, has produced technologically
advanced robots and, through Singer’s work with guitarist
Pat Metheny’s Orchestrion project in 2010, brought a wide
degree of public exposure to the burgeoning ﬁeld of musical
robotics. Singer’s use of closed-loop control in his Guitar-
Bot [14] served as an inspiration for the bellows mechanism
on Kritaanjli. A main focus of the Kritaanjli project is that
of human-robot interaction (see Section 4.3). Gil Wein-
berg’s work has in recent years broken much new ground
in the study of musical robotic interaction with human per-
formers. In addition to his work, the ﬁrst author’s prior
research contributed to the use of Kritaanjli as a tool for
pedagogy and real-time improvisation with human perform-
ers. In the last ﬁve years, many new examples of continuous,
non-percussive musical robots have appeared, including [2]
and [12]. It is the authors’ belief that the future of musical
robotics promises to play host to works with ever-increasing
sonic complexity and enhanced human-robot interaction.
3. TECHNICAL DESIGN
Figure 2: A visualization of a CAD drawing of Kri-
tanjali’s frame and solenoid mount.
The harmoniums used in Kritaanjli are small hand-pumped
reed organs. Such instruments were introduced to India by
Christian missionaries in the 19th Century and were subse-
quently adopted into Indian classical, devotional, and folk
music [1]. Harmoniums function by forcing air past reeds
opened by the depression of keys. The amount of air forced
past the reeds governs the loudness of the instrument and is
varied by changing pumping rate. Harmoniums continue to
be used as an accompanying instrument and a pedagogical
tool. The following subsections will focus on the augmenta-
tion of such a harmonium to allow for mechatronic control
of the instrument.
3.1 Design Overview
Figure 3: Kritanjali under construction.
Kritaanjli consists of an aluminum framework which sur-
rounds a harmonium. Attached to the framework assembly
are three major subassemblies: the electronics enclosure,
the bellows-pumping mechanism, and the keyboard actu-
ation mechanism. T-bracket aluminum extrusions similar
to those in many of the ﬁrst authors’ previous works were
chosen as the materials for Kritaanjli’s framework due to
the ﬂexible modularity which they aﬀord: mounting sub-
assemblies to the aluminum extrusions proved simple and
eﬃcient. The electronics enclosure houses the microcon-
troller and daughterboards (see Section 3.3) and is mounted
directly on the frame to minimize distance of cable runs.
To pump the harmonium’s bellows, a DC electric mo-
tor is connected by means of a crank mechanism ﬁrst to a
crankshaft and then with a clamp directly to the rear of
the bellows. The crank travels about the motor’s hub on
a wheel with a diameter equal to the harmonium bellow
displacement. To vary the harmonium’s output volume,
the motor speed can be increased; additionally, harmonium
motor speed must be increased to maintain a constant vol-
ume as more keys are depressed. Key presses are achieved
through the use of linear DC solenoids arranged in an array
above the harmonium’s keyboard. Each key has an accom-
panying dedicated solenoid. The solenoids are mounted on
an aluminum bracket and are connected individually to a
MOSFET driver board contained within the electronics en-
closure.
3.2 CAD/CAM
Kritaanjli was created using computer aided drafting (CAD)
technology: prior to any physical construction, the harmo-
nium and its mechatronic additions were drafted in the solid
modeling tool SolidWorks. The use of CAD in the design
cycle of Kritaanjli allowed for rapid iterative design: design
problems and conﬂicts could be addressed prior to physical
fabrication and modiﬁcations to the existing design could
be quickly tested in the CAD software with no downtime
due to assembly and disassembly of the existing system.
Figure 2 shows the CAD model of Kritanjali.
CAD techniques were coupled with computer aided man-
ufacturing (CAM) technologies to permit rapid and precise
prototyping and fabrication of Kritaanjali’s components.
Each harmonium is a hand-built instrument with loose me-
chanical tolerances: to create a linear array of holes, mea-
surements were taken to ensure that the solenoids were to
be correctly positioned above the non-equidistantly spaced
keys. In order to replicate the measurements in the ﬁnal
aluminum solenoid bracket, holes were cut using a high-
precision CNC milling machine. Additionally, mechanical
components of Kritaanjli such as the bellows motor bracket,
the crankshaft, and the bellows crankshaft clamp were pro-
duced with the aid of a laser cutter. The user of a laser
cutter allowed for the production of relatively high preci-
sion parts with very little lead time.
The CAD/CAM workﬂow has in recent years gained much
popularity in the open source hardware community. Works
such as the Fab Lab [5] and the RepRap project [6] point
toward a future of highly integrated solutions to design
and manufacture of custom parts. Such developments have
strong implications for NIME research: we found that the
workﬂow proved highly eﬃcient and will continue to make
use of the CAD/CAM paradigm in future works.
3.3 Actuation
Solenoids were chosen as actuators to press the harmo-
nium’s keys. 24V DC solenoids were mounted above the
keys. Prior to subsequent modiﬁcations, the solenoids were
pull-type, retracting their plunger arms into the barrel. All
were subsequently modiﬁed to become push-style solenoids,
allowing the solenoids to depress the harmonium’s keys.
Two versions of Kritaanjli’s keyboard assembly were pro-
duced: the ﬁrst used solenoids which rested 2cm above the
keys and were returned to their origin with the aid of springs
attached to the solenoid’s shaft.
A small amount of latency between signal transmission
and key depression was noticed. Further tests showed that
with increasing distance from the struck surface and de-
creasing voltage applied to the solenoid, latency increased.
To remedy this, the natural spring-return of the harmo-
nium’s keys were utilized on the second iteration of Kri-
taanjli’s keyboard: the solenoids were mounted such that
they pressed against the keys and were returned to their
original displacement with the spring-return of the key it-
self. This arrangement reduced latency between instructing
the solenoid to actuate and the actual actuation event.
Figure 4: Kritanjali’s MOSFET-based driver board.
While 24V Ledex-brand DC solenoids were chosen to de-
press the harmonium’s keys, the minimum voltage possible
to press each key was applied to the solenoids. The use of
minimum voltages was chosen in order to avoid actuation
noise and to prevent unnecessary force from being applied
to the harmonium’s keys. Through experimentation, the
maximum voltage necessary to depress the stiﬀest of the
harmonium keys was 11V with a variability of 1V volts:
12V were therefore applied to all key solenoids. The use
of 12V instead of 24V will greatly reduce wear and tear
on the harmonium keys as well as reduce audible solenoid
actuation noises.
A small Pololu-brand DC motor was used to pump the
Figure 5: Laser-cut motor mount and bellows hinge.
harmonium: attached to the bellows with a custom-fabricated
crankshaft mechanism, the DC motor utilizes a hall-eﬀect
encoder to provide rotational feedback. The use of an externally-
mounted non-destructive pump mechanism allows for aug-
mentation of any pump-equipped harmonium. To create the
non-destructive bellows mount, the harmonium was mea-
sured and a suitably-sized bracket was created. The bracket
was clamped to the rear of the bellows and attached to the
motor: as the motor turned, the bellows reciprocate. The
motor’s speed is controlled with a power MOSFET driven
with a PWM signal from an AVR microcontroller. Future
work will focus on attempts to reduce the noise produced
both by the solenoids and DC motor.
4. APPLICATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
4.1 Performer/Robot Interaction
With Kritaanjli, human/robot interaction is extensively ex-
plored. This work, inspired in part by Gil Weinberg’s re-
search [16, 17], focuses on duo-style improvisation between
a human player and Kritaanjli. A key element of the hu-
man/robot improvisation lies in Kritaanjli’s ability to mimic
human performance techniques. To engage in this impro-
visation, two primary elements are needed: an augmented
harmonium to allow for feature extraction from human per-
formers and a means by which the extracted performance
information can be reﬂected in Kritaanjli’s performance.
An initial avenue of research currently being conducted
is that of emulation of human player harmonium pumping:
this is accomplished through pump displacement informa-
tion gathered with the use of a linear displacement sensor
and converted to setpoint information in a PID controller
connected to Kritaanjli’s encoder-equipped bellows motor.
Future work will build upon this research, growing to in-
clude other aspects of harmonium playing such as keyboard
technique.
4.2 Raag Database
As mentioned in [1], harmoniums are often used as a peda-
gogical instrument to aid in the teaching of Indian classical
music. We recognize the potential of Kritaanjli to serve as
an automatic accompaniment instrument to augment tradi-
tional pedagogy techniques. To serve in this role, we have
begun the creation of a raga database for Kritaanjli which
will allow the instrument to be rapidly reconﬁgured to play
in diﬀerent ragas. Through the use of the Kritaanjli Raga
Database, ragas, which serve as the underpinning melodic
modes in Indian classical music, can be switched, modiﬁed,
and improvised upon.
The database has been implemented in the ChucK pro-
gramming language [15]. A wide variety of ragas are stored
in the database: each raga can be improvised upon, allow-
ing musicians to gain an understanding of the selected raga’s
characteristic in a real-time manner. The Kritaanjli Raga
Database will play an important role in future work with
Kritaanjli and human/robot interaction: the database will
be augmented to allow for real-time raga recognition and
subsequent improvisation.
4.3 Performance: Interfacing with Musicians
As mentioned in Section 1, Kritaanjli ﬁlls a new role in
the KarmetiK Machine Orchestra: that of melodic and har-
monic sustained sound. Prior melodic and harmonic instru-
ments have consisted of struck tuned bars, as on KarmetiK’s
Glockenbot and Tammy robots [9]: the presence of an in-
strument with sustained tonality will open new composi-
tional avenues. Kritaanjali will appear in future Machine
Orchestra performances: to further extend the capabilities
of the instrument, we have explored connecting Kritaanjli
with a number of custom-built musical interfaces such as
that described in [11]. The gestural expressivity aﬀorded
by such interfaces serves as a means by which Kritaanjali’s
capabilities for extended technique performance scenarios
may be explored.
5. CONCLUSIONS
With the creation of Kritaanjli, we have extended the ar-
ray of robots used in the KarmetiK Machine Orchestra
from those capable of percussive sounds to those capable
of harmonic and melodic sounds of a sustained nature. Kri-
taanjli serves as a non-destructive means by which an ex-
isting harmonium can be modiﬁed to behave as a musical
robotic agent for performance and pedagogy. The harmo-
nium was chosen for its relative simplicity: unlike pianos
and other keyboard instruments with individual dynamic
range on each note, the harmonium allows for a simpliﬁed
on/oﬀ control over each note with dynamics controlled via
bellows pumping action. Further, Kritaanjli diﬀers from
instruments wherein notes are selected serially: the paral-
lel approach in which each key possesses an accompanying
solenoid aﬀords composers the ability to craft large chordal
structures. Kritaanjli opens the door to novel future work,
including research focused on performer feature extraction,
new pedagogical techniques, and explorations in robotic en-
semble performance.
6. REFERENCES
[1] K. Brockschmidt. The Harmonium Handbook. Crystal
Clarity Publishers, 2003.
[2] R. Dannenberg, H. Brown, and R. Lupish. Mcblare: A
robotic bagpipe player. In J. Solis and K. Ng, editors,
Musical Robots and Interactive Multimodal Systems ,
volume 74 of Springer Tracts in Advanced Robotics,
pages 165–178. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2011.
[3] A. Focke. Trimpin: Contraptions for Art and Sound .
Marquand Books, Seattle, Washington, 1st edition,
2011.
[4] C. Fowler. The museum of music: A history of
mechanical instruments. Music Educators Journal ,
page 45, October 1967.
[5] N. Gershenfeld. Fab: The Coming Revolution on Your
Desktop–from Personal Computers to Personal
Fabrication. Basic Books, 2007.
[6] R. Jones, P. Haufe, E. Sells, P. Iravani, V. Olliver,
C. Palmer, and A. Bowyer. Reprap : the replicating
rapid prototyper. Robotica, 29(01):177–191, January
2011.
[7] A. Kapur. Digitizing North Indian Music:
Preservation and Extension using Multimodal
SensorSystems, Machine Learning and Robotics .
VDM Verlag, 2008.
[8] A. Kapur and M. Darling. A pedagogical paradigm
for musical robotics. In Proceedings of the 2010
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression ,
Sydney, Australia, 2010.
[9] A. Kapur, M. Darling, D. Diakopoulos, J. Murphy,
J. Hochenbaum, O. Vallis, and C. Bahn. The machine
orchestra: An ensemble of human laptop performers
and robotic musical instruments. Computer Music
Journal, 25(4):49.
[10] T. R. Laura Maes, Godfried-Willem Raes. The man
and machine robot orchestra at logos. Computer
Music Journal, 35(4):28–48, 2011.
[11] J. Murphy, A. Kapur, and C. Burgin. The helio: A
study of membrane potentiometers and long force
sensing resistors for musical interfaces. In Proceedings
of International Conference on New Instruments for
Music Expression, Sydney, Australia, 2010.
[12] K. Shibuya, S. Matsuda, and A. Takahara. Toward
developing a violin playing robot - bowing by
anthropomorphic robot arm and sound analysis. In
Proceedings of RO-MAN 2007, Jeju Island, Korea,
2007.
[13] E. Singer, J. Feddersen, C. Redmon, and B. Bowen.
Lemur’s musical robots. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on New Interfaces for
Musical Expression, Hamamatsu, Japan, 2004.
[14] E. Singer, J. Fedderson, and D. Bianciardi. Lemur
guitarbot: Midi robotic string instrument. In
Proceedings of the 2003 International Conference on
New Interfaces for Musical Expression , Montreal,
Canada, 2003.
[15] G. Wang. The ChucK Audio Programming Language:
An Strongly-timed and On-the-ﬂy Environ/mentality .
PhD thesis, Princeton University, 2008.
[16] G. Weinberg, B. Blosser, and T. Mallikarjuna. The
creation of a multi-human, multi-robot interactive
jam session. In Proceedings of International
Conference on New Instruments for Music
Expression, Pittsburgh, PA, 2009.
[17] G. Weinberg and S. Driscoll. Toward robotic
musicianship. Computer Music Journal , 30(4):28.