Sound Low Fun
Yu-Chung Tseng
eamusic.tseng@msa.hinet.net
Che-Wei Liu
drummerwei@gmail.com
Tzu-Heng Chi
davidchi0623@gmail.com
Hui-Yu Wang
huiyu18@gmail.com
National Chiao Tung University Master Program 
of sound and music Innovative Technologies
National Chiao Tung University Master Program 
of sound and music Innovative Technologies
EE526 1001 University Road,
Hsinchu, Taiwan 300, ROC
EE526 1001 University Road,
Hsinchu, Taiwan 300, ROC
ABSTRACT
Sound Low Fun, a large sphere, is an interactive sound 
installation.  The installation could produce  low-frequency 
sound (Low Sound) to make people feel relax, to have 
"Fun"effect (“Fun” also pronounced close to Chinese word 
“׳which also means relax. This is our main concern and 
fundamental idea of the project. Our work present a sense of 
technology, and then we follow the structure by "C60" to 
divide into 32 blocks; Regarding the part of internal circuit 
design, we employed the force sensor and ADXL335 three-axis 
accelerometer connect with Arduino I/O and The Mux 
(Multiplexer) Shield, then it can produce different music with 
different lighting effects through Max/MSP programming. As 
music was concerned, we make use a type of meditative 
long-sustained low-frequency sound, accompanied by some 
transparency high-frequency sounds as sphere was shaked. 
When user presses, hugs and pushes the sphere, it trigger the 
soft low sound and lighting effects generated, as a result, user 
relieve his/her pressure eventually.
Keywords
Large-scale, interactive installation, low-frequency sounds, 
stress relief, Max/MSP computer music programming, Arduino 
1. DESIGN CONCEPT AND CREATION 
IDEA
Our Installation to “Relieve Stress” for the design concept. We 
design by “Low Frequency” sound, and Interactive installation 
of large sphere with touch. Sound Low Fun can produce 
different music and light by user who push different blocks, 
and then try to make people relieve their stress. “Music”  is one 
of the ways with curative effect of stress relief. Whatever 
Eastern culture or Western culture, they both have considerable 
research of “Music Therapy”, The Eastern culture have ﬁve 
notes of traditional Chinese music “ࢗDo) ਠ(Re) ԉ(Mi) ᅄ
(Sol) ϻ(La)”  are same medical principles with ﬁve internal 
organs (liver, Heart, lung and Kidney). [1]  And then, The 
Western culture also proved that music therapy created faster 
effects than traditional treatment for four times to eight times.
2. IMPLEMENTATION METHODS AND 
TECHNIQUES
2.1. Interactive Design
This installation, "Sound Low Fun", has exhibition mode and 
interaction mode. In exhibition mode, has exhibition mode and 
interaction mode. In exhibition mode, the sphere can randomly 
generate scales and lights ﬂashing, so that the installation can 
be regarding as a static device to present to all viewers. In 
Interaction mode, it has interaction between users and the 
installation, so that users can press or push the sphere to make 
it not only rotate or sway, but also generate or change music. 
2.2.  Appearance Design
This installation is a sphere. In order to distribute it completely, 
we adopt the structure of "Carbon 60"(Figure 4.) [3], and then 
we divide the sphere into thirty-two blocks. Through pressing 
each block which  has DIY  sponge pressure sensor, it can send 
different arguments to trigger music. Additionally, we attach a 
piranha LED lights to sixty apices and use silver fabric to 
packing the sphere. When users press the sphere, the intensity 
of press can affect the brightness of the lights, and then making 
it light or shade.
 
Figure 4. Structural drawing of Carbon 601
 
1 Wikipedia-C60 http://zh.wikipedia.org/zh-tw/C60
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this 
work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee 
provided that copies are not made or  distributed for  profit or 
commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the 
full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, 
to post on servers or  to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee.
NIME’11, 30 May–1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway.
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
320
2.3. Hardware Design
The DIY  pressure sensor (Figure 7.) , which structure as fol-
lows : Using the conductive fabric as positive and negative, 
and placing conductive sponge among the conductive fabric as 
the resistance. The sponge deformation caused by people after 
they press it , the density become larger , the resistance become 
smaller so that the current that through the sponge will become 
larger, make the LED brighter. Brieﬂy , people are able to con-
trol the LED of light shading by pressing the DIY  pressure 
sensor.
Figure 7. DIY Pressure Sensor
2.4. Software Design 
In software, using Max/MSP communication between 
SimpleMessageSystem and Arduino. SimpleMessageSystem is 
a library which Arduino can send or receive the character and 
integer, and then analyse in Max/MSP. 
3. MUSIC DESIGN
In music design, we use structure of “C60” to make the surface 
of sphere which have twelve pentagon and twenty Hexagon, 
 each represents a different tone and harmony. We design our 
twelve-tone scale by “Pythagorean”, and then begin at F (Fà Cà 
Gà Dà Aà Eà Bà F#à C#à G#à D#à A#). Each notes are follow 
by order, and then backward to take three notes become 
harmony (FCG, CGD, GDA … ). Followed later by analogy, 
and the order that we deﬁne “H”. (Figure 12.)
Figure 12. All the twelve notes of twelve pentagon can be a 
scale
There have one hexagon between every three pentagon (note), 
then the sound of   hexagon is the harmony which combine 
with three pentagon (Figure 13.).
Figure 13. The hexagons of harmony constituted by three 
pentagons of single tone
We can choose one of the pentagons and regard it as pitch ”F”. 
Then basing on "order h ", corresponding to the two adjacent 
pentagons are pitch “C” and  “G”. According to this rule, we 
can give each of ten pentagons a pitch, but the remaining two 
pentagons can not be Corresponded. It is the unexpected char-
acteristic of   the installation. Finally, twenty-six sides will be 
deﬁned as different combinations of the harmony. (Figure 14.)
Figure 14. Pentagon corresponding to the pitch
Two low-frequency ambient sounds , one is pressing this 
spherical installation block, the other is with the LED ﬂashes, a 
total of four. The sound source is used Ableton Live to the 
performance of the three sound sources, and the range of 
low-frequency range selected in the MIDI pitch on the note 
name C1 to B1. Through the communication by Ableton Live 
and Max/MSP, the midi signal sent to the Ableton Live to 
trigger the sound on and off. Further by interaction of touch, 
pressure and swing the spherical installation , do more effect in 
Ableton Live , make the sound more rich and colorful.
4. CONCLUSIONS
"Sound Low Fun" is a new digital art installation which 
integrating audition,visual and tactile.Through touching or 
pressing the surface of "Sound Low Fun", users can change the 
intensity of the lights and trigger low-frequency sounds.In this 
way, users do not only get the feedback of visual and audition, 
but also release the press.
5. REFERENCES
[1] Five notes of traditional Chinese music (Do)(Re)(Mi) 
(Sol)(La)” are same medical principles with ﬁve internal 
organs (liver, Heart, lung and Kidney)
http://www.dfg.cn/big5/yspd/jzxsh/47-wy-gong-1.html 
[2] The music therapy are faster than traditional treatment for 
four times to eight times.
 http://tinyurl.com/3e8gw98
[3]  Structure of "Carbon 60"
http://zh.wikipedia.org/zh-tw/%E7%A2%B360
[4] The 2th K.T. Creativity Award Silver 
http://140.115.78.29/rctedcontest/wp/?page_id=56
[5]3FE#BMM
http://redballproject.com/taipei/1174/moca 
[6] Music of relieve stress
http://www.windmusic.com.tw/shop/edm/edm0812_relaxation/
001.htm
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
321