Percussion instruments using realtime convolution:
Physical controllers
Roberto Aimi
MIT Media Laboratory
20 Ames st
Cambridge. MA
roberto@media.mit.edu
ABSTRACT
This paper describes several example hybrid acoustic / elec-
tronic percussion instruments using realtime convolution to
augment and modify the apparent acoustics of damped phys-
ical objects. Examples of cymbal, frame drum, practice pad,
brush, and bass drum controllers are described.
Keywords
Musical controllers, extended acoustic instruments
1. INTRODUCTION
The purpose of this paper is to present several examples
of hybrid acoustic / electronic percussion instruments that
use realtime convolution with stored impulse responses to
augment the apparent acoustics of damped physical objects.
While the convolution algorithm, prior art, and system
architecture will be mentioned very brieﬂy, a more thorough
treatment can be found in [2].
1.1 Motivation
In typical digital percussion instruments [13], a set of pads
are connected to a tone generator. The intensity of hits
is measured by a peak detector and converted into trigger
messages that tell the tone generator to play a sound of
the speciﬁed intensity. Some systems additionally cross-fade
between sounds based on measurement of hit position.
Unfortunately, the timbre of the hit is ignored. Whether
it was a glancing hit, a soft mallet, or a ﬁngertip, the same
intensity results in identical output. Stirring the drum head
with brushes won’t make clear peaks for the detector to
recognize. While players use these digital drum kits to good
eﬀect, much of the nuance of an acoustic set is missing.
One way around this is to use the audio signal of a hit
directly. Previous applications have used the hit signal to
drive waveguides [6] and banks of resonant ﬁlters [14]. The
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME07, New York, NY
Copyright 2007 Copyright remains with the author(s).
technique applied to the instruments presented in this pa-
per is based on realtime convolution with stored impulse
responses [4][7].
1.2 System architecture
• brushes
• cymbal
• bass drum
• frame drum
• unusual objects...
convolver parameters
• damping
• crossfades
• pitch shift
• nonlinear chaining
• inverse ﬁltering
input ﬁltering
• nonlinear wave shaping
• inverse ﬁlters output processing
• pitch
• effects
System 
architecture
(Audio)
parametric 
contr
ol(control data)
input 
de
vice
con
v
olv
er 
system
stored impulse
Figure 1: Basic system architecture
Figure 1 shows the basic system architecture for these in-
struments. Audio from a semi-acoustic damped object (“in-
put device”) is convolved with a stored impulse. Additional
parametric control over the convolver and other processing
can be applied by sensors built into the input device.
This system has been implemented to run in real time
both in Max/MSP [3] and Pure Data (“Pd”) [12].
2. PHYSICAL CONTROLLERS
Because of the nature of the processing, the physical part
of the instrument is at least as important as the algorithmic
part. For this section I will refer to the physical part of the
instrument as acontroller for convenience, though its acous-
tic properties and conception diﬀer from typical controller
schema. These controllers are designed to exploit the way
the convolver acts as a resonator. By varying the degree of
damping, physical resonances can be removed and replaced
with any desired resonance.
The controllers described can be represented on a con-
tinuum based on the degree to which their own acoustics
inﬂuences the output. At one extreme, the practice pad
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
154
controller is highly damped, and although it does impart a
“plastic” sound, it is a relatively minor coloration. In the
middle, the various brush controllers give a clear impression
that the stored impulse is being performed with a brush,
taking on the dense time texture of the metal tines. At
the other extreme, the cymbal controller provides signiﬁ-
cant coloration to any sound, enough so that it can sound
like a cymbal bolted to a bass drum, or a cymbal attached
to a snare when used with those stored impulses.
2.1 Cymbal
(a) Side view
 (b) View of Redel con-
nector, plastic substrate
Figure 2: Cymbal controller
This cymbal controller started out as a budget brass stu-
dent cymbal, and it is designed to accommodate normal
cymbal playing gestures such as hitting the bell or shell and
choking the cymbal by grabbing the front of it. Since it is
built around a modiﬁed real cymbal, it can sit on a stan-
dard cymbal stand. A foam grommet limits contact with
the cymbal stand, and allows the cymbal to swing normally.
2.1.1 Assembly
The cymbal controller is assembled in layers, from top to
bottom, as shown in ﬁgure 3, the layers are:
• A real brass cymbal
• PVDF element (MSI FLDT1-052K [8]) bonded to the
cymbal underside, away from the playing area
• A thin foam layer to damp the cymbal and transfer
choke force
• Force sensing resistor (interlink #406 [5]) to detect
choke force at edge of the playing surface and control
damping in the convolver
• Molded plastic cymbal substrate (pintech XT practice
cymbal [11]) to support the assembly and further damp
vibration. Edges are sealed with silicone caulk.
The FSR is connected directly to the computer audio in-
terface. Audio signals are sent through the FSR and change
in the signal levels is measured to determine the sensor’s
resistance. An advantage of this approach is that no ad-
ditional hardware is needed, but it does take up another
channel of input and output(ﬁgure 4).
The signals used have been in the 150 – 500 Hz range
to minimize capacitive coupling while maintaining suﬃcient
time resolution for controlling the damping parameter.
-brass cymbal
-molded plastic
-foam layer
-FSR (for choke)
PVDF
cymbal controller (assembled)
cymbal controller (exploded)
Figure 3: Cymbal controller assembly
DAC/ADC
out
in
FSR
Figure 4: Using the audio interface to measure the
resistance of the FSR
2.1.2 Function
Since there is signiﬁcant spectral contribution from the
cymbal, hits on the bell, rim, or edge sound substantially
diﬀerent from each other. I originally expected to need mul-
tiple contact microphones to get enough variation from hits
in diﬀerent locations, but it turns out that one microphone
is suﬃcient because of the range of sounds achievable by
hitting diﬀerent parts of the cymbal. When convolving with
a cymbal sound, the eﬀect is that the lost resonance of the
cymbal (due to damping) is restored, and it is quite surpris-
ing when the processing is turned oﬀ to hear that the real
cymbal only sounds like a dull clank.
One drawback to allowing the controller to provide more
of the spectrum is that while it heightens the realism of
cymbal sounds, it will always impart a cymbal-like quality,
even to non-cymbal sounds. For example, when convolved
with a concert bass drum sound, the output sounds as if a
cymbal was physically joined to the drum head.
2.1.2.1 Extensions.
To allow for cymbal crashes, two convolvers can be chained,
approximating some of the nonlinearity of the real cymbal
(described in detail in [2]). In addition to the FSR circuit,
the surface of the cymbal was also electrically connected to
the audio interface to pick up the 60Hz hum from when the
player touched the surface. The hum was ﬁltered and the
envelope was used to control damping. Even though it pro-
vided essentially only one bit of data, having the cymbal be
sensitive to touch over its entire surface proved to be more
important than having a range of damping in one location.
A potentiometer knob was added to the top of the cymbal
(ﬁgure 5) to control pitch. The knob’s resistance was mea-
sured by Pd using the same method as for the FSR. This
allows the player to dial in a particular cymbal sound from
the cymbal itself.
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
155
Figure 5: Cymbal pitch controlled with knob
2.2 Brushes
Two kinds of brush controllers were developed for use with
this system, one wireless and one tethered. Drum brushes in
either conﬁguration were ﬁtted with a PVDF contact micro-
phone to pick up the sound in the metal tines. Any surface
can be played with the brushes, and the resulting output
sounds as if the sampled instrument is being played with
brushes, but has the texture of the surface being played. By
stirring the brush on a surface, a sustained broad band noise
can be produced that results in quite diﬀerent timbres than
were observed with the pads or cymbal controller. Diﬀer-
ent combinations of surface textures, brush movements and
stored impulse are possible.
2.2.1 Wireless brush
Figure 6: Wireless brush
The wireless brush used the circuit board and part of the
enclosure of a handheld VHF wireless microphone (Nady
DKW-1H [10]) to transmit its audio signal. Up to four wire-
less brushes can be used simultaneously on four diﬀerent
VHF channels. As with the wired brush, a piece of PVDF
(Digikey MSP1006-ND) was threaded through the tines to
pick up the brush sound. Kapton tape was used to protect
the piezo element from abrasion from the brushes.
2.2.2 Wired brush
The wired brush controller started with a rubber-handled
drum brush, and added a 3” bend sensor [1] to detect when
the brush was pressed against a surface. The bend sensor
was placed in line with the tines, while a PVDF tab was
threaded through the tines. The rubber covering was split
to make room for the wiring.
Figure 7: Wired brush
A Redel-compatible connector was added to the end of the
brush to allow quick connections to a multi-conductor cable.
This connector was common to several of the controllers
built, allowing easy interchangeability.
2.3 Pad
Figure 8: Percussion pad controller
drumhead
foam
PVDF
plastic shell
Figure 9: Percussion pad cross section
This is a simple controller derived from a drum practice
pad. Since one of the goals of a practice pad is to be quiet,
it was already well damped. A piece of PVDF foil [9] was
applied under a layer of foam located beneath the drumhead
and was connected directly to the audio interface (ﬁgure 9).
The pad proved a surprisingly versatile controller, working
well with most impulses. Due to the head material and
the high degree of damping, treble had to be boosted to
maintain reasonable sound. Unfortunately this also made it
more susceptible to noise.
The practice pad had a less-variable sound due to its thick
plastic head and highly damped design. The foam itself
made some noise when compressed, creating unrealistic ar-
tifact for louder hits. Players had to work to produce a
meaningful range of impulses. Sanding the head helped the
sound somewhat, as did maximizing the tension of the head.
Hitting the metal tension ring around the perimeter of the
head gave more of a metallic clank, which was quite diﬀer-
ent from any of the sounds achievable by hitting the drum
head.
2.4 Frame drum
Based on the preliminary results of early versions of the
cymbal controller, I wanted to apply the same technique of
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
156
Figure 10: Frame drum controller
using more of the acoustic response of the physical object
to the construction of a drum controller. Starting with a
wooden frame drum, I added contact microphones, damp-
ing material, and pressure sensors (ﬁgure 11). This drum
was much less damped than the practice pad, ensuring that
more of the spectrum of the drum was carried through the
processing.
Drums struck in diﬀerent locations can excite diﬀerent
modal structures. For example, striking location helps cre-
ate the diﬀerences between Djembe bass, tone, and slap
sounds. Unfortunately, the convolution system is limited
to the one set of modes that are in the sampled sound. One
way around this problem is to run multiple convolutions at
once, and to have contact microphones at multiple locations
on the drum head, or one could also track the location of
the hit and control a cross fade between convolvers. In this
case, multiple contact microphones were used to be able to
process hits on the center and edges of the drum diﬀerently.
2.4.1 Assembly
PVDF contact microphone
foam blocks
FSR
bottom layer
FSR
PVDF
drumhead
wood substrate
foam block
wood 
substrate
top layer
side cross section
Figure 11: Frame drum controller assembly
One PVDF element (MSI FLDT1-052K [8]) was mounted
to the underside of the center of the drumhead, and another
was mounted to the frame.
A force sensing resistor (“FSR”, interlink #406 [5]) was
mounted to a wooden substrate at the center of the drum
and covered by a foam block to provide control of damping.
The compressibility of the foam block allowed for a greater
displacement of the drum head over the active range of the
sensor, and also served to protect the sensor by spreading
any forces over its whole area. The order of assembly at the
center, from top to bottom is:
• Drumhead
• PVDF
• Foam block
• FSR
• Wooden substrate
(a) Substrate w/ FSR, con-
nector
(b) Bottom view
(c) Drum without head
Figure 12: Frame drum controller
2.4.2 Function
Since the FSR is mounted at the center of the drum, it
responds to pressing anywhere on the drumhead (although
much more strongly at the center). This gives good subtle
control of damping by pushing at the edges, while still al-
lowing sudden and immediate damping by pushing at the
center.
Pushing on the drum head also raises the pitch of the
drum slightly. Originally I had intended to have a small
pitch bend controlled by a second pressure sensor, but for
many drum sounds, there is enough of a pitch eﬀect due to
the changes in tension in the real drum head, even though
the stored impulse is not shifted.
Separate processing of the rim signals from the center
works particularly well for djembe sounds. Since there is
an increase in low frequency output of the center PVDF
sensor when it is hit directly, I found that I could combine
djembe bass and tone sounds into one sample, and obtain
more of one or the other sound entirely based on where and
how the drum was hit, while using the edge sensor just for
djembe slap sounds.
2.5 Bass drum with speaker
For this controller, I was interested in having the sound
emit from the object, to provide a stronger illusion that the
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
157
Figure 13: Bass drum controller
player was interacting with a physical object rather than
a computer. I converted a bass drum shell into what is
essentially a speaker cabinet in which the speaker is located
behind the drum head. This provided both a sonic and
tactile feedback to the player.
mesh drumhead
PVDF
foam blocks
woofer
tweetersMDF
Figure 14: Bass drum controller
2.5.1 Assembly
The assembly is shown in ﬁgure 14. A circle of medium
density ﬁberboard (MDF) was used to seal one end of the
drum, and an MDF ring supports and centers a 15-inch bass
speaker at the other end. Internal MDF bracing was also
added. A nylon mesh drumhead was stretched over the end
with the speaker, allowing sound to pass through the mesh.
Vibration in the mesh is picked up by two PVDF elements
(LDT0-028K, [8]) supported by foam glued to the MDF ring.
Side-mounted piezo horn tweeters (Pyle PSN1167) were
added to improve the system’s high frequency response.
Audio output from the computer was routed to the speaker
in the drum, semantically re-coupling the resonator to the
playing surface, though thanks to the mesh they stayed es-
sentially acoustically uncoupled.
2.5.2 Function
The bass drum controller, because of its appearance, loud
output, and low bass extension, was well suited for the obvi-
ous role of large drum sounds, along with thunder, prepared
piano soundboard, as well as for large gongs and cymbals.
Due to the resonance of the mesh, some equalization was
necessary to control feedback, making it an ideal candidate
for using deconvolution to pre-ﬁlter a typical hit from the
the stored impulses. One surprising outcome is that it is ac-
tually well-suited for snare drum sounds, provided that the
head is given a high enough tension to provide proper stick
bounce.
3. SUMMARY
The fundamental trade-oﬀ for this system is that for the
output to sound exactly like the stored sample, one would
like the input to be a perfect impulse function with no tim-
bral contribution from the physical controller. But for there
to be suﬃcient variation in the timbre, the acoustic contri-
bution of the controller has to be signiﬁcant. In a system
like this, the placement and design of the secondary controls
such as pressure, bend, and touch sensors not only have to
be consistent with the use of the instrument, but have to
allow the controller to still function as an acoustic object.
These controllers diﬀer greatly in how their own acoustics
inﬂuence the ﬁnal sound. For the bass drum and pad, I saw
that inﬂuence as a potential liability. The range of timbres
was small, and the typical timbre had strong resonances
requiring work through equalization and ﬁltering to mitigate
its impact. For the frame drum and cymbal, it was possible
for the player to extract a much broader variation of timbre,
giving an extra element of realism and variation to the ﬁnal
output.
Since the acoustic qualities of these controllers are so crit-
ical to their function, these examples represent a tiny slice
of what can be realized through extended development. In
the same way that existing percussion instruments have con-
stantly been extended and reﬁned, the physical controllers
and their associated processing can also beneﬁt from time
and iteration.
4. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Many thanks to the percussionists who helped test and
reshape these designs:
• Rakalam Bob Moses
• Jamey Haddad
• Curt Newton
• Dave Flaherty
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
158
5. REFERENCES
[1] Abrams/Gentile Entertainment, Inc. New York, NY.
http://www.ageinc.com.
[2] R. Aimi. Hybrid Percussion: Extending Physical
Instruments Using Sampled Acoustics. PhD thesis,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2006.
[3] Cycling ’74. Max/MSP. http://www.cycling74.com/.
[4] W. Gardner. Eﬃcient convolution without
input-output delay. Journal of the Audio Engineering
Society, 43(3):127, 1995.
[5] Interlink Electronics, Inc. Camarillo, CA,
http://www.interlinksensors.com.
[6] Korg corporation. Wavedrum user’s guide. Tokyo,
Japan, 1994.
[7] D. S. McGrath. Eﬃcient convolution method and
apparatus. United States Patent 6,574,649, June 22
2001.
[8] Measurement Specialties, Inc. Hampton, VA.
http://www.meas-spec.com.
[9] Measurement Specialties, Inc. Piezo Film Sensors
Technical Manual, 1999.
[10] Nady systems, inc. Emeryville, CA,
http://www.nady.com.
[11] Pintech USA, inc. Greenville, SC
http://www.pintechworld.com.
[12] M. Puckette. ”pure data.”. In Proceedings,
International Computer Music Conference, pages
269–272, San Francisco, 1996. International Computer
Music Association.
[13] Roland corporation. percussion sound module TD-20
owner’s manual, 2004.
[14] K. Van Den Doel and D. Pai. Audio anecdotes,
chapter Modal synthesis for vibrating objects. A.K.
Peter, Natick, MA, 2003.
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
159