ChordEase: A MIDI remapper for intuitive performance of 
non-modal music 
 
 
 
 
Chris Korda 
whorld.org 
80 Avon Street 
Somerville, MA 02143 
chordease@gmail.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Improvising to non-modal chord progressions such as those 
found in jazz necessitat es switching between the different 
scales implied by each chord. This work attempted to simplify 
improvisation by delegating the process of switching scales to a 
computer. An open-source software MIDI remapper called 
ChordEase was developed that dynamically alters the pitch of 
notes, in order to fit them to the chord scales of a predetermined 
song. ChordEase modifies the behavior of ordinary MIDI in-
struments, giving them new interfaces that permit non-modal 
music to be approached as if it were modal.  Multiple instru-
ments can be remapped simultaneously, using a variety of 
mapping functions, each optimized for a particular musical 
role. Harmonization and orchestration can also be automated. 
By facilitating the selection of scale tones, ChordEase enables 
performers to focus on other aspects of improvisation, and thus 
creates new possibilities for musical expression. 
 
Author Keywords 
Mapping, chords, jazz, improvisation, note correction, non-
modal, chord progression, digital musical instrument. 
 
ACM Classification 
H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation] User Interfaces, 
H.5.5 [Information Interfaces and Presentation] Sound and Music 
Computing–Methodologies and techniques. 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
We sought to simplify the process of improvising to non-modal 
chord progressions. This led us to develop a software MIDI 
remapper called ChordEase that repurposes ordinary MIDI 
instruments by giving them new interfaces. These interfaces 
eliminate the need to play a different scale for each chord, the 
related need to play accidentals, and more generally the need to 
remember or even know the chord progre ssion. ChordEase 
alters the pitches of notes in real time while preserving their 
rhythm and dynamics. Control over pitch is partially sacrificed 
in exchange for the freedom to approach non-modal music as if 
it were modal. By delegating the more computational aspects of 
improvisation to ChordEase, users are able to focus on other 
aspects, such as rhythm, dynamics, feel, group interaction, and 
aesthetics, even at fast tempos. 
2. PRIOR WORK 
Note correction schemes have been proposed before, for exam-
ple a recent invention by Kinter [1] puts “an electronic MIDI 
keyboard in perfect pitch,” while the Hotz Translator [2] alters 
note pitches “so that only correct values ... are available.” 
ChordEase integrates a novel combination of schemes, and 
does so within the context of an open-source project in order to 
encourage collaboration.  It also lowers the barriers to entry by 
requiring only ordinary MIDI instruments and a laptop, unlike 
most existing solutions which are embedded in specialized 
hardware [3][4]. Though a few existing solutions permit the 
chord progression to be sequenced [5], most expect the user to 
perform it in real time, typically by selecting from a palette of 
chords. ChordEase is designed to sequence chords, in part be-
cause this eliminates the need to know the chord progression, 
but also because features that require look-ahead, such as har-
monic anticipation and bass approach, are easier to implement 
when the chords are predetermined. ChordEase permits manual 
selection of chords, but its look-ahead features are inoperative 
in this case. Finally, unlike most existing solutions, ChordEase 
supports multiple users, each having their own se ttings but 
following the same chord changes, so that an ensemble can be 
remapped by a single instance of the application. 
 It’s instructive to compare ChordEase with Jean Haury’s 
metapiano [6]. A metapiano user can perform a classical score 
without knowing its pitches, and similarly a ChordEase user 
can improvise to a song without knowing its chord progression 
or t he scales those chords imply. Both sy stems reduce the 
amount of knowledge required to play music. In both cases the 
user delegates control over pitch, while retaining control over 
rhythm and dynamics. But unlike the metapiano, ChordEase 
doesn’t restrict the user to a predetermined sequence of notes; 
instead it restricts the user to a pre -determined sequence of 
scales. The notes of each scale can be played in any order. 
 ChordEase can also be compared with Musician Maker [7], in 
which “players are limited to notes which fit the chord progres-
sion”, so as to “allow novice players the opportunity to create 
expressive improvisational music.” Musician Maker shares the 
goal of delegating “tedious difficulties” to a co mputer, and 
supports multiple users, but unlike ChordEase, it depends on 
unique custom controllers for input, and restricts users to chord 
tones rather than scales. 
 According to the mapping strategy analysis of Wanderley et 
al. [8], the mappings used in ChordEase are indirect, because 
multiple inputs determine the pitch of an output note. The chord 
progression and current position within it, the choice of map-
ping function and the function’s parameters all combine with 
the pitch of the input note to determine the corresponding out-
put note’s pitch. Virtuosos may find it disconcerting that a giv-
en gesture doesn’t always produce the same pitches. On the 
other hand, musical vocabulary is acquired more easily, be-
cause it’s no longer necessary to learn it in all twelve keys. 
ChordEase lightens the performer’s information processing 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on 
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME’15, May 31-June 3, 2015, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
322
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
load by embedding harmonic rules, but practice still makes 
perfect. Playing ChordEase is skill-based in the sense of “re-
quiring constant performer input to sustain musical output” [9]. 
3. DESIGN
Figure 1: ChordEase screen shot. 
ChordEase remaps input notes so that their corresponding out-
put notes fit the chord progression of a predetermined song. 
Figure 1 shows the song in the upper right corner. The song 
consists of chord symbols, which are associated with scales, 
modes, and chord voicings by a user-customizable chord dic-
tionary. Songs can be created and edited within the user inter-
face or via a text editor, or imported from Impro-Visor [10]. 
 Regardless of how the song modulates or what scales it uses, 
it can be played as if it were confined to a single major key. 
The input key is configurable, though herein we assume the key 
of C. In the default case, white keys map to scale tones, where-
as black keys map to either non-scale tones or duplicate scale 
tones. The user synchronizes with the song by following a 
built-in metronome via headphones. Due to its efficient multi-
threaded design, a single instance of ChordEase can support 
many users simultaneously with minimal latency. For optimal 
throughput on a multi-core CPU, each instrument should have 
its own MIDI interface. A typical multi-user hardware configu-
ration is shown in Figure 2. 
Laptop+USB MIDIadaptersInstrumentB
InstrumentAMIDI
InstrumentC
Drum machineMIDI
MIDI
MIDI Headphonedistributionamplifier
Click track
Figure 2: A multi-user ChordEase setup. 
4. MAPPING FUNCTIONS
ChordEase supports three mapping functions, each of which 
facilitates a specific musical role. Lead is intended for soloing, 
Bass for bass playing, and Comp for chordal accompaniment. 
 The Lead function transposes input notes in position, by add-
ing accidentals as needed. The input notes are modified as little 
as possible in order to fit the chord progression. This function is 
useful for soloing because unlike transposition by shifting, it 
avoids pitch leaps at chord change boundaries, and thereby 
preserves the input’s melodic shape across chord changes. 
 The Bass function transposes input notes by shifting, so that 
each note of the input diatonic scale has a fixed harmonic role. 
C is always the root of the current chord, E is always the third, 
G is always the fifth, etc. This facilitates bass playing because 
chord tones, particularly the root, remain stationary on the in-
strument and can be located trivially. The Bass function also 
supports an approach mode that lets any chord be approached 
as if it were C. Approach mode shifts the current chord scale so 
that C maps to the root of the target chord, or as close as possi-
ble. Unlike the Lead function, the Bass function may produce 
pitch leaps at chord boundaries, as shown in Table 1. 
Table 1: Comparison of Lead and Bass functions. 
Input C4 D4 E4 F4 G4 A4 B4 
Am7 
Lead C4 D4 E4 F#4 G4 A4 B4 
Bass A3 B3 C4 D4 E4 F#4 G4 
Fm7 
Lead C4 D4 Eb4 F4 G4 Ab4 Bb4 
Bass F3 G3 Ab3 Bb3 C4 D4 Eb4 
In the Comp function, a single input note triggers a chord, with 
user control over voicings, variations, and arpeggiation. The 
algorithm resembles the one proposed by R. Dias et al. [11] in 
that higher notes produce higher chords. Specifically, the input 
note’s pitch determines the bottom note of a window within 
which the output chord is voiced. The chord is inverted as 
needed to keep it within the specified window. Voicing options 
include close, drop 2, drop 3, etc. Two customizable variations 
are defined for each supported chord type. The first variation 
uses a conventional spelling, whereas the second uses an al-
tered spelling. The output automatically alternates between the 
two chord variations. The arpeggio speed and order are dynam-
ically variable, facilitating emulation of strumming and finger-
picking. 
5. ADDITIONAL FEATURES
Additional features essential to ChordEase are explained below. 
Other useful but non-essential features include recording of the 
output, synchronization with external sequencers, and remote 
control of all parameters via MIDI. 
 In order to support multiple users simultaneously, ChordEase 
permits the creation of any number of parts, each having its 
own independent state. A part is a data structure that specifies 
how to map input notes to output notes, and includes many 
settings such as MIDI port and channel selections, which map-
ping function to use, and mapping function parameters. A sin-
gle user can also play multiple parts at once, either by splitting 
an instrument into zones that control different parts, or by lay-
ering parts together. Melodic lines can be orchestrated by layer-
ing Lead and Comp. 
 In an ensemble, one part may intentionally change chords 
early, relative to other parts. This is harmonic anticipation, and 
ChordEase allows it to be specified differently for each part. 
Positive anticipation creates a time window before each chord 
change during which the part’s input notes are mapped to the 
subsequent chord’s scale. Negative harmonic anticipation is 
also permitted, in which case the part lags behind the changes. 
 If a note is sustained over a chord change, the note may be-
come invalid, i.e. it may not be a member of the new chord’s 
scale. ChordEase can optionally correct held notes, by substi-
tuting notes from the new chord’s scale. The Lead and Bass 
functions substitute the nearest scale tone, whereas the Comp 
function substitutes the nearest chord tone. If a Comp chord is 
held over multiple chord changes, cumulative corrections pro-
gressively alter the original chord. Harmonic anticipation can 
323
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
prevent held note corrections, because notes struck within the 
harmonic anticipation window are mapped using the anticipated 
chord’s scale, and are thus axiomatically valid when the chord 
arrives. 
 ChordEase includes a harmonizer that automatically gener-
ates a harmony line for any part. The user specifies a generic 
interval, which is then altered as needed to fit the chord chang-
es. The harmonizer also supports static harmony, implemented 
as follows: the previous harmony note is compared to each 
subsequent melody note, and as long as the interval between 
them stays within a specified range, the previous harmony note 
is reused. Multi-part harmony is also achievable by layering 
parts that have different harmony settings. 
6. NON-DIATONIC INPUT
In its usual configuration, ChordEase maps the white keys to 
chord scale tones. But what happens if a black key is struck? 
The result depends on which non-diatonic rule is in effect, as 
shown in Figure 3 and explained below. 
C4
Db4
D4 Eb4 F4 G4 Ab4 Bb4 C5
D4 Gb4 G4 A4
C4
C4
D4 Eb4 F4 G4 Ab4 Bb4 C5
D4 F4 G4 Ab4
C4 D4 Eb4 F4 G4 Ab4 Bb4 C5
C4
D4
Eb4 G4 Ab4 C5 Eb5 G5 Ab5
F4 Bb4 D5 F5
C4
D4
Eb4 G4 Bb4 D5 F5 Ab5 C6
F4 C5 Eb5 G5
Al l ow
Quant i ze
Di sabl e
Skip
Thirds
C4
Db4
D4 Eb4 F4 G4 Ab4 Bb4 C5
E4 Gb4 A4 B4
12Tone
Figure 3: Non-diatonic rules for Lead over F Dorian. 
 The default rule is Allow, which maps each black key to the 
scale tone of the white key above it, minus a half step. The 
result is either a non-scale tone or a duplicate note, depending 
on the interval between the adjacent scale tones. 
 The Twelve-Tone rule is similar to Allow, but eliminates the 
duplicate notes. The entire chromatic scale is made available, 
but at the cost of presenting the notes slightly out of order. The 
black keys map to the five unique non-scale tones. 
 The Quantize rule rounds to the nearest scale tone, so that all 
black keys generate duplicate notes. Only scale tones are acces-
sible, making the instrument accident-proof and more suitable 
for gestural playing. The Disable rule similarly restricts the user 
to scale tones, by disabling the black keys. 
 The Skip rule compresses the diatonic scale onto the chro-
matic scale, so that all keys are active and output unique scale 
tones. This is useful when inputting notes via a continuous 
controller, theremin, or similar device, because it ensures that 
the scale tones are linearly mapped to controller coordinates, 
i.e. any two adjacent scale tones are always separated by the 
same increment of physical motion. Interval distances are great-
ly reduced, e.g. playing a fifth yields an octave. The mapping is 
aligned so that middle C (C4) retains its usual pitch, but all 
other notes are shifted. 
 Finally, the Thirds rule maps input notes to output notes in 
such a way that successive white keys form the cycle of thirds. 
This makes it much easier to play arpeggios. Each black key 
outputs the scale tone that the adjacent white keys step over. 
Interval distances are again greatly reduced: each input octave 
spans two output octaves. 
7. CONCLUSION
We sought to facilitate the performance of improvisational non-
modal music, particularly jazz, by delegating music theory 
calculations to a computer. We implemented several alternative 
interfaces for ordinary MIDI instruments, each optimized for a 
different musical role. These interfaces create new possibilities 
for musical expression, and make it easy to play parts that 
would otherwise be demanding or impossible. On the other 
hand they make common tones harder to locate. It might be 
helpful to indicate common tones visually. We plan to develop 
additional mapping functions in the future, including melodic 
vocabulary and palettes of relative scale tones. We hope that 
ChordEase proves to be a useful platform for further experi-
mentation as well as pedagogy, and speculate that it could be of 
particular interest to people with disabilities. 
8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to Kevin Roche, Robert Kimberk, Elisabeth Shaw, Josh 
Rosenstock, V.J. Manzo, Greg Waltzer, Richard Clements, 
Douglas Ruuska, Todd Winkler, and the NIME reviewers for 
their comments and suggestions. 
9. REFERENCES
[1] Z. C. Kinter. MIDI re-mapping process for utilizing proper 
music theory when playing a keyboard. US8642875. 2014. 
[2] J. Hotz. MIDI musical translator. US5099738. 1992. 
[3] G. Johnson. Dynamic chord interval and quality modification 
keyboard, chord board CX10. US5440071. 1995. 
[4] W. H. Sim. System to enable the use of white keys of musical 
keyboards for scales. US20040231500. 2004. 
[5] K. Ueki et al. Assistive apparatus, method and computer 
program for playing music. US20040112203. 2004. 
[6] J. Haury. La pianotechnie ou notage des partitions musicales 
pour une interpretation immediate sur le metapiano. In Proc. of 
the 14th Journees d’Informatique Musicale. 2009. 
[7] J. Buschert. Musician Maker: Play expressive music without 
practice. In Proc. of New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 
2012. 
[8] A. Hunt, M. M. Wanderley, and M. Paradis. The importance of 
parameter mapping in electronic instrument design. In Proc. of 
New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 2002, 1-6. 
[9] J. Malloch, D. Birnbaum, E. Sinyor, and M. M. Wanderley. 
Towards a new conceptual framework for digital musical 
instruments. In Proc. of the 9th International Conference on 
Digital Audio Effects, 2006, 49-52. 
[10] R. Keller, A. Schofield, A. Toman-Yih, Z. Merritt, and J. 
Elliott. Automating the explanation of jazz chord progressions 
using idiomatic analysis. Computer Music Journal, 37 
(4), 2013, 54-69.
[11] R. Dias, C. Guedes, and T. Marques. A computer-mediated 
Interface for Jazz Piano Comping. In Proc. of ICMC/SMC, 
2014, 558-564. 
10. Appendices
The ChordEase screen shot, documentation and source code are 
available, along with demo and instructional videos. 
324
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 