Striso, a Compact Expressive Instrument Based on a
New Isomorphic Note Layout
Piers Titus van der Torren
Independent researcher
pierstitus@toverlamp.org
ABSTRACT
The Striso is a new expressive music instrument with an
acoustic feel, which is designed to be intuitive to play and
playable everywhere. The sound of every note can be pre-
cisely controlled using the direction and pressure sensitive
buttons, combined with instrument motion like tilting or
shaking. It works standalone, with an internal speaker and
battery, and is meant as a self contained instrument with
its own distinct sound, but can also be connected to a com-
puter to control other synthesizers.
The notes are arranged in an easy and systematic way,
according to the new DCompose note layout that is also
presented in this paper. The DCompose note layout is de-
signed to be compact, ergonomic, easy to learn, and closely
bound to the harmonic properties of the notes.
Keywords
new instrument, isomorphic, 3D note control, accelerome-
ter, DIY, open source, perceived pitch height, tuning invari-
ant
1. INTRODUCTION
I have been playing instruments since I was young, and
while the reason to switch from piano to accordion was
mainly to play something more portable, another aspect
caught my fascination: because the buttons on the bass
side are arranged like the circle of ﬁfths (or more general
spiral of ﬁfths, a basis in the theory of harmonic proper-
ties), it was easier to feel what happened in the music. My
right hand, which still played the piano keyboard, needed
my brain much more to get its job done. Ever since then I
have been fascinated by instruments which have their notes
arranged based on their harmonic properties, instead of only
their pitch height.
When I started building musical instruments, I started
thinking about ways to create new instruments with their
notes arranged following the circle of ﬁfths. This resulted in
the DCompose note layout, a 2D button layout where both
the circle of ﬁfths and pitch height play an important role.
This turns out to be an isomorphic layout, which means
that each type of interval or chord you play has the same
shape. I will elaborate on this further in section 3.
After several acoustical instrument designs which were
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’14,June 30 – July 03, 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Figure 1: The Striso, with for the right hand the
DCompose note layout and for the left hand a re-
duced size note layout for accompaniment.
diﬃcult to build, a friend explained how to work with mi-
crocontrollers, and so the plan for making an electronic in-
strument was born. The goal still was to make a real in-
strument, with its own sound and the expressiveness of an
acoustic instrument, not an interface for mimicking other
instruments. This resulted in the Striso (see ﬁgure 1), an
instrument with the beneﬁts of an electronic instrument,
yet an acoustic sound and feel. In section 4 you can ﬁnd
the details of the Striso.
The bass side uses the intriguing auditory illusion of pitch
circularity to play music which tricks your ears. You will
see what that means after reading section 5.
In making these ideas reality there is a lot of technology
involved, and thanks to a big DIY community and FabLabs
the possibilities for creating complicated technology on a
small scale have greatly improved. Section 6 focuses on the
technology and construction of the electronics, the hard-
ware, and the software for the synthesizer and its parameter
mapping.
But ﬁrst, in the next section, there is a bit about the his-
tory of other work in the ﬁelds of note layouts and musical
expression.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
615
2. PRIOR WORK
2.1 Note layouts
In the past centuries many people have attempted to create
alternative note layouts which are based on harmonic prop-
erties of notes, in contrast with the note layouts based on
the physical properties of instruments.
Using harmonic properties to build a note layout quickly
leads to isomorphic note layouts. On an isomorphic note
layout the notes are located in such a way that each mu-
sical interval always has the same shape. So for example
a minor third always has the same direction and distance.
This makes the layout transpose invariant: every interval,
chord, scale or melody has the same geometrical shape and
ﬁngering when it played in a diﬀerent key. This means that
the musician needs to learn scales and chords only once,
and also that music theory becomes much more intuitive
and attractive to experiment with.
Another property that helps a lot in this aspect, is tuning
invariance, which means that in diﬀerent tunings the shape
and ﬁngering of intervals and chord is the same [10]. Even
when using only the default tuning of western music, the
12-et tuning1, this facilitates better understanding of music
theory, such as the diﬀerence between d♯ and e♭, which dif-
ferent in other tunings than 12-et. It also makes it a small
step for musicians to explore diﬀerent tunings, such as the
meantone or 31-et tunings that have been popular until the
18th century [14].
For many instruments the note layout is closely tied to the
physical shape, like guitar and violin. For others it is most
practical for the construction to stick to a linear layout,
like piano and harp. Instruments where the position of the
buttons is more or less free, like on organs and accordions,
attracted experiments, and the development of electronic
interfaces and synthesizers made experimenting a lot easier.
The ﬁrst and most used isochromatic note layout dates
back from 1850, when the ﬁrst chromatic button accordion
was made [5]. This layout however is not tuning invari-
ant, and as such less useful for learning music theory. In
1872, Bosanquet created his generalized keyboard [2], while
searching for an alternative to the piano keyboard that
works for diﬀerent tunings, and as such is the ﬁrst tun-
ing invariant keyboard. In 1896 a very compact note layout
was patented by Wicki [17], and later reinvented by Hayden,
with which a series of concertinas was made. It was mainly
focussed on 12-et instruments, but is tuning invariant.
A great attempt to launch a new instrument using the
Wicki layout has been done with the Thummer, which ceased
development due to funding issues [13]. This created some
follow-up in the DIY scene2.
Also multi-touch apps for tablets incorporating Wicki and
other hexagonal layouts have been created 3.
For teaching music and for beginning musicians a nice
property that can be found in the Wicki layout is that the
area with learned notes can be gradually increased: the
pentatonic scale is one connected and compact area, which
can be extended to the diatonic scale, and ﬁnally to all other
notes [12].
The developments around the Wicki layout lay a ﬁrm
basis for the DCompose layout.
2.2 Musical expression
Several ways of adding expression to digital button or key
based instruments have been developed, starting with key
112 equal temperament tuning: the octave is divided in 12
equal steps, which is the most used tuning in western music.
2see http://www.altkeyboards.com
3iMusix for iOS, and Hexiano for Android
velocity sensing which is now very common on keyboards.
Later continuous pressure sensing, also called aftertouch,
has been implemented on keyboards and new button based
controllers.
More recently research has been done on 3D note control,
by adding direction sensitivity per button in addition to
pressure sensitivity, such as in the Eigenharp [1] or Seaboard
[7]. Or even by blurring the borders of buttons to a con-
tinuous ﬁeld, such as the Haken Continuum [4], Madrona
Soundplane [6] or Linnstrument [8].
Additionally there are many ways of adding expression
to the whole instrument instead of per button, like ped-
als, breath controllers, strip controllers and motion sensors.
Nice examples are thumb controllers plus motion sensors in
the Thummer4, and strip controllers plus breath controller
in the Eigenharp, in addition to its 3D button sensitivity.
3. DCOMPOSE, A NEW NOTE LAYOUT
The name DCompose has several origins. It refers to the
mathematical term decompose, the layout is an orthogonal
decomposition of the pitch height and the circle of ﬁfths.
There is the D, the D is the central note in the circle of
ﬁfths, and as such the central note on the layout. At last
there is the musical meaning of compose.
The goal of the DCompose note layout is a note arrange-
ment which is compact, ergonomic, easy to learn, and closely
bound to the harmonic properties of the notes.
For the construction of the layout, the circle of ﬁfths is
put on the horizontal axis, while the pitch height is on the
vertical axis. Every note can now be placed on the ﬁeld
based on these two properties, see ﬁgure 2.
Pitch
Circle of Fifths
a
b
A♭ G
A G♯
G♭
D♭
A♭
E♭
B♭
F
C
G
D
A
E
B
F♯
C♯
G♯
D♯
A♯
G♭
D♭
E♭
B♭
F
C
D
E
B
F♯
C♯
D♯
A♯
G
A
F
C
G
D
A
E
B
F
C
D
E
B
A♭G A G♯G♭D♭E♭B♭F C D E B F♯C♯D♯A♯
Figure 2: In the DCompose note layout notes are
positioned based on their pitch and their position
in the circle of ﬁfths. To create an even spacing the
vertical octave spacinga is 2.268 times the horizon-
tal second spacing b. For the Striso b = 18mm.
The result is the DCompose layout. It is both compact
and ergonomic to play with four ﬁngers, which keeps the
thumb available for other controls, stabilizing the instru-
ment or helping with diﬃcult passages. It is based on the
ﬁrst two harmonics, the octave and the ﬁfth, and these are
both located close to each other. The diﬀerent octaves are
placed vertically aligned above each other, while the circle
of ﬁfths is in the horizontal direction. This makes it easy to
play in any single key, and also to deliberately play notes
that are out of key, which are located just a bit further away.
It is also tuning invariant, which helps in understanding mu-
sic theory and encourages players to explore other tunings,
such as Pythagorean, meantone or 31-et.
4Thummer demo video at http://youtu.be/lWK1d9fzlVQ
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
616
Since it is an isomorphic layout it has all the related prop-
erties, e.g. chords always have the same shape, and trans-
posing is a matter of moving your hand. Some chord shapes
are shown in ﬁgure 3.
C
G
E
A
C
E
G
F
D
B
C Am G7
F
C
GF
D
B F
A
C♯
Bdim Faug Csus4
Figure 3: The shape of a chord is alway the same in
an isomorphic layout. Here some common chords
are shown for the DCompose layout, put the shape
of a chord somewhere on ﬁgure 2 to get the chord
for another note.
The buttons can be coloured for visual guidance. Since
the piano layout is so well known, the easiest way to get
people familiar is to use the same colouring, white for the
C major scale, black for the rest. For tactile orientation
the D’s, which are the central notes, can be marked with a
texture.
To get a nicely ﬁlled surface the spacings of the second
and the fourth should be equal. To get this the vertical
spacing of the octave should be 2.268 times the horizontal
spacing of the second (see ﬁgure 2). After testing with dif-
ferent hand sizes, a practical value for the horizontal spacing
of the second of 18 mm is found, giving an octave spacing
of 40.82 mm. For a button array of three octaves with 17
buttons per octave this gives a buttonboard of 16 x 16 cm,
which can be used on a very portable instrument. Com-
bined with transpose buttons to shift octaves and key this
gives enough range for a most music (for one hand), but
also a bigger board with more octaves or more notes per
octave can be used.
3.1 Comparison to existing note layouts
The DCompose layout is very close to the Wicki layout. The
diﬀerence is that the Wicki layout doesn’t have the simple
relationship between pitch height and location on the note
layout [10]. Other properties are shared with the DCompose
layout, so existing learning material can be used or easily
changed, and Wicki players can easily switch.
Another layout which is closely related it the Bosanquet
generalized keyboard. This layout also has the pitch height
and the circle of ﬁfths on the axes, only the scaling is diﬀer-
ent and pitch height is horizontal and the circle of ﬁfths is
vertical. Compared to the DCompose layout the octaves are
put further apart and the circle of ﬁfths is made narrower.
This makes it closer to the piano layout, even the same
ﬁngering can be used, which is a beneﬁt for piano players.
However, it is less compact, and hence less practical for use
on a compact portable instrument.
The note layout of the Array mbira [16] also follows the
same pattern of the pitch height vertical and the circle of
ﬁfths horizontal, only this time scaled so the octaves are
closer to each other and the circle of ﬁfths wider. Here
octaves are close enough to each other to be played with
a single ﬁnger, which gives interesting playing possibilities,
but since the major seconds are not adjacent it is less intu-
itive to play.
All in all the DCompose layout is a compact isomorphic
layout where harmonic notes are located close to each other.
It can be learned quickly as it is isomorphic, all chords have
the same shape and transposing is as easy as moving your
hand. Also major, minor, and other scales are easy to re-
member and have straightforward ﬁngering. The pitch axis
is clear, which is not the case on some other isomorphic
layouts. Because of its compactness even a small hand can
easily span three octaves, and even though less harmonic
intervals are further away – where you expect them – they
are still comfortable to reach.
4. STRISO, THE INSTRUMENT
The name Striso contains iso, from the isomorphic layout,
also tri is found, for the 3D expression control in each but-
ton. The ﬁrst syllable also refers to ‘string’, as an inspiration
for the variety of sounds and expression it can make.
The Striso is built around the DCompose note layout,
which fulﬁlls an important part of the goal of being intu-
itive to play. Furthermore the goals were set to make an
instrument which
•is distinct and recognisable both in sound and appear-
ance,
•allows both hands to play, melody and accompani-
ment,
•is freely movable, to add expression using instrument
motion,
•is small enough to easily take with you,
•has space for a reasonable speaker.
The result of this ﬁts in a box of 20x20x20 cm, with the
sides angled for comfortable playing (see ﬁgure 1). On the
right side is a three octave DCompose buttonboard for the
right hand. The right hand can move freely around the
buttonboard, so its focus can be on playing notes, although
the palm or thumb can also be used to stabilize or shake
the instrument. The left hand holds the instrument using a
thumb strap, as is used on certain concertinas. This way it
has direct contact with the instrument and its movement.
To reduce strain for the left hand there is an attachment for
a neck strap on the top. For the left hand there is a spe-
cial reduced size button board for playing accompaniment,
which is described in more detail in the next section.
The Striso is designed to work standalone, using the inter-
nal speaker it can be used for small performances or camp-
ﬁre music. Using the headphone plug you can practise ev-
erywhere in silence, or connect an ampliﬁer on stage. For
recording, composition, or controlling other synthesizers, it
can be connected to a computer.
The goal of this project is to create a real instrument,
with its own distinct and versatile sound. As such there is
only one main operating mode, which is versatile enough to
create diﬀerent sounds by playing in diﬀerent ways. This
means that there should be many expression possibilities.
The next part will elaborate on this subject.
4.1 Musical expression and sound
To put as much control as possible in every note the but-
tons have 3D note control: continuous pressure and direc-
tion sensing on each button. This way for each note the
volume, pitch bend and some timbre related parameter can
be controlled independently.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
617
Additionally a motion sensor (accelerometer) lets instru-
ment motion like tilting or shaking be used to add more
expression and sound eﬀects.
The buttons are shaped in a way that the position where
a ﬁnger is placed on a button has little inﬂuence, only the
pressure and the direction of pressure matter. This way
precise ﬁnger placement is less important.
The top of the buttons has a linear shape, which helps
with feeling the orientation of the button, and also of the
note layout, when playing without looking. This shape give
precise control over the note, and also makes it possible to
pluck the buttons, like plucking a string (see ﬁgure 4).
Figure 4: The shape of the buttons, top view and
side views. The buttons are sensitive in all three
directions. The directionality of the top helps with
feeling orientation and makes plucking like a string
possible.
The sound of the Striso is inspired by a string, where you
can both have natural decay, when plucking or hammering,
or a sustained note, with other actuation like bowing or
resonating with an ampliﬁer.
The Striso is supposed to sound like an acoustic instru-
ment, and as such it is important that there is a clear match
between the sound and the look and feel, and that each ac-
tion has a believable inﬂuence on the sound. Still it must
be possible to touch or even cross the border of a believable
acoustic instrument.
5. SPECIFICITIES OF THE BASS SIDE
The left side, or bass side, is mainly meant for accompani-
ment, and as such diﬀerent aspects are important.
For accompaniment, it is more important which chord is
played than in which octave or which inversion. This can
be combined with the intriguing auditory illusion of pitch
circularity, which makes it possible to change the perceived
pitch height independent of the pitch class of the note that
is played [15][3]. This is also used on the bass side of accor-
dions, where all bass notes have the same perceived pitch
height, and all bass chords have a slightly higher perceived
pitch height.
Using pitch circularity, only one octave of notes is neces-
sary, as the notes never get higher anyway. This is conve-
nient when it isn’t important that the note is played in a
speciﬁc octave, as it is when playing chords. Think of a gui-
tar, the player often only knows the chord, and not exactly
which notes or which inversion.
A new implementation of pitch circularity is introduced
here, called ‘perceived pitch height modulation’, which makes
it possible to change the perceived pitch height of every note
while playing. As the buttons are direction sensitive, one
axis can be mapped to perceived pitch height, which intro-
duces the possibility of playing any note at any pitch height.
In the next part the details are explained.
This creates many creative possibilities, for example imag-
ine playing a C major scale upwards, while ending on the
same C without any jumps. Or even end an octave lower,
log frequency
output power
octave
0
0.5
Pp
Figure 5: The method for generating notes with
an arbitrary perceived pitch height. Three notes
in succeeding octaves are played, while their out-
put power is based on the distance to the requested
perceived pitch height Pp as in this graph. In the
graph this is shown for two notes, C with a solid
line and D with a dotted line.
play perceived pitch height glissandos, or change the inver-
sion of a chord smoothly. To help your imagination, listen
to some of the audio samples5.
5.1 Perceived pitch height modulation
The perceived pitch height modulation is implemented in
a relatively simple way, which in principle can be applied
on any sound. If instead of playing one note, the same
note is played in three succeeding octaves, the perceived
pitch height is similar to the middle note played alone. By
changing the relative volume of the three notes this per-
ceived pitch height can go up or down, while still playing
the same note. The three notes that are chosen are the note
closest to the requested perceived pitch height Pp and the
note one octave higher and lower. The output power An of
each note is calculated with the formula
An =



0.5, if ∆P ≤0.5
0.5 ·(1.5 −∆P), if 0.5 < ∆P <= 1.5
0, otherwise
(1)
where
∆P = |Pn −Pp|
Pn is note pitch
Pp is requested perceived pitch height
and pitch is expressed in octaves:
pitch = log2(frequency)
This way the total output power of the three notes always
is 1. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 5. Now the perceived
pitch height can be changed independent of the note that
is played. In practice the perceived pitch height is diﬀerent
per person, and is also inﬂuenced by the audio equipment
[3]. For this instrument this is no concern, as the musician
can adjust the requested perceived pitch height by ear.
Using perceived pitch height modulation also has impli-
cations for the button layout, as is explained in the next
part.
5.2 Button layout of the bass side
Using perceived pitch height modulation only buttons for
one octave are needed, where the perceived pitch height
is controlled by the direction sensitive buttons. Because
there is not really an increasing pitch height in the notes,
5Audio samples can be found at http://www.toverlamp.
org/nime/perceived_pitch
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
618
a straight Wicki layout is used. While one octave would be
enough, it is important to keep the isomorphic properties,
so three rows of buttons are available, where the top row is
a copy of the bottom row.
G♭
D♭
A♭
E♭
B♭
F
C
G
D
A
E
B
F♯
C♯
G♯
D♯
A♯
D♭E♭F G ABC♯D♯
C E
G
F
D
A F G
D
B
C Dm G7
Figure 6: The mirrored Wicki note layout as it is
used on the bass side, and some common chord
shapes. Thanks to the perceived pitch height mod-
ulation it doesn’t matter which chord inversion is
played, so the inversion with the easiest ﬁngering is
chosen.
The layout is mirrored, so on both sides the same direc-
tion for sharp and ﬂat are used: pinky direction for sharp
and thumb direction for ﬂat. The layout and the shapes of
some chords are shown in ﬁgure 6.
On the Striso the left hand has restricted movement free-
dom, so the buttons are smaller and spaced closer than on
the right side. The spacing is equal to the bass side of an
accordion. For accordion players the spacing should feel fa-
miliar, just as the order based on the circle of ﬁfths. Only
there are way fewer buttons and way more possibilities.
6. TECHNOLOGY
The design of such an instrument is one thing, the techno-
logy to really create a well functioning device is another.
The setup of a production line is even yet another thing.
However, in these times of rapid prototyping and customized
manufacturing, they all tend to get closer to each other.
The ﬁrst working prototype has been made with little
more than an Arduino, a transparency sheet, aluminium
tape, some pressure sensitive foil and a piece of silicone tube.
While it did work and was more or less playable, the sensi-
tivity was far from constant. A couple of prototypes later
the aluminium tape was replaced by gold plated contacts,
and the Arduino with one of the fastest microcontrollers
available, and the silicone tube by molded silicone.
This section will explain more about the technology used
to create the prototypes.
6.1 Electronics
The core of each pressure and direction sensitive button is
formed by three pressure sensitive pads. Using three pads
the pressure and direction of the pressure can be measured.
Since there are many buttons the sensors need to be cheap
and small. Luckily Velostat or Linqstat, the black antistatic
foil in which electronic components often are shipped, has
a pressure dependent resistance, and is used for pressure
sensors by the DIY community [11]. The pads are placed
between a ﬂexible circuit board on one side, and a rigid
circuit board on the other side (ﬁgure 7). The easiest way to
connect all the pads is using a matrix without any additional
components per pad. The downside of this method is that
there is crosstalk possible between pads when multiple pads
are pressed. Since it is a big beneﬁt that no additional
components are needed, the matrix is designed such that
the impact of crosstalk is low. This is done by connecting
each octave to a single analog input, while all buttons with
the same pitch class are sharing a digital output. This way
the only crosstalk that is possible is between the same notes
in diﬀerent octaves, which isn’t much of a problem in music.
The pads are sampled by microcontroller, which then
sends those signals to the internal synthesizer or to a com-
puter. The ﬁrst prototype used an AVR microcontroller,
which is the basis for the Arduino platform. However it be-
came apparent quickly that something more powerful was
needed, with more digital outputs and a faster ADC. One of
the most powerful microcontrollers around is the STM32F4,
a 168 MHz ARM processor with three very fast ADCs and
up to 140 input/output pins. Also a ﬂoating point unit
is included, which gives it enough power to run a synthe-
sizer. A prototype board for this microcontroller is available
under the name STM32F4-DISCOVERY, and includes an
accelerometer and audio codec, which makes it a perfect
choice for prototyping new instruments.
The ﬁrmware is developed using ChibiOS6, an open source
real-time operating system which provides a hardware ab-
straction layer and fast multithreading.
6.2 Synthesizer and mapping
The synthesizer is written in the functional audio program-
ming language Faust7, which combines a functional and a
ﬂow based language, and is speciﬁcally designed for real-
time signal processing and synthesis. There are libraries
with common functions included, and there are good exam-
ples available [9].
The Faust compiler generates C++ code, which can be
compiled to a large variety of targets, including plugins for
popular software or standalone programs controlled by open
sound control (OSC). In order to run the synthesizer on the
microcontroller in the Striso a new target is developed for
embedded use. The source code including an example for
the STM32F4-DISCOVERY board will be available on the
website of the author8.
In order to quickly try new ideas and ﬁne-tune the param-
eter mapping the synthesizer is run on the computer, while
a small program converts the messages from the Striso to
OSC messages controlling the Faust synthesizer.
6http://www.chibios.org/
7http://faust.grame.fr/
8http://www.toverlamp.org/nime/
Figure 7: Circuit board with all the pressure sensi-
tive pads.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
619
7. EXPERIENCES AND FUTURE WORK
With the DCompose note layout a compact isomorphic lay-
out is created, based on the circle of ﬁfths and pitch, which
is easy to learn and helps understanding music theory.
With the Striso an expressive instrument is made with 3D
sensitive buttons and motion sensing. It uses the DCompose
note layout, and has a built-in speaker, battery and synthe-
sizer, and a special bass side which features perceived pitch
height modulation, which is also introduced in this paper.
In the current state the Striso is a prototype, and has been
tested informally by several people. The general response
is very positive, and the layout is quickly understood, es-
pecially since the black and white colouring is added. For
some people not having the minor seconds close to each
other feels strange, but adaptation is generally quick when
noticing that when the index ﬁnger is on a certain note, the
pinky is very close to a minor second higher or lower. Also
using the left hand for accompaniment doesn’t always feel
natural, especially using a diﬀerent layout. Hence ideas for
adding a stronger connection between both hands are being
researched.
Additional experience with the DCompose layout is ob-
tained with a modiﬁed accordion (ﬁgure 8), which is being
used with great pleasure by the author.
The note layout is very easy to play in any key, espe-
cially when playing blind and guidance by the colours is
not needed. The layout makes it easy to jam in a certain
key, but also attracts experimenting with out of key notes
and other scales such as blues or gypsy scales, since the
relation with other notes can be felt well. Fingering is gen-
erally smooth and goes almost automatically for melodies,
for polyphonous pieces more thinking ahead is needed to
play smoothly. For me as an accordion player the separa-
tion between the two hands feels natural, though the bass
side gives much more freedom than the bass side of an ac-
cordion.
The goal of making in acoustic like instruments have al-
ready proven successful, more than one was surprised to
ﬁnd out it is electronic.
Since people have diﬀerent taste and musical ideas the
intent is to make parts available for custom instruments, if
there is enough interest. The software and ﬁrmware will be
open source.
Progress of the development of the Striso can be followed
on the website9.
8. REFERENCES
[1] G. Bevin. Eigenharp Alpha review after three months.
http://www.eigenzone.org/2010/06/21/
eigenharp-alpha-review-after-three-months ,
June 2010.
[2] R. H. M. Bosanquet. Elementary Treatise on Musical
Intervals and Temperament. 1877.
[3] D. Deutsch. The paradox of pitch circularity.
Acoustics Today, pages 8–15, July 2010.
[4] L. Haken, E. Tellman, and P. Wolfe. An indiscrete
music keyboard. Computer Music Journal ,
22(1):30–48, 1998.
[5] G. Hermosa. The accordion in the 19th century .
Editorial Kattigara, 2013.
[6] R. Jones, P. Driessen, A. Schloss, and G. Tzanetakis.
A Force-Sensitive Surface for Intimate Control. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on New
Interfaces for Musical Expression , pages 236–241,
2009. See also http://madronalabs.com/hardware.
9http://www.striso.org/
Figure 8: The accordion of the author modiﬁed to
the DCompose layout. It has four octaves with 21
buttons per octave.
[7] R. Lamb and A. Robertson. Seaboard: a new piano
keyboard-related interface combining discrete and
continuous control. In A. R. Jensenius, A. Tveit, R. I.
Godøy, and D. Overholt, editors, Proceedings of the
International Conference on New Interfaces for
Musical Expression, pages 503–506, Oslo, Norway,
2011.
[8] R. Linn. Preview: Linnstrument, 2010. http://www.
rogerlinndesign.com/preview-linnstrument.html
(accessed nov 2011).
[9] R. Michon and J. O. Smith. Faust-STK: a set of
linear and nonlinear physical models for the Faust
programming language. In Proceedings of the 11th
International Conference on Digital Audio Eﬀects
(DAFx-11), page 199, 2011.
[10] A. J. Milne, W. A. Sethares, and J. Plamondon.
Isomorphic controllers and Dynamic Tuning:
Invariant ﬁngering over a tuning continuum.
Computer Music Journal, 31(4):15–32, Dec. 2007.
[11] H. Perner-Wilson. Pressure Sensor Matrix,
Instructables, jan 2009. http://www.instructables.
com/id/Pressure-Sensor-Matrix/ (accessed 10 feb
2010).
[12] J. Plamondon. Kod´ aly, Wicki, and iSlate.
http://blog.igetitmusic.com/2009/12/
kodaly-wicki-and-islate.html, Dec. 2009.
[13] J. Plamondon. What Killed Thumtronics?
http://blog.igetitmusic.com/2009/09/
what-killed-thumtronics.html, Sept. 2009.
[14] Terpstra, Siemen. Toward a theory of meantone (and
31-ET) harmony.
http://www.huygens-fokker.org/docs/terp31.html
(accessed 14 nov 2013).
[15] J. D. Warren, S. Uppenkamp, R. D. Patterson, and
T. D. Griﬃths. Separating pitch chroma and pitch
height in the human brain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A., 100(17):10038–42, Aug. 2003.
[16] B. Wesley. The Array Mbira: Array System.
http://www.thearraymbira.com/arraysystem.php.
[17] K. Wicki. Tastatur f ¨ur Musikinstrumente. Swiss
patent Nr. 13329, 1896.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
620