davos soundscape, a location based 
interactive composition 
Jan C. Schacher
Zurich University of the Arts
Institute for Computer Music and Sound Technology
Baslerstrasse 30
CH-8048 Zurich
0041 (0) 43 446 55 06
jan.schacher@zhdk.ch
ABSTRACT
Moving out of doors with digital tools and electronic music and 
creating musically rich experiences is made possible by the 
increased availability of ever smaller and more powerful mobile 
computers. Composing music for and in a landscape instead of for 
a closed architectural space offers new perspectives but also raises 
questions about interaction and composition of electronic music. 
The work we present here was commissioned by a festival and ran 
on a daily basis over a period of three months. A GPS-enabled 
embedded Linux system is assembled to serve as a location-aware 
sound platform. Several challenges have to be overcome both 
technically and artistically to achieve a seamless experience and 
provide a simple device to be handed to the public. By building 
this interactive experience, which relies as much on the user's 
willingness to explore the invisible sonic landscape as on the 
ability to deploy the technology, a number of new avenues for 
exploring electronic music and interactivity in location-based 
media open up. New ways of composing music for and in a 
landscape and for creating audience interaction are explored. 
Keywords
Location-based, electronic music, composition, embedded Linux, 
GPS, Pure Data, interaction, mapping, soundscape
1. INTRODUCTION
In the spring of 2007, we were commissioned to produce an 
interactive piece by the organizers of the annual music festival in 
the Swiss mountain town of Davos. Instead of proposing a more 
traditional interactive installation in one of the festivals venues we 
opted for a new approach that would expose the audience more 
directly to the spectacular nature and landscape present. Davos is 
best known for being the location of the annual World Economic 
Forum or the setting of Thomas Mann's Magic Mountain. The 
town and its surroundings are characterized by richly varying 
natural and urban environments, ranging from the urban chic of 
the main shopping street to the alpine rock wilderness of the high 
peaks reaching up towards 3000 meters above sea level. These 
contrasts inspired us to devise a location-aware site-specific 
musical work that would cover a large area and would have to be 
explored by an audience ready to do some walking. We called the 
piece very prosaically the davos soundscape [1] and decided to 
make use of an experimental dedicated GPS-enabled computing 
platform that would be purpose-built for the specific demands of 
this project. 
2. CONTEXT
Locative media work [2] draws from a rich background of 
Dadaist, Situationist, and post '68 philosophy and media theory. 
The focus lies on the creation of situations of social interaction 
where the intention is to bridge the gap between the virtual, online 
and Internet based media and the physical world, be it through 
mapping, tagging and/or representing one domain in the other. In 
our own approach the situationist Guy Debord's concept of dérive
[3] is as much present as is the de/territorialization of sounds 
postulated by Deleuze/Guattari in their seminal work "Mille 
Plateaux" [4]. The former intends to generate an urban psycho-
geography by dissociation of motion through urban space from its 
function of transport or reaching a destination. The latter focus on 
the role of sound and music in defining a territory or mental 
space. Through the creation of a territory that exposes music in a 
real landscape, we establish a non-deterministic composition that 
owes its existence and perception as much to the presence of the 
audience as to our own construction. In a sense, we present a 
typical open work, as set out by Umberto Eco [5], who defines an 
open work as one that doesn’t intend to convey a definite meaning 
to be comprehended by the audience. The creation of the work of 
art is rather an act in which the perceiving individual is directly 
involved by assigning it a personal meaning. The constituting 
elements of the work do not represent a static structure but 
establish a dynamic and fluctuating field of relationships. 
In this context, the design of a musical expression takes on a 
different meaning. The relevant issues here are not, for example, 
modeling of the action-perception coupling [6] and the 
enhancement of the specific affordances present in the 
technological platform deployed. The intended audience behavior 
and the expressive qualities given by the technology are very 
clear. The user moves through the landscape; the music heard is 
dependent on his topographical position and his temporal 
evolution through the given space. Sonic complexity arises out of 
the superposition of natural environmental sounds and composed 
materials triggered by the motion of the user. The real cognitive 
achievement is the ability to perceive one's movement in space as 
the acting element of the piece and to merge proprioperception 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
NIME08, June 5-7, 2008, Genova, Italy
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
168
with listening on at least two levels (natural sound and composed 
electronic music) and to engender from this a meaningful musical 
experience. This setting is representative of a number of everyday 
musical and sonic experiences that form part of our contact with 
mobile technologies. Ubiquitous or pervasive computing is a 
growing trend through the closer integration of a increasing 
number of technologies into our personal communication devices. 
Tapping into this potential for musical creation and acquiring 
knowledge and experience in dealing with these issues is one of 
the main motivations of this project. 
The following projects serve as examples of other location-based 
concepts in the urban field. Both Akitsugu Maebayashi’s Sonic 
Interface [7] and Lalya Gaye’s Sonic City [8] use urban sounds 
and user interaction to create a mobile personal soundscape. Marc 
Shepard's Tactical Sound Garden [9] is about planting sounds in 
an urban context and it locates the user through triangulation of 
known wireless hotspots. The projects Mediascape by HP Labs 
[10] and the net_dérive by Atau Tanaka for Sony/CSL [11] merge 
different types of media content and location technologies to 
create an urban and social interaction.
3. COMPOSITION
The first task in our composition process was to define how the 
landscape should be subdivided. Eight routes were devised, each 
representing an essential aspect of the area. The two town centers 
(Davos is actually split in two); the lake-side promenade; the 
town’s park; the famous two kilometer long hill-side promenade; 
the walk downriver to the secluded forest cemetery; the high 
pastures and woods on the slopes above the Schatzalp sanatorium 
and finally the alpine hiking trails high up towards the 
Weissfluhjoch. Each of these routes was treated differently, the 
sonic structure or spatial placement of the music governed by a 
different principle. The longitudinal topography of the h illside 
promenade for example engendered sequential musical segments 
that connect differently according to the point of entry and the 
direction along which one walks on the promenade. 
Figure 1. The lakeside promenade and its corresponding 
sound zones (image from Google Earth)
The circling of the lake by its promenade led to overlapping zones 
some of which functioned like musical beacons across the water. 
The common structure that emerged and became the guiding
principle for all areas was the use of circular zones centered on a 
point of interest in the landscape and extending spheres of 
influence of varying size. We collected the GPS-coordinates for 
each spot, assigned them their music, a playback mode, a radial
amplitude envelope which controls the cross fade between zones 
or the increase in volume towards the point of interest and finally 
the size of the sphere. The eight routes were mapped out with a 
total of 86 points of interest, each covering a large area and 
overlapping with one or several of the neighboring zones. Google 
Earth became an invaluable tool for planning and visualizing the 
spatial relationships of the sound zones and routes. (Fig 1.)
While approaching the task of producing the actual music for the 
davos soundscape several additional strategies emerged. Since 
one of the premises was to present a transparent sound overlaying 
natural and composed elements through open headphones, it was 
quite natural to think of the effects an augmented acoustic reality 
achieved by using field recordings or recordings of natural sounds 
as well as their polar opposites, the purely synthetic sounds. It 
soon b ecame apparent that the strict separation of the two would 
be difficult and not very desirable if one wants to to maintain the 
sonic unity of the piece. The music contains brief sequences of 
field recordings made on site, sometimes deliberately displaced, 
for example where the cowbells from the alpine pastures make 
their appearance on the busy main thoroughfare or when the 
sound of the wash of the waves on the lakeshore reappears in the 
middle of the mountain woods. Since most of the time no 
predetermined chronology is possible in the arrangement of 
sounds, the music rarely establishes a linear evolution. Most zones
have several possible neighborhood relationships; the music can 
overlap and occur in a number of combinations all depending on 
the itineraries chosen by the visitors. It was our principal intention 
to generate an inderminate field of acoustic possibilities that had 
to be explored and experienced in an individual way.
4. TECHNOLOGY
At present mobile devices equipped with GPS are becoming very 
common but they were less accessible when we evaluated 
possible solutions for our GPS-enabled music platform. Based on
the options available at the time the choice was made to use a 
semi-industrial platform running Linux.
4.1 Hardware
The prerequisites for the mobile device were guided by a number 
of personal choices. We wanted to be able to write custom code 
without having to develop the entire software from the ground up. 
We wanted a device that gives access to all low-level routines of 
the Firmware or OS in order to set up daemons for automatic 
upkeep of the devices for extended periods of time. Coming from 
a background in electronic music, we were interested in using 
data-flow software for composition. The device needed to contain 
or easily connect to a GPS receiver and make the position-data 
available on a software-accessible interface. It had to have a solid-
state medium on board that would store several hours of 
uncompressed stereo PCM audio and an analog audio output 
which could be controlled from software. The device needed to be 
able to run for about eight hours on one battery charge. Most 
importantly we wanted to avoid having to build any custom 
electronic components ourselves. 
4.1.1 Choice of Platform
After evaluating all available options, ranging from commercially 
available GPS equipped PDAs to open source hardware, we 
finally decided to use the Gumstix platform [12]. It fulfills many 
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
169
of the prerequisites by offering a selection of expansion-boards in 
addition to its ARM-based motherboards. The three determining 
factors were that the Gumstix run a Linux OS, that they offer an 
expansion-board that hosts both a GPS receiver and audio I/O 
chip and, as we were excited to learn, that a port of Pure Data 
called PDa (Pure Data anywhere) [13] is available for the ARM 
processors used on many of the embedded single board devices. 
Finally, several expansion modules exist for the Gumstix that 
offer Compact Flash or MMC interfaces to connect large solid-
state storage devices.
4.1.2 Device Assembly
In addition to the embedded computer with its daughter boards, 
three other components are necessary to make the device 
complete: the battery, the GPS-antenna and the headphones. 
Unsure about the actual power consumption we opted for a large 
single-cell 3300mA/h Lithium Polymer battery. This is the same 
technology found in mobile phones and laptops. Preliminary tests 
had shown that the device consumed roughly 250 to 350 
milliamps per hour so in theory a full charge should run for a full 
eight hours. Active GPS antennas are readily available and have a 
form-factor ideally suited for mounting on top of headphones. The 
entire device was assembled in a standard electronics shielding 
metal-case and packed into a soft case for protection and user-
friendlier packaging (see Fig. 3).
Figure 2. The Gumstix computer with a 4GB Compact Flash 
Card on top, the battery underneath and both the LiPo 
charger circuit and the active GPS-antenna on the left.
4.2 Software
4.2.1 Linux OS
The Gumstix computers come with a factory-installed fully 
functioning Linux OS that contains all necessary device drivers 
for the possible expansion boards. In our case there was a problem 
with the OSS audio layer that took a lot of time to correct. In-
depth knowledge of Linux and experience in building and 
compiling was a definite plus. In theory, things should work right 
out of the box but our experience was a little bit marred by the 
problems we had getting the audio to work. The buildroot 
environment used for cross compiling for the ARM architecture 
and the available command line tools on the Gumstix offer a 
limited but essential set of features, all geared towards 
autonomous functioning with a minimal footprint. The working 
methodology for embedded systems may take some getting used 
to, since the Gumstix typically provide neither screen nor 
keyboard. All operations are executed from the host computer on 
the command line through a secure shell. 
4.2.2 PDa
An important step for our project was to port PDa to the Gumstix. 
Featuring a limited set of functions PDa still contains all essential 
tools for audio on such a system. Originally ported to run on an 
iPaq-PDA this downscaled version of Pure Data has been 
successfully applied to Apple iPods, Linksys routers and a variety 
of portable devices running Linux [14]. Since the ARM type 
processor doesn't feature a dedicated Floating Point Unit, and 
software processing of IEEE-754 32-bit ﬂoating point numbers is 
extremely slow, PDa has been rewritten to run all DSP code in 
16-bit fixed point numbers. This makes extending the audio-
capabilities difficult and for that reason, for example it is not 
possible to play compressed audio in the Ogg/Vorbis or the mp3 
formats. Apart from this limitation normal patches can be written, 
system-access is given through the shell external and access to 
serial ports is possible after porting Pure Data’s comport object. 
The most essential feature of PDa for our application is the ability 
to extend its functionalities by writing dedicated objects in C. 
4.2.3 Custom C Code
Because of the limited set of objects and for the sake of 
efficiency, PDa is used as a kind of framework within which to 
run our own code. The first task is to obtain the coordinates from 
the GPS receiver. Thankfully, the data from the module used by 
the Gumstix is made accessible on a standard serial port. This 
stream of data is parsed for the standard NMEA GPS reports to 
obtain a new set of coordinates every second [15]. At startup a 
database file is loaded into a simple data structure which contains 
the map with the coordinates of all the points of interests and their 
associated sound files and further information about global scaling 
factors, reference points and envelope tables. With each new GPS 
coordinate, this internal map is evaluated and the appropriate 
commands are generated to control a very simple patch which 
consists of four sound file players and a mixer. 
4.3 Long Term Usage
A lot of care was taken when planning and assembling the devices 
to ensure a completely unattended functioning  for the duration of 
three months. By avoiding any manipulation by either the users or 
the attending festival personnel, we achieved the goal that the 
devices survive this extended period. Through a combination of 
shell scripts and daemons the device was made to boot straight 
into the PDa patch and in case of a crash automatically relaunch 
it. In order to reset the GPS receiver the Gumstix was also 
automatically power cycled and restarted at regular intervals. 
Whenever not in use the devices needed to be charged since a full 
charge can take as long as twelve hours. 
5. USER EXPERIENCE
We built a series of ten devices for the festival. Against a deposit 
the public borrowed them from the local tourist office for the 
duration of a day. The goal was to present a seamless experience 
that convey as little technological complexity as possible. With 
the compact packaging and the clear documentation this goal was 
clearly achieved. 
The audience or visitors were handed an already running device in 
a closed pouch to which a set of semi-open light headphones is 
attached. The GPS antenna is placed on top of the headphones to 
ensure optimum satellite reception. There are no user-controllable 
elements on the device and no setup is required. Right after 
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
170
moving outdoors with the device there is a brief waiting period 
since the GPS receiver needs to locate and identify the satellites, 
download the almanac and obtain a stable position fix. A printed 
map of the landscape, including point descriptions and 
information, is handed out together with the GPS device. The 
eight routes that make up the davos soundscape are clearly 
marked. In the real landscape, to facilitate orientation but more 
importantly to leave a physical mark, stakes painted a bright 
orange and bearing the logo of the davos soundscape  are planted 
at all 86 points of interest. 
Feedback from members of the audience clearly indicates that a 
memorable sonic experience was presented. Of course not all of 
the music can be heard in one day and sometimes the participants 
have difficulties to orient themselves within the multitude of 
elements present within the acoustic domain. Often the terms 
“treasure hunt” and “exploring new territories” are mentioned. 
The intention to enhance Davos’ sonic reality by overlaying the 
natural acoustic environmental with electronic sounds is not 
always recognized. This might be largely due to the fact that we 
have all been conditioned to filter out external sounds when 
wearing headphones. Depending on the weather the individual 
experiences can also vary. Satellite signals get disturbed by 
certain atmospheric conditions; some people reported problems 
during thunderstorms and were clearly apprehensive to walk
around under such cond itions wearing an antenna on their head!
Figure 3. One of 86 markers in the landscape and a visitor 
with the GPS-device and Headphones.
6. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
Davos soundscape  t a u g h t  u s  s o m e  v a l ua b l e  l e s s o n s .  C o m p l e x i t y  
emerged as the constantly challenging factor. It happened on a 
technical level during the first phase when a lot of elements had to 
be assembled and problems sorted out, before even raw sketches 
of the planned features could be made and evaluated. Once the 
prototype for the device was functioning, the challenge of 
imagining, structuring and composing music for a landscape 
arose. As musicians we are clearly not trained to think in loose 
aural or temporal relationships and need to learn how to deal with 
a real topographical space as the stage for our music. The final 
most valuable lesson learned was never to underestimate the 
demands that a series of experimental devices make to be able to 
run for an extended period of time without any attendance. This 
being said, it still seems an intriguing concept to be able to take a 
device capable of real-time interaction with intelligent electronic 
music generation out into nature and to witness a musical 
expression and spatial sonic experience which would not be 
possible any other way. Due to the complexity of all elements 
involved, the compos ition and topographical principles applied to 
the music in the davos soundscape  h a d  t o  r e m a i n  q u i t e  s i m p l e .  
The platform’s computing power and the flexibility of the 
software offer a much greater creative potential that remains to be 
explored. Generative, algorithmic music and a closer integration 
of the user through sensor technology are only some of the ideas 
that come to mind. 
For future iterations of the piece, the software will be ported to 
one of the new commercially available GPS enabled devices 
running Linux such as the N810 Internet tablets by Nokia. With 
these devices the hardware constraints are resolved and since the 
software has already received its validation, location-based 
interactive music experiences can now be imagined in many other 
forms.
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I'd like to thank Marcus Maeder for his partnership in this creative 
endeavor, Alejandro Duque for his expertise in all things Linux 
and the organizers and sponsors of the Davos Festival 2007 for 
making this project possible.
8. REFERENCES
[1] http://www.davosoundscape.ch
[2] Galloway, A; Ward, M; 2006. Locative Media as Socialising 
and Spatialising Practices: Learning from Archaeology
Leonardo Electronic Almanac, Vol. 14, Issue 3/4.
[3] http://library.nothi ngness.org/articles/all/all/display/314
[4] Gilles Deleuze, Félix Guattari, Mille Plateaux, Minuit, 
coll. « Critique », Paris, 1980, 645 p.
[5] Umberto Eco; Opera aperta. Forma e indeterminazione nelle 
poetiche contemporanee, 1962, Bompiani,
[6] Marc Leman, 2008, Embodied Music Cognition and 
Mediation Theory, p. 52-53, the MIT Press, ISBN 978-0-
262-12293-1
[7] http://www2.gol.com/users/m8/installation.html
[8] Gaye L., Mazé R., Holmquist L. E. Sonic City: The Urban 
Environment as a Musical Interface  NIME 2003, Montreal, 
Canada, May 2003
[9] http://www.tacticalsoundgarden.net
[10] http://www.hpl.hp.com/mediascapes
[11] http://www.csl.sony.fr/items/2006/net_derive
[12] http://www.gumstix.com/
[13] Geiger, G. PDa: Real Time Signal Processing and Sound 
Generation on Handheld Devices ,P r o c e e d i n g s  o f  t h e  
International Conference on Computer Music 2003 
(ICMC'03) Singapore, 29. Sept. - 4. Oct, 2003
[14] http://gige.xdv.org/pda/
[15] http://gpsd.berlios.de/NMEA.txt
All URLs were accessed and verified in April 2008
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
171