Flowspace – A Hybrid Ecosystem
Daniel Bisig
Zurich University of the Arts
Institute for Computer Music and 
Sound Technology
Baslerstrasse 30
8048 Zurich, Switzerland
daniel.bisig@zhdk.ch
Jan Schacher
Zurich University of the Arts
Institute for Computer Music and 
Sound Technology
Baslerstrasse 30
8048 Zurich, Switzerland
jan.schacher@zhdk.ch
Martin Neukom
Zurich University of the Arts
Institute for Computer Music and 
Sound Technology
Baslerstrasse 30
8048 Zurich, Switzerland
martin.neukom@zhdk.ch
ABSTRACT
In this paper an audio-visual installation is discussed, which 
combines interactive, immersive and generative elements. After 
introducing some of the challenges in the field of Generative 
Art and placing the work within its research context, conceptual 
reflections are made about the spatial, behavioural, perceptual 
and social issues that are raised within the entire installation. A 
discussion about the artistic content follows, focussing on the 
scenography  and  on  working  with  flocking  algorithms  in 
general, before addressing three specific pieces realised for the 
exhibition. Next the technical implementation for both hard- 
and software are detailed before the idea of a hybrid ecosystem 
gets discussed and further developments outlined.
Keywords
Generative  Art,  Interactive  Environment,  Immersive 
Installation, Swarm Simulation, Hybrid Ecosystem 
1. INTRODUCTION
This  publication  describes  an  installative  artwork  entitled 
"Flowspace" that was realised by the authors and shown to the 
public  in  the  context  of  a  thematic  exhibition  about  sound, 
space and virtuality [7]. The installation creates an interactive, 
immersive,  and  generative  environment  for  audiovisual 
compositions  that  are  controlled  via  simulations  of  swarm 
behaviour. As  such,  the installation  situates itself  within the 
fields of Generative Art and Artificial Life. One of the most 
fundamental  challenges  in  Generative  Art  relates  to  the 
establishment  of  meaningful  and  traceable  mapping 
relationships between the underlying algorithmic processes and 
the resulting aesthetic output [2]. "Flowspace" shifts the focus 
away from the mapping issue in favour of an approach that 
places  a  stronger  emphasis  on  the  customization  of  the 
generative algorithms themselves in order to match a particular 
artistic  goal  [10].  The  issue  of  interaction  with  complex 
autonomous systems constitutes another fundamental challenge 
in Generative Art. “Flowspace” approaches this challenge by 
providing an interaction model that is based on multiple levels 
of immediacy in control and feedback. "Flowspace" employs 
generative  algorithms  not  only  for  the  creation  of  aesthetic 
feedback  but  also  to  establish  coherence  among  spatial, 
perceptual,  behavioural  and  social  phenomena  that  manifest 
themselves within the installation. We employ the term hybrid 
ecosystem to describe the characteristics of such an installative 
environment.  This  designation  is  related  to  the  term  hybrid 
ecology as it has been coined by Crabtree and Rodden [5], 
since  both  of  them  refer  to  the  creation  of  collaborative 
situations  in  mixed  reality  environments.  Rising  interest  in 
ecological approaches to musical composition [12,6] and recent 
examples in installation art [1,11] are a strong indication that 
this  approach  indeed  constitutes  a  promising  direction  for 
Interactive Media and Generative Art. 
2. BACKGROUND
The  installative  artwork  "Flowspace"  represents  a  tangible 
result  from  two  consecutive  research  projects  that  are 
conducted  at  the  Institute  for  Computer  Music  and  Sound 
Technology  of  the  Zurich  University  of  the  Arts.  The  first 
project is entitled ISO – Interactive Swarm Orchestra – and its 
successor project is entitled ISS – Interactive Swarm Space. 
Both  projects  explore  strategies  for  interrelating  swarm 
simulations with the interactive and aesthetic properties of an 
artwork [2,4]. Furthermore, the projects try to promote artistic 
applications of swarm simulations by developing open-source 
tools in software and hardware that aid in the realisation of 
swarm based artworks [3,13]. 
3. CONCEPT
The realisation of “Flowspace” reflects our intention to create a 
hybrid  environment  in  which  the  natural  and  simulated 
properties  and  behaviours  of  the  space  and  its  inhabitants 
overlap  and  interrelate.  This  situation  creates  an  immersive 
experience  that  involves  spatial,  behavioural, perceptual  and 
social  aspects,  which  are  described  in  more  detail  in  the 
following sections. 
3.1. Spatial Aspects
The architectural structure of “Flowspace” is realised in the 
shape  of  a  Dodecahedron  [see  figure  1].  The  shape  of  the 
installation conforms to the characteristics of the installation's 
generative  feedback  [see  section  5.1.].  As  a  result,  the 
architecture  of  the  installation  supports  the  blending  of 
physical and virtual space. The simulation space overlaps with 
the installation space that surrounds the visitors. In addition, the 
simulation space is mapped onto a two-dimensional segment of 
the Dodecahedron surface and forms part of the installation's 
interface.  This  enables the  visitors  to  experience  a  spatial 
immersion  within  the  virtual  swarm  and  to  simultaneously 
assume a juxtaposed position outside of the swarm. 
3.2. Behavioural Aspects
In  “Flowspace”,  the  behaviours  of  visitors  and  the  swarm 
agents  affect  each  other  on  multiple  levels  that  differ  in 
immediacy and spatial extension. By touching the surface of 
the interface, visitors can directly manipulate the positions of 
particular agents. Other agents subsequently respond to these 
changes.  These  interrelating  agent  behaviours  transform  the 
visitors'  interactions  from  an  initially  local  and  immediate 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
NIME’11, 30 May–1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
260
effect  into  an  element  in  the  emergent  dynamics  of  the 
installation's audiovisual compositions. Different combinations 
of  properties  exist  for  swarm  simulation  and  audiovisual 
processes and are organized as discrete states in a finite state 
machine. The selection of the states is controlled by the visitors' 
long  term  accumulated  activities.  The  installation's 
characteristics  as  a  hybrid  ecosystem  results  from  the 
interrelations  among  the  activities  of  its  natural  and  virtual 
inhabitants that occur on several temporal, spatial and causal 
levels. The simplicity and immediacy of the interface's physical 
manipulation  and  its  subsequent  effect  on  the  installation's 
responses provides a natural form of interaction, which helps to 
balance the visitors' intuition, familiarity, curiosity and surprise. 
3.3. Perceptual Aspects
“Flowspace”  provides  feedback  through  the  modalities  of 
touch, hearing, and vision. Correlations among these modalities 
shape the aesthetic experience, direct the visitors' attention and 
influence  the  traceability  of  the  installation's  behaviours.  In 
“Flowspace”, the audiovisual compositions and the visual and 
tactile feedback of the interface are all linked via the swarm 
simulation. Again, multiple levels of immediacy exist in the 
creation  of  the  installation's  output.  In  order  of  decreasing 
immediacy, they range from the very basic tactile experience 
from  touching  the  interface,  the  presence  of  bright  circles 
underneath  the  visitors'  fingers,  the  abstract  graphical 
depictions  of  the  swarm  simulation  on  the  interface,  to  the 
presentation of the audiovisual compositions themselves [see 
figures  2-4].  In  addition,  these  perceptual  phenomena  also 
differ  with  respect  to  their  spatial  characteristics.  The  most 
immediate  feedback  of  the  visitors'  hand  movements  is 
localized on the surface of the interface. The presentation of the 
audiovisual compositions is spatially distributed and forms part 
of the visitors' immersive experience. 
3.4. Social Aspects
In  “Flowspace”,  the  installation  space  and  its  interface  are 
sufficiently large to allow several people to become involved at 
the same time. Due to the installation's relatively open forms of 
interaction  and  exploration,  different  social  situations  may 
appear. Some social settings resemble performance situations 
when  individual  visitors  become  performers  that  actively 
interact with the interface while the remaining visitors act as an 
audience. Other social settings are more collaborative in that 
most of the visitors try to collectively affect the installation's 
behaviour. The fact that various social situations appear and 
disappear forms part of the installation's characteristics as a 
hybrid environment. 
4. ART WORKS
The “Flowspace” installation was part of an exhibition entitled 
“Milieux Sonores” that was shown in two separate occasions: 
in the Kunstraum Walcheturm in Zürich in 2009 and in the 
Gray Area Foundations for the Arts in San Francisco in 2010. 
4.1. Scenography
The  scenographical  integration  of  the  installation  into  the 
environment  of  the  exhibition  was  realized  in  close 
collaboration with the curator Marcus Maeder. The crystal-like 
characteristics  of  the  Dodecahedron  shape  [see  figure  1]  is 
partially  resumed  in  the  form  of  black  wooden  shards  that 
gradually  transform  the  exhibition  space  into  the  spatial 
situation of the installation. 
4.2. Swarm-based Artworks
The installation forms an environment for the interaction with 
three different swarm-based artworks. The swarm simulations 
are displayed as simple graphical renderings on the surface of 
the interface. Visual compositions are projected as panoramic 
imagery  on  two  pentagonal  surfaces  above  the  interface. 
Musical  compositions  are  spatialised  via  speakers  that 
completely surround the visitors. The detailed implementation 
of the swarm simulations and the audio generation mechanisms 
is described in a different publication [10]. 
4.2.1. Impacts
Starting  from  a  strongly  interactive  premise,  the  flocking 
algorithm in this piece explores the possibility of hierarchical 
relationships  between  several  flocks,  similar  to  the 
interdependence within an ecosystem or food chain. There are 
three types of entities present in the "Impacts" model: the first 
type of agent is the attractor. Its behaviour is fully dependent on 
the visitor’s action since it can't move by itself but is displaced 
by  the  visitor's  touch.  The  agents  of  the  secondary  swarm 
influence their own kind and react to the attraction forces of the 
first swarm. They serve as attractors to the agents within the 
third swarm. The behaviours of the agents within the second 
and third swarms are parameterized in such a manner as to 
create very dynamic motion patterns. The music consists of a 
background layer of Ambisonic ambience of the Notre Dame 
cathedral in Paris. The individual collisions between agents in 
the swarm simulation trigger piano samples on impact and a 
granular  echo  of  the  same  pitch  when  an  escape  point  is 
reached. In the true spirit of emergent structures, the mixture of 
all of these events alone is what generates the characteristic 
texture of sounds. The user interaction controls the choice of 
pitches: the higher the level of interaction, the more active the 
Figure 2: The “Impacts” Piece
Figure 1: Schematic Representation of the Installation
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
261
entire swarm simulation is and the richer and more dissonant 
the  pitch-sets  become.  Since  the  note-events  are  spatialised 
according to the position of the generating agents, these pitch 
clusters are perceivable as being located in certain sectors of 
the surround field.  The visualisation re-interprets the idea of 
impacts  and  escape  points  by  tracing  these  points  into  a 
Delaunay triangulation and showing growing concentric circles 
around the points of impact [see figure 2].
4.2.2. Flow
The  “Flow”  piece  exploits  the  existence  of  periodically 
recurring  events  within  the  simulation  in  order  to  generate 
rhythmical structures in the acoustic and visual output. These 
recurring  events  originate  from  repeated  changes  in  the 
neighbourhood relationships between two different swarms: a 
predominantly static swarm whose agents are attached to the 
visitors'  touch  positions  and  a  highly  dynamic  swarm,  that 
traverses the static swarm. As long as the visitors do not move 
the  static  agents,  the  dynamic  agents  settle  into  cyclic 
trajectories that cause them to periodically approach the static 
agents and thereby trigger the generation of sound grains whose 
content  is  created  via  additive  synthesis.  The  duration  and 
acoustic spatialisation of the grains and the frequencies of the 
oscillators  is  controlled  by  the  dynamic  agents'  position, 
velocity and jerk. Accordingly, the musical motif is dominated 
by  stable  rhythmic  patterns  whereas  the  texture  of  the 
individual sounds constantly varies. The visual output renders 
the static agents as a mesh of lines that interconnect the agents' 
positions  [see  figure  3].  The  discrepancy  between  the  large 
scale repetitions and local variations in the trajectories of the 
dynamic  agents  is  visually  emphasized  by  drawing  the 
trajectories as thin lines that rapidly widen into series of spokes 
according to the agents' jerk.
4.2.3. Membranes
The “Membranes” piece employs models of physical springs 
for  both  swarm  simulation  and  sound  synthesis  in  order  to 
create a perceptual and aesthetic proximity between the two. 
The simulation consists of two types of swarms: a static swarm 
that  is  directly  manipulated  by  the  visitors,  and  a  dynamic 
swarm whose agents behave as end points of interconnected 
springs. Depending on the distance between spring agents, new 
springs  are  created  or  old  springs  are  destroyed.  The  static 
agents repel the spring agents. Whenever the visitors move the 
static  agents,  the  previously  established  network  of 
interconnected  springs  is  disrupted.  The  musical  algorithm 
employs  a  non-linear  model  of  a  physical  spring  for  sound 
synthesis [8]. Each of these acoustic springs corresponds to a 
spring in the swarm simulation. The movement of the spring 
agents drives the excitement of the acoustic springs. Whenever 
an agent spring is created or destroyed, a strong excitement is 
applied  to  the  acoustic  spring.  The  location  of  the  acoustic 
spring in the sound-field is determined by the centre position of 
the  spring  agent.  The  musical  output  consists  of  a  slowly 
undulating texture that is occasionally interrupted by discrete 
and loud sounds that result from the creation and destruction of 
springs.  The  visual  output  displays  the  connectivity  of  the 
springs' mesh as stacks of triangles and the small fluctuations of 
the springs' mass points as interconnected lines the follow the 
points' trajectories [see figure 4]. 
5. IMPLEMENTATION
The implementation of the “Flowspace” installation relies on 
hard-  and  software  tools  that  have  been  developed  in  the 
context of the ISO/ISS research projects. 
5.1. Hardware Setup
The structure of the installation [see figure 1] is built from an 
aluminium frame that is about 4.2 meter in diameter and has the 
shape  of  a  Dodecahedron.  This  shape  was  initially  chosen 
because  of  its  suitability  for  positioning  loudspeakers  in  a 
spherical arrangement for three-dimensional ambisonic sound 
projection [9]. Later on, the frame was extended for video rear 
projection by covering its surface with projection screens. The 
latest  improvement  consists  of  the  integration  of  a  tactile 
surface into one of the Dodecahedron's pentagonal faces. The 
video  projection  setup  consists  of  three  ultra-short  throw 
projectors. The  projection  surface  covers  three  neighbouring 
pentagonal  surfaces.  The  two  upper  surfaces  are  used  for  a 
panoramic video projection of the visual compositions and the 
lower  surface  is  used  for  the  interface  display.  The  touch 
interface is based on video tracking with rear diffuse infrared 
illumination. 
5.2. Software Setup
The software part of the installation consists of a number of 
applications for swarm simulation, finger tracking, audio and 
video  generation  and  installation  state  control.  Many  of  the 
applications rely on a set of open source C++ libraries that were 
developed as part of the ISO project. These so-called “ISO” 
libraries  [3]  are  available  for  both  Mac  OS  X  and  Linux 
operating  systems  and  can  be  downloaded  from  the  project 
website  [13].  The  swarm  simulations  for  the  three  different 
audiovisual  compositions  are  implemented  with  the  "ISO 
Flock" library. Several audio applications generate the acoustic 
output of the installation. The analysis of the swarm data and 
the  control  of  sound  generation  and  spatialisation  is 
implemented differently by the three artworks. The audio for 
Figure 3: The “Flow” Piece
Figure 4: The “Membranes” Piece
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
262
"Impacts"  is  created  in  Max/MSP  whereas  "Flow"  and 
"Membranes" employ sound synthesis algorithms implemented 
with the "ISO Synth" library. Two of the three applications for 
the visual rendering of the swarm simulations are implemented 
using the "ISO Visual" library. The visualisation for “Impacts” 
as  well  as  the  finger  tracking  and  the  master  state  control 
software are implemented in openFrameworks [14]. The master 
state control software is in charge of managing the different 
installation states and acts as a communications hub between 
the simulations, tracking software and audio and video engines. 
Inter-application  communication  is  based  on  the 
OpenSoundControl protocol.
6. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The installation "Flowspace" creates an environment in which 
natural and artificial entities and their respective physical and 
virtual surroundings merge into a hybrid ecosystem. Based on 
the  positive  feedback  that  we  have  received  from  visitors 
during the exhibition of the installation, we believe that this 
approach is successful in creating an engaging experience for 
the visitors. We attribute the installation's positive reception to 
several aspects that are inherently part of our notion of a hybrid 
ecosystem. Firstly, the installation provides an environment that 
encourages intuitive and explorative forms of interaction. We 
have emphasized this aspect by allowing the visitors to engage 
with the installation and to experience its reactions via several 
levels of immediacy and across different modalities. Secondly, 
the installation's spatial, behavioural and perceptual properties 
are correlated via a single underlying swarm model and thereby 
allow the visitors to experience the installation as a coherent 
whole. Thirdly, the ecosystem characteristics of the installation 
offers the visitors the ability to become involved on perceptual, 
behavioral  and  social  levels.  When  this  involvement  is 
sufficiently  intense, each of these levels achieves immersive 
qualities.
7. CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK
We believe that the notion of a hybrid ecosystem can inform 
artistic  approaches  in  creating  interactive  and  immersive 
environments. The realization  of such an environment is an 
inherently interdisciplinary endeavour that combines knowhow 
and  methods  from  various  fields  such  as  Artificial  Live, 
Generative  Art,  Interaction  Design,  and  Scenography.  Since 
ecological approaches in Generative Art are relatively new, a 
vast range of scientific questions and artistic challenges exists 
that should be addressed. In particular, we would like to explore 
the  following  aspects  that  up  to  now  have  played  only  a 
marginal role in our work: In “Flowspace”, the capabilities of 
the swarm simulations and the characteristics of the audiovisual 
feedback mechanisms are predefined and never change during 
an  exhibition.  Because  of  this,  the  short-term  behaviour  of 
“Flowspace”  is  surprising  and  engaging  for  visitors,  but  its 
long-term behaviour tends to be repetitive and predictable. It 
would  be  interesting  to  augment  the  installation  with  the 
capability to undergo long-term changes through learning or 
evolution. The aesthetics of  the audiovisual  compositions in 
“Flowspace”  are  largely  defined by  its authors. Visitors  can 
explore these compositions within relatively narrow aesthetic 
boundaries. It could provide additional interest if the role of the 
visitor's creative contribution is strengthened by expanding the 
range  of  interaction-based  effects  both  with  respect  to  the 
compositions and the underlying simulations. Finally and most 
importantly,  we  believe  that  the  hybrid  ecosystem  approach 
provides an excellent context to experiment with rarely used 
modalities and unconventional interfaces. In “Flowspace”, the 
usage of sonic, visual and tactile feedback and its combination 
with a touch sensitive surface is interesting mainly due their 
correlation via a common generative mechanism. Other than 
that, neither the interface nor the feedback modalities are very 
unconventional. We are currently in the process of designing 
different  types  of  interfaces  that  are  specifically  adapted  to 
interaction  with  a  spatially  distributed  and  highly  dynamic 
entity such as a simulated swarm. These new interfaces will 
play  a  dual  role  as  control  interface  and  display  of  swarm 
activities and will employ the same modalities for input and 
output in  order to  bridge the  gap between the  physical and 
virtual aspects of the hybrid ecosystem.
8. REFERENCES
[1] Bartlem, E. Immersive Artificial Life (A-Life) Art. Journal 
of Australian Studies. 84, Perth, API Network, 2005.
[2] Bisig, D., and Neukom, M. Swarm Based Computer Music 
- Towards a Repertory of Strategies. In Proceedings of the 
Generative Art Conference. Milano, Italy, 2008.
[3] Bisig, D., Neukom, M., and Flury, J. Interactive Swarm 
Orchestra - A Generic Programming Environment for 
Swarm Based Computer Music. In Proceedings of the 
International Computer Music Conference. Belfast, 
Ireland, 2008.
[4] Bisig, D., and Unemi, T. Swarms on Stage - Swarm 
Simulations for Dance Performance. In Proceedings of the 
Generative Art Conference. Milano, Italy, 2009.
[5] Crabtree, A., and Rodden, T. Hybrid ecologies: 
understanding cooperative interaction in emerging 
physical-digital environments. Personal and Ubiquitous 
Computing. 12, 7, Springer, London, England, 2008.
[6] Davis, T. Cross-Pollination: Towards an aesthetics of the 
real. In Proceedings of International Computer Music 
Conference. SARC, Belfast, Ireland, 2008.
[7] Maeder, M. (Ed.). Milieux Sonores - Klangliche Milieus. 
Klang, Raum und Virtualität. Transcript Verlag, Bielefeld, 
Germany, 2010.
[8] Neukom, M. Signale, Systeme und Klangsynthese - 
Grundlagen der Computermusik. Peter Lang, Bern, 
Switzerland, 2005, 515 – 519.
[9] Schacher, J.C. and Kocher, P. Ambisonics Spatialization 
Tools for Max/MSP. In Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Computer Music. New Orleans, USA, 2006.
[10] Schacher. J., Neukom, M., and Bisig, D. Composing with 
Swarm Algorithms - Creating Interactive Audio-Visual 
Pieces Using Flocking Behavior. In Proceedings of 
International Computer Music Conference. Huddersfield, 
England, 2011.
[11] Wakefield, G., and Haru, J. Artificial Nature: Immersive 
World Making. In Proceedings of the EvoWorkshops. 
Springer, London, England, 2009.
[12] Waters, S. Performance Ecosystems: Ecological 
approaches to musical interaction. In Proceedings of 
Electroacoustic Music Studies Network Conference. De 
Montfort University, Leicester, England, 2007.
[13] http://swarms.cc
 (URL valid in April 2011)
[14] http://www.openframeworks.cc (URL valid in April 2011)
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
263