 Unfoldings: Multiple Explorations of Sound and Space 
 
Tim Shaw 
Culture Lab and Fine Art, 
Newcastle University, 
NE1 7RU, UK 
t.m.shaw@ncl.ac.uk  
 
 
Simon Bowen 
Open Lab, 
Newcastle University, 
NE1 7RU, UK simon.bowen@ncl.ac.uk  
  
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper describes a long term, collaborative project Sound Spaces. 
Within this project we creatively investigated various environments 
and built a collection of artworks in response to material gathered 
through a number of practical field visits. Our responses were 
presented in numerous, idiosyncratic ways and took shape through a 
number of concerted making activities. The work was conducted 
both in and with the public, allowi ng participants to inform the  
creative decisions made throughout the project as well as 
experiencing the building of the artworks. Within this essay we report 
on our process, presentation and offer  alternative methods for 
collecting material and presenting representations of space using 
Ambisonic and other technologies. We describe the many responses 
made during our time and related these to research concerns relevant 
to the NIME community. We conclude with our findings  and, 
through the production of an annotated portfolio, offer our main 
emerging themes as points of discussion.  
Author Keywords 
Field Recordings, Sound Space, Ambisonics, Spatialised Sound. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Throughout the years there has been a large amou nt of research 
concerning spatialised sound space environments within the NIME 
literature (among many examples [3]). This research often reports on 
technologies that support surround sound listening, leading on the 
technicalities of a single device that achieves a set of particular  
results. Many of these technologies have been used by artists and 
performers to playback compositions or perform through.  
 Drawing on our previous work, we used Public Making [17] as 
means to investigate this area in Sound Spaces, a collaboration 
between the authors [TS, SB, JB], the Foundation for Art and 
Creative Technology (henceforth FACT) and a small cre ative 
business partner Kinicho. We configured t his collaboration to 
encourage numerous pieces to be made with the intention of 
developing an Annotated Portfolio [2, 7] of our work. Beyond 
this creative work , the collaboration also enabled us to further 
our research interests in sound as a creative and concrete 
material, counterfactual representations of space and place, and 
collaborative creative practice . Here, makin g was both an 
enquiry into the creative possibilities presented by the 
technologies, locations and materials gathered, and a means 
through which wider insights emerged relating to our particular 
concerns. Our approach was akin to “Research Through Art 
and Design Practice” [7] and “constructive design research” [9] 
in using making as enquiry, but we also note that our making 
was explicitly informed by our interests in social studies of 
technology [ 14] critical-speculative applications of mak ing 
[e.g. 1, 10], and our previous empirical studies of technol ogy in 
action, amongst others. 
 Löwgren describes how such research can produce 
“intermediate -level knowledge” [ 16] where the insights 
developed translat e beyond the specific making context 
although not abstracting completely to the level of general 
theory. Whilst our making has indeed stimulated our thinking 
beyond the particular context of our practice, we stress the 
mutual dependency between this understanding and the 
artefacts through which it was developed and is expressed. 
Hence, in this paper, we present an  annotated portfolio  that 
both respects this indexicality and communicates the work in a 
manner that can inspire others’ creative practice and research.  
 Action Research (AR) [10] also gives practice a central role 
within research en quiry, and other writers have noted 
similarities between creative practice and Action Research [19]. 
Although we do not go so far as to claim our work as AR,  like 
AR, we reflected on r esearch concerns and insights throughout 
the project with our collaborators to ensure that the project 
became a collective enquiry. 
 We shall discuss three contributions from our work: insights from 
our Annotated Portfolio that relate to specific concerns for NIME; 
building on this, alternative ways of using sound to convey spatial 
character to methods emphasizing precision or realism; and, the 
methodological value of public making a portfolio of work. 
 
 
Figure 1: Soundspaces Exhibition at FACT Liverpool  
2. CONVEYING SPACE WITH SOUND 
Historically, within academic digital sound studio lit erature, 
there have been ma ny reports on how to create virtual listening 
environments [6], how to ‘optimise’ acoustic accuracy  within 
Ambisonics [25] etc. and create acoustical ly ‘neutral’ spaces  
for listening . These reports often lead on scientific, 
psychoacoustic perception, building spaces  that allow users to 
hear sound in ‘3D’ and also how to minimize distortions or 
artifacts in the acoustic image.  Many artists have used thi s 
technology to realistically represent places, for example sound 
artist Chris Watson uses Ambisonic technology to record and 
playback various environments with very realistic results. As 
impressive as these pieces can be , our work  is presented 
differently, we allow for multiple sounding devices to 
temporarily co -exist and strive to challenge views of sonic 
representations of space . Though our work uses some of these 
listening technologies, such as Ambisonics, this did not overly 
prescribe the direction of our creative explorations. Our 
activities do  not focus on a single  technology or outcome but 
rather create entangled listening spaces , making it possible for  
various device s to subtlety interact with one another.  Other 
artists such as Stockhausen  [4], Cardiff [ 15] and Truax have 
also explored various creative approaches to spatialised sound.  
For example, Cardiff’s piece The Forty Piece Motet , playfully 
uses multiple loudspeakers to represent singers in a 
reinterpretation of Tallis’ Spem in Alium . Our approa ch to 
Sound Spaces  was conducted in a slightly different way, we 
explored listening technologies as creative materials, allowing 
 
John Bowers 
Culture Lab and Fine Art,  
Newcastle University, 
NE1 7RU, UK 
john.bowers@ncl.ac.uk  
 
152
for flexible and changeable speaker configurations  to occur and 
thus creating hybrid listening spaces.  
3. SOUND SPACES 
Sound Spaces was part of The Creative Exchange (CX), an Arts 
and Humanities Research Council ( AHRC) funded program 
bringing together humanities academics, creative industries and 
creative practice PhD students. FACT are a non -profit media 
arts center  based in Liverpool, Merseyside. Kinicho is 
principally Stefan Kazassoglou [SK] a music producer, sound 
recording engineer, and composer who set up Kinicho (“ki netic 
audio”)  as a microbusiness within FACT. [SK] has a long-term 
interest in spatialised sound, and has made many spatial sound 
recordings as well as  spatial sound listening environments, 
including his Icosahedron Sound System  – an array of 20 
loudspeakers and associate d software for playback and spatial 
mixing of third order A mbisonic recordings [4]. Another 
collaborator was Magnus Williamson [MW], a medieval 
musicologist, based at Newcastle University, who offered an 
alternative perspective on sound and space.   
 Throughout the project,  w e wanted to explore creating 
imaginary sonic environments drawing direct ins piration and 
gathering material  from some of Liverpool’s lost and forgotten 
spaces. An original inspiration for the project was John 
Bowers’ [JB] proposal to explore of Liverpool’s ‘ sound lines’ 
(“ one pa rt song -line, one part ley line ”) – imagined sonic ley 
lines between different locations , and how they might  create 
virtual connections between seemingly disparate places.  
 The site visits included excursions to the William son 
Tunnels1 (a network of tunnels with an ambiguous history built 
by the eponymous Li verpool industrialist) ; the Bombed -Out 
Church2, the remaining shell of a local church largely destroyed 
in WWII that had become a public arts venue; and T he Old 
Dock3, the World’s first commercial wet dock  built in 1715 , 
now 10 meters under street level.  
 Although largely informed by activities over two years , much 
of the creative work in Sound Spaces  occurred during the last 
six months  of 2015 (and some is ongoing the time of writing ). 
This included running two Public Making sessions (ove r four 
days in August, and one day in early October), a 
residency/exhibition at FACT in late October that included 
public performances and invited artist talks, and creative work 
in support of and following on from these activities. 
 During the Public Making sessions we wer e located in a 
workshop/maker-space with access to a number of project ors, 
two small sound systems, several tables and  numerous power 
points. We placed tables around the space each paired with an 
associated sound system and/or projector.  
 
 
Figure 2: SoundLines public making workshop  
 Through web publicity, p ublics were invited to drop in at any  
time during the August session but we were also encouraged by 
                                                                    
1 http://www.williamsontunnels.co.uk  
2 http://www.bombedoutchurch.com   
3 http://bit.ly/20RmMbo  
FACT to have a cohort of makers join us for the whole  period. 
To encourage a wide demographic to atte nd we decided to not  
stipulate prior making experience. On day  one ten participants 
joined us, with varied backgrounds and experience ( from 
experienced musicians to first time sound makers). Days were 
typically structured as  field visits in the morning s and working 
with recorded material in the workspace in afternoons.  We 
conducted this work in a publically accountable way, people 
were invited to ask questions, interact with the devi ces made or 
just experience the installation space as we worked. T he Public 
Making concluded with a presentation of all of work made 
during the sessions and a short performance from [JB] using 
some of the technologies he had built.  
 Three pieces made during the Public Making sessions were 
developed further for installation in a public gallery spaces at 
FACT Liverpool (SoundMap, Icosahedron Sound System  and 
SoundLines, described below)  (see figure 1). These pieces were 
presented together, their sonic output overlapping one another, 
which created an interesting layering for gallery visitors. 
Moving through the space would create complex crossf ades 
between piece s, meaning one’s position in the room would 
directly inform the received composition.  
4. SOUND SPACES PORTFOLIO  
Throughout the project we created various pieces, gathered 
material from a variety of environments and explored the 
concepts of ‘sound lines ’ and sound spaces through an active 
and pragmatic process. We adopted a flexible approach and 
made our work practically suitable to the places where we were 
conducting our activit ies and the publics we were engaging 
with. In this sense the making process and the presen tation of 
things made were inherently interconnected. All of the material 
gathered throughout was shared openly with each collaborator, 
allowing open access to all the tools and resources to encourage 
collaboration and re-appropriation of the shared material. We 
now give more detail to the pieces that emerged during our 
making activities, followed by a description of the con cerns and 
themes that link them.
 
 
                
      
  
Figure 3: Field recording and Icosahedron (early version)  
4.1 Sound and Space Constructions 
4.1.1 Development of the Icosahedron Sound 
System 
Prior to the project, [SK] had built a version of his Icosahedron 
Sound System for listening to and, via a mob ile app, controlling 
third order A mbisonic recordings. This array of 20 
loudspeakers, placed at the vertices of a dodecahedron, was  
rebuilt twice during the project – first to replace the cane 
structure with longer aluminum poles and upgrade the 
amplification, second to construct a larger version with larger 
loudspeakers and stronger metal frame, acoustic dampening 
and a floor-mounted su b-bass transducer (see figure 3 ). By 
using a 360 -degree speaker array and playing sound through an 
Ambisonic encoding form at, users were able to ‘place’ sounds 
153
in space, specifically using height (vertical plane), rotational 
(horizontal plane) and distance (near and far) dimensions. We 
came to regard the Icosahdron Sound System (ISS) as being 
exhibited in three different modes. Mode One involved playing 
fixed media pieces composed using materials and data gat hered 
during our field trips (e.g. Unfoldings I ). Mode Two enabled 
participants to directly interact with the sonic sp ace using an 
iPad running Lemur. connected through Open Sound Control 
(OSC), which allows the dimensional parameters to be 
manipulated. Mode Three presented participants with s pherical 
photographs of various environments visited during our time 
together, which they could navigate using their own smart 
phones, with their physical movement directly informing the 
sound design and spatial diffusion. As well as providing a 
listening space, the Icosahedron added a sculptural visual form 
for our creative work which some of our later work bui lt upon.  
4.1.2 Impulse Respons e Readings 
We took impulse response (IR) readings within the va rious sites 
we were visiting as a way of capturing the sonic signa ture of 
that environment. This was done by setting up an A mbisonics 
microphone within a central area of the space and pla ying a  
sine sweep using a portable speaker back into the space 
covering every frequency within the human hearing range (for 
more on this technique see [20]). These IR readings were then 
taken back into the workshop space to playback within the 
Icosahedron. Using this techni que one could stand within the 
Ambisonics system and excite the IR by speaking into a  
microphone, giving the user the impression they were ma king 
sound within the referenced space.  
4.1.3 Extended Field Recordings  
During our visits to the locations within Liverpool we explored 
the environments with a diverse collection of listening 
equipment. Using contact microphones, electromagnetic coils, 
air pressure microphones, radio transmitters and a Raudive 
diode receiver of the sort sometimes used by researchers into 
electronic voice phenomena and a circuit made by artist Martin 
Howse, the Detektor, which frequency shifts infra- and ultra -
sonic electromagnetic radiation into the audible range, we 
extracted sonic material from our visits. We allowed our 
explorations to be serendipitous — approaching places open to 
listening and chance. Collected material was then taken back to 
our workspace, experimented with in multiple ways and offered 
as a material anyone in the group could use.  
 
Figure 4: GPS trace from Tim Shaw [TS] during one day of 
the workshop 
4.1.4 GPS Traces 
As well as recording audio and visual material from our  field 
visits, GPS data was collected using the iPhone application 
‘Track’. Taking inspiration from the self -archivist Jacek 
Smolicki [24] each day  was ‘tracked’ and at the end of the day 
these traces were distilled into minimal lines, keeping only 
positioning data and ridding it of all other metadata. Each day 
was shown as a different image and simply presented as a black 
line on a white background.  An ANS style synthesiser [ 22] was 
built in Pure Data and used as a way of generating sound from 
the images. In this construction each pixel line related to a 
different oscillator. The gain of each oscillator was controlled 
by the grey value of each pixel.  The image was scanned 
vertically and then changed to another day’s image at random.  
4.1.5 SoundLines  
During the course of the August SoundLines workshop, [JB] 
devoted much attention to making a piece that embodied a 
creative concept of a ‘sound line’. The son ic component of this 
piece involved cross -fading between recordings made at one 
site in the city to recordings made at another. As the cross -fade 
took place the recordings were transformed by algorithms 
coded in Pure Data into more noisy, drone-like, pulsi ng or 
crackling forms of themselves. In this way, as the piece 
unfolded the listener was ‘transported’ between locations and in 
and out of more sonically abstracted forms. In [JB ]’s creative 
conceit, these more abstracted forms were imaginings of the 
hidden ‘sound lines’ connecting the two locations. A visual 
projection showed the relative locations of the sites, the lines 
connecting them, and the current position of the cross-fade 
against a background created by collaging historical maps of 
the city. For the public  exhibition, [JB] further developed the 
piece to work over a multi -channel loudspeaker system and five 
HD monitors. 
4.1.6 Spherical Photographs  
[SB] created s pherical photographs using a camera mounted on 
a tripod with spherical panoramic head. Nineteen  images were 
made using an 18mm lens on a FX -format Nikon DSLR: two 
rows of eight images at 45 degree yaw (rotation) interval s and 
+/- 30 degree pitch, a single zenith image, and two nadir 
images (one hand -held for removing the tripod later in Adobe 
Photoshop). Images were stitched into a single rectilinear 
spherical projection image using PT Gui Pro. The Marzipano 
Tool was used to create interactive versions of spherical images 
that could be viewed using standard web browsers. Marzipano  
code was then adapted for viewing panoramas according to 
mobile device orientation and other novel interactions 
(Icosahedron Mode Three, above).   
4.1.7 SoundMap 
Developed from a composition that two of our participants 
made with field recordings and an iPad , the pair suggested 
relocating their manipulated recordings by giving them the 
sonic character of the places we had visited. This was achieved 
by convolving the manipulated recordings using the IRs of the 
sites we had visited, playing them back through the 
Icosahedron, and recording the result onto personalisable audio 
greetings cards. Further, photographs one participant  had taken 
of the sites were used as images on the cards. A longside this, 
the authors  had experiment ed with visualisations of Liverpool  
through layers of maps a nd using the location visited to plot 
imaginary sound lines across the city. We presented these idea s 
together as a SoundMap in two materialisations. The first at the 
first workshop where a map was projected onto a table with the 
greetings cards placed on the relevant locations. The second 
version at the public  exhibition used a physical map mounted 
onto a wooden board and placed onto a stand. Audio 
transducers were placed underneath various relevant locations 
of the map playing back sound relating to that place. Some of 
the sounds were also processed through the relevant IRs to 
create a convolution reverb [ 19] effect.  
4.1.8 Ship Horn Syntheziser  
One of the participants to the August workshop brought  a 
collection of sound files digitising a 1966 album entitled The 
Ships Of Merseyside. [JB] worked with him to create a software 
synthesizer in Pure Data that would analyse sound input to a 
microphone and output a sound texture comprised of so und 
grains derived from the ship horn recordings which was as 
closely matched in sound spectrum as possible. This technique 
154
enabled any sound picked up by the software to be echoed with 
ship horn sound. In this way, the field recordings collected 
could be ‘timbre-stamped’ with the sounds of (now lost) ship 
horns— a rather poignant g hostly effect. Additionally, to much 
amusement, participants sang into a microphone, their efforts 
rudely accompanied by fog horns and other ship signals. 
4.1.9 Concatenative Synthesis  
During our activities we built up a large collection of recorded 
material from various sources, we wanted a novel way of being 
able to navigate this material using potential computational and 
algorithmic processes. Drawing on the work done at IRCAM 
by Diemo Schwartz [21] we used concatenative synthesis as a 
way of making sonic con nections from our large corpus of 
material. For example, a virtual 2D space was created, one axis 
frequency, and the other amplitude. We loaded in our  library 
and then the sounds were available to navigate, using an iPad as 
a way to quickly interface with sonic material. The top left 
corner of the graph was the highest in frequency and the highest 
in volume etc. We then used this method in the Icosahedron as 
a way of navigating the library but also generating sound with 
the Ambisonic space.  
4.1.10 Random Jukebox  
Another way of playing our corpus of recorded material  in the 
August workshop’s workspace was through a random jukebox . 
Terminal commands sent through Pure Data were used to  
playback multiple sound files to create ‘layered’ soundscapes. 
The program periodi cally inspected the shared folder where we 
were placing our location recordings and so people’s  
contributions could soon be heard as part of a n ever -growing, 
program-generated composition. 
4.1.11 Layers of the Old Dock  
This piece used spherical panoramic photogra phs of The Old 
Dock and the leisure and shopping complex now above it , 
overlaid with archive material (paintings, photographs, posters 
and text) relating to its historical links with slavery and child 
migration, and contemporary images and sound recording s to 
create a layered presentation of the many meanings of this 
place. Interactive media was explored using mobile phones and 
tablets (as a development of Mode Three Icosahedron, abov e), 
and was built by extending the Marzipano basic code to add 
new functionality such as the use of ‘gaze spots’ (holding the 
device still in a specific direction  to navigate between layers ). 
4.1.12 IR ASAP (Impulse Response As Soon As 
Possible) 
After building up a library of IRs from the various f ield trips 
we decided to use this mate rial to create a slightly different 
work. When de -convolving the IRs the sound sweep can be 
distilled to a simple percussive slap with a reveberance 
characteristic of the space. These sounds offered a very simple 
impression of what the environments we visited were like. An 
algorithmic composition in Pure Data played back the 
collection of IRs randomly and as fast as possible. The speed 
could be varied to create different sonic textures. At its most 
extreme (at its fastest) this was a noise and as it was slowed 
various percussive elements also came through, while at its 
slowest the program played reverberant impacts (the IRs) 
separated by long silences. 
4.1.13 Performance 
During the public installation, there was an evening of 
performance within a gallery-sized Icos ahedron (also built by 
[SK] at FACT for a parallel, but unrelated installation) . [JB] 
and [TS] made an improvised performance together, while 
sound artist Philip Jeck also performed on the loudspeaker 
system with some of his sound material being the Public 
Making location recordings of Liverpool provided by [TS]. The 
event was sold out  several days in advance. For their 
performance, [JB] and [TS] made performable versions of some 
of the devices and software they had made during the course of 
the collaboration. For example, the software behind [JB]’s 
SoundLines installation was modified so that the loading of new 
files, the cross -fades and the mixing in of different processed 
forms of the location recordings could be made by hand from a 
MIDI fader box in addi tion to programmatically. A performable 
version of the Mode Three spherical photograph interactive was 
also developed by [SB] to visually accompany [JB] and [TS]’s 
performance and modified so that it could be displayed across 
three large screen projections. Here, Marzipano code was 
further developed to enable keyboard control of scene,  rotation 
direction and speed and roll. In addition, [JB] wrote a series of 
short haiku-like texts, one associated with each of the sites, 
which were included in the projected  material. Each text 
contained oblique references to the history of the site, our 
activity there and various associations that had occurred to 
participants as they worked with us. [TS’s] GPS traces were 
also incorporated into the performed visual material. 
 
 
Figure 5: Sound Spaces performance 
4.2 Annotations  
Constructing an Annotated Portfolio of  the diverse body of 
work created in Sound Spaces revealed several linked concerns 
that both informed and were informed by what was made (see 
figure 6), as we shall now describe. Bowers [2] explains in 
depth how AP offers an alternative to more ‘scientistic’ ways of 
understanding research through creative work. By charting 
similarities and differences , this method helps make implicit 
connections within a corpus of work .    
 
                  
 
Figure 6: Annotating our Portfolio of Work  
4.2.1 Minimal Ordering  
From the offset our  work was minimally themed around the 
idea of a line. For example, the exploration of the s oundscapes 
of Liverpool was named  SoundLines after the model  of 
‘songlines’, the paths Indigenous Australians trace in t he 
landscape following the land’s creator -beings, and participants 
were urged to trace the hidden sonic connections in the city.  
The SoundLine piece, for example , was a very literal 
interpretation of this, creating a linear interaction between a 
variety of field recordings the group  had collected. We also 
155
explored the essence of the ‘sound line’ as a conceit or myth,  
(searching for the sound line with our field trips),  creating 
counterfactual repre sentations and ‘eruptions’ of ‘sound lines’ 
on the Sound Map.  
4.2.2 Mappings  
As many of our activities were related to specific loc ations we 
decided to creatively reimagine a varie ty of maps associated 
with Liverpool . Maps were collected of the local areas and  a 
variety of mapping techniques were undertook. GPS Traces  
involved gathering data from our numerous journeys. Other 
members of the group also appropriated an OS map, addin g 
statements or connections between locations.  Subsequent work 
derived from these activities including the sonification of the 
GPS data and visualizing of the GPS traces. This work was also 
folded into the visual aesthetic of the two versions of the Sound 
Map. 
4.2.3 Documenting  
Much of what was made involved, or derived from , the 
documentation of the locations we visited. Significantly this 
involved both ‘precise’ recording of acoustic character (IR 
readings, photography) and extended field recording techniques 
that emphasized alternative and complementary characteristics 
of the spaces. The documentation was not an end point, we also 
considered this as a collective creative material which was 
appropriated in numerous pieces following. This is evident in 
the Layers of the Old Dock , Random Juke Box and 
Concatanative Synthesis makings whereby mat ching material 
was used across a number of artworks. Our  site activities 
explored the character and materiality  of the locations we 
visited rather than approaching these places with preconceived 
ideas. By collecting photographs and  using extended field 
recording techniques w e allowed our explorations to include 
serendipitous occurrences, to use the act of collecting as a way 
of getting to know a space through its material qualities  [18].  
4.2.4 Virtuality (and its Alternatives)  
An initial concern related to how t he character of lost or 
disappeared spaces could be re -presented. For Magnus 
Williamson, virtual and augmented reality suggested means of 
achieving this. However, as we began to work with the material 
we gathered (see Documentation), we explored how spaces 
could be recreated in both literal and counterfactual ways. The 
Icosahedron Modes 2 and 3 provided a ‘realistic’ impression of 
space through audio convolution and spherical photography.  
Both the Performance and Layers of the Old Dock, however, 
showed that lost spaces could (indeed, should) be evoked using 
both literal and creative responses  to their current incarnations. 
Many of the works made involved the incorporation and 
layering of diverse materials, e.g. the Random Jukebox  and the 
sonic overlapping within the October installation.  
4.2.5 Layers 
Our progression from virtual or augmented reality, des cribed 
above, also involved recognizing the value of layering literal 
and counterfactual elements. In Layers of the Old Dock , this 
was an attempt to demonstrate it s ‘perdurance’ – a site always 
and already on its way to becoming something else  [11]. From 
this perspective, the interaction should encourage the user to 
explore the many historical, contemporary and imagined 
accounts of this place as co-existent, and ope n to individual 
interpretation – a ‘layered ontology’ of place. Similarly the 
SoundLines piece took the numerous field recordings  we had 
made over our time and used algorithmic processing to find 
commonalities between them. This created new, un -
representational spaces, imaginatively opening up ideas of how 
sound is associated with space and place.  
4.2.6 Performance 
Throughout our creative collaboration there was an e xplicit 
intent for the work to be performed. This meant that, rather than 
being fixed (albeit inte ractive) representations of Liverpool , the 
work became a means for including others in this meanin g 
making, via performance. This a lso opened up new 
applications, for example  spherical photo graphs initially 
created as documentation became a  performable ins trument for 
engagement. Many of the devices made were also recon figured 
for the public performance, allowing us to create additional  
performable versions of the exhibited pieces.  
4.2.7 Varied Forms of Presentation  
Our material was presented in multiple ways. We  avoided a 
single outcome for the project by creating  multiple layered 
appropriations of the material which we collected. Many of our 
makings were left open, presented unfinished so as to create 
multiple instances and for the piece to be appropria te for th e 
context i n which it was being presented.  T he Icosahedron 
Sound System was showcased in this way, with multi ple modes 
of interaction involving a variety of material. Similarly 
spherical photography was presented on both mobile devices 
(Icosahedron Mode 3,  Layers of the Old Dock ) and on large 
projection screens for the Performance.  
5. DISCUSSION 
5.1 Research Contributions 
Some p revious NIME literatures have focused on creating 
digital instruments that promote collaboration through 
simplified interfaces and interactions on a single device. These 
devices are often presented to the public as finished objects, 
creating distance between how to use the instrument and how 
the instrument was made (one example of many [17]). Our 
work attempts to allow participants to exper ience the process of 
making, creating connections between material and inte raction, 
collaborating through making and making through listening . 
By doing this we hope to open up  a different research 
orientation, creating opportunities for participants to gain 
knowledge on how this process works, focusing on the process 
of making rather than a finished artifact. 
5.2 Sound and Space 
Specialized sound listening environments can be instrumental in their 
nature, music studios are acoustically treated and speakers are set 
with precision to the ‘sweet spot’. With the development of multi-
channel systems such as ‘Ambisonics’ and ‘Wave Field Synthesis’ 
this precision can become even more intense, with sound image  
being misrepresentative if the environmental conditions are 
‘incorrect’. Furthermore, exhibitions of technological sound work 
can be presented in a conclusive way, with the work ‘black boxed’ 
[13] making it potentially difficult to access the means in which it 
was made. We situate our sonic artwork differently. This work 
moves away from the precise, accurate representations of place to a 
more heterogeneous, layered, imagined listening space, combining 
material through ‘real,’ imagined and counterfactual investigations of 
the numerous places we visited.  
 Within our work here we have dealt with a collection of concerns 
relating to building creative work in response to locations of sonic 
and historic significance with participant s using a variety of 
technologies. We have presented work in a variety of context and 
created complex entanglements between materials, devices made and 
spaces we have worked within. We left many of our makings open 
allowing them to be informed by the publics who visited us  and 
respond to the contexts in which they were being prese nted. For 
example Layers of the Old Dock had multiple presentational 
instances and Random Jukebox was designed in such a way as to 
enable us to continually add material to it with ease.  
156
 We explored places of interest and approached the examining of 
these spaces through their material qualities, taking sound recordings, 
photographs, video material and data loggings. We allowed this 
material to inform our work, to build our devices from the material 
up, without always having pre-determined technological processes. 
We presented a collection of devices as a complex bricolage, a 
collection of artistic layering’s.  
 Through this we avoided a purist approach to audio w ork, the 
pieces made where presented in plurality, allowing multiple 
outcomes to emerge. This is evident in many of the makings, for 
example the Impulse Response Recordings. This material was not 
only used to represent the space in a realist way, but also folded into 
IR ASAP.  
 Towards the start of our work, [SK] and [MW] had part icular 
ideas of how material might be recorded and presented in the 
Icosahedron. Emphasis was placed on precise capture of IRs, 
the representational value of IRs, and on minimising external 
sound interference with the Icosahedron. These views changed 
during the project as we used IRs as sonic materials in their 
own right, composed a fixed media piece for the Icosahedron 
that reconceptualised it as a 20-channel mono playback system, 
and developed an exhibition where the Icosahedron was 
integrated alongside pieces that presented spatialised sound in 
alternative and complementary ways ( SoundLines, SoundMap). 
Similarly, our extended field recording techniques 
problematised recording as being solely concerned with 
representational accuracy and indeed contributes to debates as 
to what field recording is or may be. 
5.3 (Public) Making Portfolios 
Drawing on our previous work Public Making [23], we extend what 
it means to make through listening, creating spaces for collective, 
collaborative sound making. We present part of our work as a 
collection of unfinished devices, as prototypes, allowing trajectories 
of our work to be informed by the publics who visit us. We also open 
up this space as a shared listening environment, encouraging our 
audiences and participants to engage in the making of layered, 
collaborative sound worlds. 
 Our preceding discussion demonstrates how Sound Spaces 
was not only creatively productive, but also produce d insights 
on the evocation and experience of space through sound (and  
image). Sound Spaces  develops our previous work on Publi c 
Making by investigating how it can provide a methodo logy for 
larger, more complex collaborative work (e.g. including FACT, 
Kinicho, [MW] and various publics). The value of this 
approach, we propose, depended on the intentions we brought 
to our making, an d the particular environment (or ecosystem) 
developed for that making.  
 Collaborative creative work, most typically in desig n, is often 
portrayed as the collective identification and solution of 
problems. In our approach, however, our intent was to conduct 
numerous making activities in parallel, with no explicit 
intention for a common objective to be reached (Minimal 
Ordering being an attempt to inspire , not proscribe creative 
work). This parallel making often led to individuals or small 
groups autonomously  making together. However, our 
workspace environment ensured that making did not happen in 
isolation; rather opportunities for federations around creative 
work were created. Making together in the same space a nd 
making our materials (literally) audible and  visible allowed 
materials to interact with one another, and ideas and  responses 
to merge and entangle to form a cohesive assemblage.  
 This approach was not without its challenges : c ertain 
participants expected a more pedagogic al format; maintaining 
several autonomous strands of making required intensive work; 
and, a sensitive balance was required between facilitating 
other’s creative work whilst allowing sufficient time for one’s 
own. However, as several current projects developing from 
Sound Spaces will attest, this approach has much to recommend 
it. 
6. REFERENCES 
[1] Archer, B. 1995. The nature of research. Co-design. 2 
(1995), 6– 13. 
[2] Bowers, J. 2012. The Logic of Annotated Portfolios: 
Communicating the Value of “Research Through 
Design.” Proceedings of DIS2012  (Newcastle-Upon-
Tyne, UK, 2012), 68– 77. 
[3]  J. Cannon and S. Favilla, 2010. “Expression and spatial 
motion: playable ambisonics,” in Proc. NIME 10. 
[4] Jonathan Cott, 1973, Stockhausen: Conversations w ith 
the Composer, Simon & Schuster. 
[5] Dunne, A. and Raby, F. 2013. Speculative Everything . 
MIT Press. 
[6]  Peter Fellgett, 'Ambisonics. Part One. General System 
Description', Studio Soun d, vol. 17 no. 8. 20-22.  
[7] Frayling, C. 1994. Research in art and  design. Royal 
College of Art Research Papers . 1, 1 (1994), 1– 5. 
[8] Gaver, B. and Bowers, J. 2012. Annotated portfolios. 
interactions. 19, 4 (Jul. 2012), 40. 
[9] Gaver, W.  et al. 2003. Ambiguity as a resource for 
design. CHI ’03: Proceedings of the SIGCHI  
conference on Human factors in computing systems  
(New York, New York, 2003), 233 – 240. 
[10] Hayes, G.R. 2011. The relationship of action research  
to human -computer interaction. ACM Transactions on 
Computer-Human Interaction. 18, 3 (Jul. 2011), 1– 20. 
[11]  Tim Ingold. 2013. Making: Anthropolgy, Archaeology, 
Art and Architecture. Routledge. 
[12]  Tim Ingold. 2007. Lines: A Brief History. Routledge. 
[13] B. Latour. 1987. Science in Action , Harvard University 
Press 
[14] B. Latour. 1993. We Have Never Been Moder n. 
Harvard. 
[15] A. Licht. 2007. Sound Art, Rizzoli. 
[16] Löwgren, J. 2013. Annotated portfolios and other for ms 
of intermediate -level knowledge. interactions. 20, 1 
(Jan. 2013), 30– 34. 
[17] William Marley & Nicholas Ward Gestroviser. 2015. 
Toward Collabor ative Agency in Digital Musical 
Instruments, NIME 2015. 
[18]  Leandro Pisano. 2015. The Third Soundscape, Third 
Text, 29:1-2, 75-87  
[19] Swann, C. 2002. Action research and the practice of 
design. Design Issues. 18, 1 (2002), 49– 61. 
[20]  Cutis Roads. 1996. The Computer Music Tutorial, MIT 
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 428 -431. 
[21]   Diemo Schwartz. 2013. Interacting with a Corpus of 
Sounds, Symposium on Sound and Interactivity . 
Singapore 
[22]  Tim Shaw and John Bowers. 2015. Public Making: 
Artistic Strategies for Working with Museum 
Collections, Technologies and Publics. ISEA, 
Vancouver. 
[23]  Andre Smirnoff. Sound in Z – Experiments in Sound 
and Electronic Music in Early 20th Century Russia  
(London, Sound and Music, 2013)  
[24] Jacek Smolicki. 2015. De -totalizing Capture: On 
Personal Recording and Archiving Practices. ISEA, 
Vancouver. 
[25] Franz Zotter, Matthias Frank, Christian Haar, Spherical  
microphone array equalization for Ambisonics, 
Fortschritte der Akustik, DAGA, Nürnberg . 
157