Making Sound Synthesis Accessible to Children
Christoph Trappe
Center for Computing and Communication Technologies (TZI)
Bibliothekstr. 1
28359 Bremen, Germany
ctrappe@tzi.de
ABSTRACT
In this paper we present our project to make sound synthesis
and music controller construction accessible to children in
a technology design workshop. We present the work we
have carried out to develop a graphical user interface, and
give account of the workshop we conducted in collaboration
with a local primary school. Our results indicate that the
production of audio events by means of digital synthesis
and algorithmic composition provides a rich and interesting
ﬁeld to be discovered for pedagogical workshops taking a
Constructionist approach.
Keywords
Child Computer Interaction, Constructionism, Sound and
Music Computing, Human-Computer Interface Design, Mu-
sic Composition and Generation, Interactive Audio Sys-
tems, Technology Design Activities.
1. INTRODUCTION
Music constitutes a signiﬁcant part of children’s lives. While
the construction of novel musical interfaces enjoys great
popularity amongst professionals such as engineers, scien-
tists, and artists, we argue that the educational potential
of the interface creation has been neglected in the past. By
taking advantage of this potential in an educational setting,
music can nurture interest in active participation in the de-
sign and development of technological artifacts [16]. Sound
synthesis can provide a unique access to technology and
hence foster interest in Information and Communications
Technology (ICT) related subjects. This requires appropri-
ate interfaces and workshop concepts. A Constructionist
[9] sound environment could serve as a rich ﬁeld to gener-
ate a personal and meaningful understanding of the creative
possibilities of computer generated music. Although some
prior work suggest that music has a great potential to fos-
ter children’s interest in technology and some stress on its
supportive qualities in learning processes, the community
lacks appropriate sound design environments for children.
Core issue here is the software for children to program and
build interesting sounds. Children should ﬁnd themselves as
creators of technology and active participants in the design
process, rather than mere consumers or spectators. With
our project we would like to address this problem. With a
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’12,May 21 – 23, 2012, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
new sound programming interface we aim to augment ex-
isting smart textile workshop concepts by the realm of in-
teractive music creation. In this paper we present our work
on the derivation and development of a graphical user in-
terface (GUI) to enable children to program simple sound
synthesis patches to be controlled through sensors such as
accelerometers or light sensors. Furthermore we sketch its
use in a technology design workshop.
2. RELATED WORK
Constructionist [9] workshops with smart textiles [11] and
construction kits such as the EduWear kit [12] or the Lily-
Pad platform [3] have shown that children have considerable
interest in embedding sound capabilities in their artifacts.
Generally the standard workshop set-up provides a good
basis for the creation of personal music controllers, since a
huge variety of materials, tools and components are avail-
able [12]. As stated previously, the possible ways to create
sensor interfaces with self-made sensors for music interac-
tion provide a vast area to be explored, for instance [8] (the
mentioning “homemade pressure and position sensors”, sen-
sors from video tape or antistatic foam), [6] (“conductive
ink, adhesive, rubber, tape, elastics and porous materials”),
[4] (pencil lead resistors and homemade tilt switches, to
name but a few ways to interface to music). Software envi-
ronments specially designed to develop programs that syn-
thesize sounds are very abstract and require a rather large
knowledge base to formulate musical expressions. This is
true for text based programming environments such as Su-
perCollider or ChucK [18] as well as for graphical program-
ming environments such as Pure Data [10] or MaxMSP. A
Sound Modelling and Control Kit (SMaCK) geared for chil-
dren aged 9-13 was presented in [17]. Children can gain ac-
cess to additive sound synthesis and control their sound with
a personal hardware controller. However, SMaCK lacks pro-
grammability and provides merely linear assignment of pa-
rameters to sound properties.
3. PRE-STUDY
In the following section we present our project work. Start-
ing with the motivation, we will sketch our development
process from the ﬁrst pre-test with ideas of participatory de-
sign [19] to the working prototype used in the ﬁnal school
workshop. Within a Halloween Theme Based Workshop
children were assisted in using the Arduino board to trig-
ger simple pre-recorded wave sounds. While this enabled
the participants to create fun artifacts it neither provided
a deeper understanding of digital sound production nor en-
abled further interaction with the sound itself. However,
this initial set up convinced us that the children were inter-
ested in creating more ﬂexible sounds. The next step was to
experiment with existing professional environments in order
to enable the creation of more powerful artifacts in terms of
sound capabilities. We conducted a test with a small group
of children (four participants) using Pure Data in order to
understand the potential of a unit generator based graphi-
cal programming environment and the problems which may
arise during the interaction with it. This approach was in-
spired using methods of participatory design which involved
the users at an early stage of development, rather than just
evaluating the ﬁnished product at the very end, where feed-
back has little or no impact. The approach required con-
stant iteration of the software evolving along user feedback.
A graphical programming environment for sound synthe-
sis was chosen for an initial study with children to gather
material on how sound programming could be made acces-
sible. Several projects revealed that graphical programming
languages have great potential to be accepted and under-
stood by the youngsters. Popular examples for successful
environments are the LEGO-Mindstorms programming en-
vironment RCX-Code, Scratch1, or the Java based Amici2
(to program the Arduino board). Over a period of six weeks
four children (aged 11-14) visited the university once a week
to work with Pure Datain combination with other craft ma-
terials. Over this period diﬀerent approaches to the software
were taken. The general notion was to move from an empty
patch to a pre-conﬁgured interface with custom high level
abstractions (e.g. frequency modulation). In the beginning
a small number of intrinsic elements of Pure Data3 was ex-
plained to the children, such as osc∼ , dac∼ , metro and
random . The sessions were captured by means of video
and audio recordings. The two tutors were asked to write a
brief protocol after each session. They were asked to observe
the children in the process of constructing sound pieces.
One focus was to pay attention to “indicators of enjoyment
and engagement” as deﬁned in [15]: “smiles, laughter, or
positive body language, and also signs of lack of enjoyment
and frustration, including, for example sighs, and looking
around the room”. The documentation should include the
process of artifact design, referring to the actual behavior
of participants (social interaction, expressions) and their ac-
tivities (planning, constructing, playing, etc.) as well as the
construction process in hardware and software. During the
session the children were encouraged to give their opinion,
to discuss problems, exchange ideas, communicate critical
parts of the software, present their work, reﬂect on it and
perform together. Based on the observations and the feed-
back of the children the interface was altered and extended
by the tutors consecutively from session to session, result-
ing in a color coded pre-conﬁgured patch with custom high
level abstractions. Most handling issues observed were re-
lated to the GUI. We can report a signiﬁcant amount of
positive feedback from the subjective user experience of the
participants that used the software. The fundamental prin-
cipal of graphical programming, connecting units to form a
patch, was conceived as stimulating. It comes as no surprise
that the raw PD GUI provided some diﬃculties regarding
usability. We have summarized the main diﬃculties of the
children using the software as follows:
• Elements are not easily accessible. One has to know
the name of an object to use it.
• Object names are not expressive. Without prior knowl-
edge identiﬁers such as vcf∼ do not mean much.
1Developed by the Lifelong Kindergarten Group at the MIT
Media Lab, http://scratch.mit.edu/
2http://dimeb.informatik.uni-bremen.de/eduwear/
3Pd version 0.41.4-extended
• Language issues (only English version).
• The interface is based on the drag-and-drop metaphor.
The handles of objects are too small, therefore they
are hard to grab.
• There are only few visual cues on the functionality of
a patch (e.g. the order of connections is invisible, hot
and cold inlets look the same).
• It is unclear why connections cannot be drawn from
inlet to outlet (from drain to source).
We ﬁgured that most of the shortcomings that became ap-
parent during the pre-test could be eliminated by providing
an alternative GUI. Based on the ﬁndings and the experi-
ences made during this phase we developed a GUI, which is
presented in the next section.
4. GUI PROTOTYPE
Figure 1: GUI showing a childs patch with three
analog inputs coming from the Arduino (a0, a1, a2)
controlling master volume, saw tooth frequency and
sine wave pitch.
As a consequence of the pre-test we decided to replace
the textual identiﬁers of unit generators and ﬁlters with
distinct iconic representations. At the start of the pro-
gram the objects are already present on the screen. Ob-
jects can be dragged and dropped - without prior navigation
through multi-layered menus. Since some diﬃculties arose
when making explicit connections between objects, we re-
viewed literature for alternatives. As appropriate for this
purpose we identiﬁed the dynamic patching [7] approach
as used for the reacTable [14]. The alternative GUI (Fig-
ure 1) was designed to have a small number of elements
such as unit generators, controllers and ﬁlters that were
reﬁned in the color coded pre-conﬁgured patch during the
pre-test with the children. Furthermore we provided objects
to represent data input from the Arduino board. The GUI
was implemented using the open source C++ toolkit open-
Frameworks4. Pure Data was used as the sound engine,
4www.openframeworks.cc
receiving OSC messages from the GUI. The serial connec-
tion between microcontroller and host computer was real-
ized with the Firmata 5 standard ﬁrmware and the Pduino
object6. On the hardware side the connection was realized
with Xbee modules 7.
5. SCHOOL WORKSHOP AND RESULTS
The implemented GUI was then to be used in a sound
workshop. The workshop “Moving Sounds” was organized
in collaboration with a local primary school. 20 girls and
boys of the 4th grade were involved in inventing, creating,
performing music controllers twice a week over a period of
ﬁve weeks with a public performance at the end to present
their inventions (Figure 2). The sessions were planned
Figure 2: Children rehearsing gestures for the per-
formance with their digital sound artifacts.
to follow the ﬁve pedagogical stages as described in [5]:
1. During the ﬁrst session children had the opportunity
to freely think about what kind of sounds they would like
to make. They collected ideas and sketched ﬁrst blueprints
loosely related to fantastic musical instruments. At this
stage they were not confronted with the constraints of the
hardware and software. 2. The children were introduced
to sensors, actuators and the microcontroller. The sec-
ond stage was also used to introduce the children to the
GUI for sound production. 3. The children formed project
groups to combine ideas from the ﬁrst sessions with the
knowledge gained during the second one. The children re-
invented their ideas with their acquired technical knowl-
edge and worked in groups on realizing them. 4. At the
fourth stage the children could follow their ideas and com-
plete some hands-on work with constructing and program-
ming. 5. The public presentation was an important part
of the pedagogical set-up. The children could show what
they had learned and how they gained conﬁdence in the
interaction with the technology.
The GUI was used with an enthusiasm that actually be-
came a usability issue; for practical reasons the children
worked on a project in groups of four. This proved to be
challenging at diﬀerent stages, for instance while working
with the software, as every group member wanted to be in
charge of the mouse. The individuals had no diﬃculty in
creating patches and the interaction with the GUI was per-
ceived by the three workshop tutors as enjoyable for the
children.
Within the ﬁve weeks ﬁve sound artifacts were created.
They are shown in Figure 3. The ﬁrst three seem to be
5www.firmata.org
6at.or.at/hans/pd/objects.html#pduino
7www.digi.com
quite similar, in that they are all shirt based. However, the
theme they followed and the sound that was programmed
for them using the GUI, diﬀered to a large extent. The
ﬁrst one, the ZOMBIE SHIRT, was meant to produce a
creepy, eerie sound controlled through a self-made pressure
sensor. The second one, the BREAKDANCE SHIRT, used
accelerometers to speed up and slow down a drum loop to
produce “the soundtrack to the dance” on-the-ﬂy. The third
shirt was created to be a percussion instrument; two pres-
sure sensors could trigger short harmonic sounds. Number
four in Figure 3 shows the ARM FLUTE. A temperature
sensor in a straw was used to probe for the musician blow-
ing. The sensor values were mapped through the GUI onto
the amplitude of a melody, with speed controlled by means
of a pressure sensor. The ﬁnal artifact number ﬁve was
the only creation not mounted to the body. The so called
STOMP PIANO was placed on the stage and controlled
through self-made pressure sensors to vary pitch and vol-
ume of the sound.
Figure 3: Childrens inventions: 1. Sound Zombie,
2. Breakdance Shirt, 3. Body Drum, 4. Arm Flut,
5. Stomp Piano.
6. CONCLUSION
The workshop was discussed by the tutors and pupils at the
end of each session as well as during a ﬁnal meeting after the
performance. The overall feedback was very positive. How-
ever, during the performance it became apparent that the
division of a music controller in sound generating unit (the
computer) and the controller (the artifacts) was problematic
from an experience design point of view. Sometimes it was
confusing for the little performers. For future workshop we
suggest to mount the sound producer on the artifact itself,
using for instance battery powered PC speakers. We as-
sume that the children would have felt more in control over
the instrument. In this we would suggest to aim to cre-
ate AutoNMAs as coined in [1] denoting autonomous new
media artifacts. We strongly recommend to make the arti-
facts self-contained - also to avoid the problematic wireless
connection. This might be achieved through mobile-phone
centered workshops. Another approach to this could be to
use the microcontroller itself for sound production by tog-
gling I/O pins at a certain rate (akabit-banging) or by using
a simple DAC and multiple output pins 8. By implement-
ing a bit-banging interface for children the artifacts could
become independent from a host computer. The digital
processing could be linked closer to the sound generation.
8http://www.uchobby.com/index.php/2007/11/11/
arduino-sound-part-1/
Bringing the sound production closer to the actual events
on the hardware level one might also avoid what Hejlsberg
refers to as simplexity [2]. The exploration of fundamen-
tal programming concepts such as control statements (e.g.
relational operators or conditionals) could be enabled. For
the implementation of sound synthesis software for children
we suggest to focus on musical playfulnessas a measure for
a successful design. Play is a signiﬁcant strategy to acquire
knowledge about the world. We take the diversity of arti-
facts that were created during the workshop as an indicator
that the overall concept is not restrictive and indeed enables
children to realize their ideas in a free ﬂow. Two key words
are especially important when designing for children: sim-
plicity and robustness. The ﬁrst one was also stated in [13].
It is important that the children feel in control and are inde-
pendent from a teacher or a tutor. Robustness is an equally
straight forward point, however worth mentioning here. The
goal should be to provide a stable environment that does not
impose interruptions due to necessary software debugging in
the workshop. From the observations it is possible to draw
a number of conclusions. Apart from some usability issues
with the current environment (as identiﬁed in the pre-test
in Section 3) it turned out that children are motivated to
dedicate their attention to a rather abstract environment
that oﬀers an interesting, rewarding output with aesthetic
qualities. By trend the sound environment nurtures intrin-
sic motivation and enables self-motivated creation, explo-
ration, and play. The iconic representations as used in the
GUI are still abstract; yet they seemed to oﬀer more room
for association than just the textual identiﬁers. This could
be extended by enabling the participants to design personal
icons for each object. To combine musical instrument con-
struction and sound programming for children in a work-
shop is very promising in terms of the variety of activities
that can be oﬀered in such a context, ranging from the ac-
tion (during the construction), interaction (with technology
and sound), and acting (during the performance). The de-
velopment of such interfaces is an under-researched ﬁeld.
The huge variety of controllers that came into existence in
the last couple of years provides an indication of the huge
variety of possible modalities that can be addressed with dif-
ferent materials. Hence music controller construction is a
rich ﬁeld to be discovered for pedagogical purposes. An ap-
proach to acquire some fundamental understanding of how
the current data ﬂow programming environment Pure Data
could be modiﬁed to be utilized in a workshop setting was
presented on the preceding pages.
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful for the funding provided by theKlaus Tschira
Stiftung in the scope of the Graduate School “Advances in
Digital Media” at the University of Bremen. Furthermore
we would like to thank the communities ofopenFrameworks,
Pure Data, and Arduino. We would also like to thank the
workshop participants for their valuable feedback.
8. REFERENCES
[1] E. Berdahl and C. Chafe. Autonomous new media
artefacts (AutoNMA). In Proceedings of the
International Conference on New Interfaces for
Musical Expression, pages 322—323, Oslo, Norway,
2011.
[2] F. Biancuzzi and S. Warden. Masterminds of
Programming: Conversations with Creators of Major
Programming Languages. O’Reilly Media, 1 edition,
Apr. 2009.
[3] L. Buechley and M. Eisenberg. The LilyPad arduino:
Toward wearable engineering for everyone. IEEE
Pervasive Computing, 7(2):12–15, 2008.
[4] N. Collins. Handmade Electronic Music: The Art of
Hardware Hacking. Taylor & Francis, 2nd ed. edition,
June 2009.
[5] N. Dittert, K. Dittmann, T. Gr ¨uter, A. K¨ummel,
A. Osterloh, M. Reichel, H. Schelhowe, G. Volkmann,
and I. Zorn. Understanding digital media by
constructing intelligent artefacts - design of a learning
environment for children. In ED-MEDIA World
Conference on Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia
& Telecommunications, pages 2348–2358, Chesapeake
(VA), 2008. AACE.
[6] A. Jensenius, R. Koehly, and M. Wanderley. Building
Low-Cost music controllers. In Computer Music
Modeling and Retrieval, pages 123–129. 2006.
[7] M. Kaltenbrunner, G. Geiger, and S. Jord` a. Dynamic
patches for live musical performance. In Proceedings
of the 4th Conference on New Interfaces for Musical
Expression, Hamamatsu (Japan), 2004.
[8] E. R. Miranda and M. M. Wanderley. New Digital
Musical Instruments: Control And Interaction
Beyond the Keyboard. A-R Editions, Pap/Com
edition, July 2006.
[9] S. A. Papert and I. Harel. Situating constructionism.
In Constructionism. Ablex Publishing Corporation,
1991.
[10] M. S. Puckette. Pure data: another integrated
computer music environment. In Proceedings Second
Intercollege Computer Music Concerts, pages 37–41,
Tachikawa, 1996.
[11] M. Reichel, L. Dickmann, and Schelhowe. Smart
textiles prototyping: Participating with new ideas. In
CARS2007, 2007.
[12] M. Reichel, A. Osterloh, E. Katterfeldt, D. Butler,
and H. Schelhowe. EduWear: designing smart textiles
for playful learning. In Proceedings of the 8th
ICICTE, volume Readings in Technology in
Education, pages 252–263, Corfu, Greece, 2008.
[13] M. Resnick and B. Silverman. Some reﬂections on
designing construction kits for kids. In Proceedings of
the 2005 conference on Interaction design and
children, pages 117–122, Boulder, Colorado, 2005.
ACM.
[14] Sergi Jord` a, M. Kaltenbrunner, G. Geiger, and
R. Bencina. The reacTable. In Proceedings of the
International Computer Music Conference, Barcelona
(Spain), 2005.
[15] G. Sim, S. MacFarlane, and J. Read. All work and no
play: Measuring fun, usability, and learning in
software for children [An article from: Computers &
Education]. Elsevier, Apr. 2006.
[16] A. Thaler and I. Zorn. Music as a vehicle to encourage
girls’ and boys’ interest in technology. Mar. 2009.
[17] C. Trappe and H. Schelhowe. SMaCK: a sound
modelling and control kit for children. In S. Kain,
D. Struve, and H. Wandke, editors,
Workshop-Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on
Humans and Computers, pages 183–186, Berlin, 2009.
Logos Berlin.
[18] G. Wang and P. Cook. ChucK: a concurrent,
on-the-ﬂy, audio programming language. In In
Proceedings of the ICMC, 2003.
[19] B. Williamson. The participation of children in the
design of new technology - a discussion paper, Sept.
2003.