Recent Developments in Violin-related Digital Musical 
Instruments: Where Are We and Where Are We Going?
Cornelius Poepel 
Department of Music 
The University of Birmingham 
Edgbaston 
Birmingham B15TT, UK 
cp@khm.de 
Dan Overholt 
CREATE, UC Santa Barbara 
Center for Research in Electronic Art Technology 
Media Arts and Technology Program 
Santa Barbara, California 93106 
dano@create.ucsb.edu 
ABSTRACT 
In this paper, some of the more recent developments in musical 
instruments related to the violin family are described, and 
analyzed according to several criteria adapted from other 
publications. While it is impossible to cover all such 
developments, we have tried to sample a variety of instruments 
from the last decade or so, with a greater focus on those 
published in the computer music literature. Experiences in the 
field of string players focusing on such developments are 
presented. Conclusions are drawn in which further research into 
violin-related digital instruments for string players may benefit 
from the presented criteria as well as the experiences. 
Keywords 
Violin, viola, cello, bass, digital, electronic, synthesis, 
controller. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
A violin-related digital musical instrument can be either a 
physical instrument that incorporates or mimics a bowed string 
instrument, a software instrument  that is controlled by or 
mimics bowed string instruments, or quite possibly a 
combination of these two things. Figure 1 shows a few past and 
present developments in violin-related interfaces for electronic 
music. 
In the case of physical interfaces, some new instruments can be 
played in exactly the same way as a traditional violin, w hile 
others require the performer to learn non-traditional gestural 
techniques. For example, Max Mathew’s electric violin, which 
is one of the first developments in violin-family digital 
instruments, is played with traditional violin technique, while 
other developments such as Dan Trueman’s BoSSA [15] are 
designed around an entirely new set of gestures (albeit 
borrowing from traditional technique as we discuss later). One 
example of a hybrid interface that combines these elements and 
brings together both traditional and non-traditional gestural 
techniques is the Overtone Violin [10].  
A software instrument  can be a synthesis algorithm or a 
processing algorithm, or a combination of the two. Synthesis 
algorithms are generated entirely from scratch in the computer 
and are typically controlled by parameter updates from an 
external controller with sensors that detect the performer’s 
gestures. Processing algorithms take input from an external 
audio source (such as the strings of an electric violin) and either 
modify it with reverb, delay, etc. or use it as a stimulus for 
modulation of filters or other signal processing algorithms. One 
example of a violin-related synthesis algorithm is the use of 
physical modeling to simulate the Helmholtz motion of a 
bowed violin string [5]. An example of an algorithm that uses 
the audio from a viola’s strings as stimulus is Audio Signal 
Driven Sound Synthesis [11]. 
A wide variety of violin-related digital musical instruments 
have been invented – the intention here is not to survey all 
known developments, but to outline the criteria that make a 
given development suitable or unsuitable for a specific purpose. 
A development that is weak in a certain area can often be 
strengthened by combining it with another technique to produce 
a hybrid. 
2. LOOKING BACK 
In order to get a view on where we are, it is helpful to take a 
look into the past. Surveying the last 10 years of developments, 
we analyzed the proceedings of the International Computer 
Music Conference ICMC (1995-2005) and the Proceedings of 
the conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression 
NIME (2001-2005). We found 28 (18 ICMC and 10 NIME) 
articles that were related to the violin family. 
 
Figure 1. Clockwise from top left: Max Mathews playing his 
electric violin, Neal Farwell’s Funny Fiddle, Dan 
Trueman’s BoSSA, 2 generations of Tod Machover’s 
Hyperviolins, Chris Chafe’s Celleto, and Suguru Goto’s 
Superpolm MIDI violin. 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post 
on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a 
fee. NIME 06, June 4-8, 2006, Paris, France. Copyright remains with the 
author(s). 
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
390
The violin is often said to be an instrument with a high potential 
for musical expression and a high quality of sound. We wanted 
to investigate if the reason for the works presented in these 
publications were related to this expressivity or quality, and on 
which component of a digital instrument they were focused. 
According to our statistics, 84% of the developments we looked 
at mentioned the bowed string instrument family in their 
reasoning when considering expressivity or sound quality. By 
separating the papers into the four categories of controller, 
synthesis, processing, and complete instrument we found the 
following: The majority (11 publications, 61% of the ICMC 
publications) focus on sound synthesis, wherein the majority of 
these (8) are related to physical modeling. The largest class of 
developments discussed in the NIME proceedings were 
complete instruments (6 instruments, 60% of the violin related 
NIME publications). Four of the 28 publications focused 
mainly on the development of a controller; two from ICMC and 
two from NIME. The remainder of the papers were divided 
among processing (one publication) and others (one publication 
on violin pitch tracking and two publications on software to do 
analysis of bow strokes).  
While the majority of researchers said they would like to use 
the expressivity or quality of a bowed stringed instrument, it 
was interesting to see how expressivity or quality was defined, 
where in the instrument or playing process they thought it was 
located, and how it was assimilated into the development of a 
digital instrument. Except in one case, there were no 
publications that explicitly defined musical expression or 
expressivity of a violin. 
Regarding synthesis-related research, the quality of the 
instrument is mostly thought to be located in the physically 
describable behavior of the instrument. The majority of the 
publications locate the expressivity in a fixed set of player 
gestures and playing parameters. These are: right hand—bow 
speed, bow pressure, bow position, and left hand—finger 
position and finger pressure. With respect to the connection 
between the gestures and resulting sound of a traditional 
instrument there is no major belief found which sound-
conditions have to be met in order to keep an acceptable 
instrumental coupling and synthesized specific sound. 
Concerning mapping, it was found that violin related 
publications directly addressing this topic are rare. One-to-one 
mapping was found predominantly, and one-to-many only 
occasionally. Many-to-one mappings were not explicitly found 
in our search, and only two publications addressed the mapping 
issue in a broader fashion, e.g. in the development of an 
“advanced and intelligent mapping interface” [3]. 
Most researchers were concentrating on scientific goals in the 
published literature. 11 developments (4 presented at ICMC, 
and 7 at NIME) were said to be ready for stage use. It was 
found that over 50% of the developments had the goal to sound 
like a traditional bowed stringed instrument, that over 50% of 
the developments had the goal to give the player the "feel" of a 
traditional bowed stringed instrument, and that over 75% of the 
developments behaved (in terms of articulation) similar to a 
traditional bowed stringed instrument. 
In general, the evaluation of results and capabilities of the 
developments in terms of expressivity or quality were done by 
the authors. Six publications out of the 28 showed that external 
evaluation was involved, with two of the six using empirical 
methods to evaluate the work. This might be said to reflect the 
goals of the developments, which more often than not fell into 
the categories of personal use or research.  
Additionally, there have been many important developments 
that to our knowledge have never been published. Some of 
these are quite significant in the field, and are discussed here—
a few them that the authors have knowledge of include Max 
Mathew’s electric violin, Chris Chafe’s Celletto , Neal 
Farwell’s “Funny Fiddle”, Jon Rose’s MIDI bow, and Peter 
Beyl’s IR-violin. 
One of the earliest examples of an experimental bowed string 
instrument is Max Mathew’s electric violin, which used a 
piezo-ceramic bimorph pickup system to capture the vibrations 
of the strings. The same pickup technology was used on Chris 
Chafe’s Celletto, which he began building in 1988 [2]. The 
Celletto is an ongoing and pioneering project, and has evolved 
through a series of embodiments in many performances. Along 
the way, various sensors have been used to capture the gestures 
of playing, such as strain gauge sensors and an accelerometer 
on the cello bow. In one context, a Buchla Lightning controller 
was used to track the bow, an elegant solution to the problems 
associated with developing custom sensor devices. 
Neal Farwell’s “Funny Fiddle” instrument was used in his 
composition Gipsy Fugue  in 1996 and is also still undergoing 
development. Jon Rose’s MIDI bow was developed at STEIM 
in Amsterdam, and incorporates sonar sensors to allow a 
violinist to lift the bow from the string and continue to play 
with the bow alone. Peter Beyl’s IR-violin is an altered violin 
with infrared transmitters and receivers as sensors in place of 
the strings. 
3. NEW VIOLIN-RELATED 
INTERFACES: THREE TOPICS TO 
THINK ABOUT 
To be sure, any new musical instrument must consider the three 
areas of human interfaces, sound generation, and the mapping 
of data between these input and output systems. Here we 
uncover some of the concerns that arise when designing, 
developing, and performing with new violin-family digital 
instruments. Examples of specific instruments are given where 
applicable, and – inspired by David A. Jaffe’s article “Ten 
Criteria for Evaluating Digital Synthesis Techniques” [6] — 
criteria for estimating effectiveness in performing scenarios 
proposed. We assume that the purpose of a new violin-family 
instrument is that of performance (other contexts for their use, 
such as individual or institutional research or personal 
enjoyment are beyond the scope of this paper). These 
recommendations are given as our personal opinion of how the 
criteria can ideally be met. 
3.1 Human Interfaces – Gestural 
Controllers and Sensor Technologies 
Although technical issues such as sensor resolution, latency of 
transmission, and wireless capability all have impacts on new 
interfaces, we will not focus on these engineering problems 
here. Instead, we start by looking at the gestures enabled by the 
interface, and how they allow a performer to extend or enhance 
the playability of a violin-related digital musical instrument. 
3.1.1 How Intuitive are the Gestures? 
When designing a new interface, one decision that needs to be 
made is what type of gestures are to be captured—the answer 
can fall into two different categories. Some musicians are 
interested mainly in using the gestures they have already 
developed through years of practice on traditional violin-family 
instruments, while others would prefer novel gestures to be 
available as control inputs. In either category, developers 
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
391
should consider how ‘natural’ a gesture feels when designing 
new human interfaces and sensor technologies. In the first case, 
sensors should be used to capture traditional gestures with as 
much accuracy and precision as possible, and in the case of 
non-traditional gestures the interface should use a sensor 
system that allows for gestures that are in some way related to 
the traditional playing motions of violin-family instruments. Of 
course an instrument easily becomes “something else” (no 
longer a violin-related instrument) if this relationship is broken. 
Suguru Goto’s Superpolm violin [3] is an interface that requires 
alternate gestures to be used as performance input, by 
substituting electronic sensors for strings and synthesis 
algorithms for acoustics. The instrument is equipped with 
touch-strip sensors on the fingerboard and a bow that works as 
a resistor ladder pressed against a voltage sensor on the bridge, 
plus a chin squeeze sensor for an added dimension of control. 
While it is impossible to use traditional playing techniques on 
the Superpolm (since it doesn’t have strings), the gestures it 
requires are closely related to those of a traditional violin. 
Given this correlation, the Superpolm is a good example of an 
interface that employs non-traditional gestural input, and the 
use of a pressure sensor under the chin rest seems to be a 
natural fit for added expressivity. Although chin pressure does 
nothing on a traditional instrument, it could be argued that 
squeezing the violin harder or softer is an intuitive method of 
input as it relates to the overall player’s effort. 
Another interf ace that captures non-traditional yet violin-like 
gestures is Dan Trueman’s Bowed-Sensor-Speaker-Array, or 
BoSSA [15]. This instrument includes elements of both the 
violin’s physical performance interface and its resonating body, 
yet eliminates both the body and the strings. It replaces the 
body with a “spatial filtering audio diffuser”, a spherical 
speaker designed with multiple drivers to eliminate the 
directionality associated with normal loudspeakers, and 
multiple sensors mounted on a moveable fingerboard in place 
of the strings. At first glance, most of the gestures (except 
bowing) associated with playing the BoSSA might seem to be 
counter-intuitive to a traditional violinist. However, as the 
developer is himself a violinist, the motions necessary to 
control the instrument have been carefully designed to overlap 
with several aspects of violinistic gestures.  
In both traditional and non-traditional gestural interfaces, it is 
the authors’ opinion that those looking to extend bowed 
instruments should expect to spend some time learning a new 
set of gestures if they are to have an impact in far-reaching 
ways; it just helps this process if such new gestures are put 
forth by the instrument developer in an intuitive manner. 
3.1.2 How Perceptible are the Gestures? 
Gestures should cause an understandable change in the sound 
for the performer to best grasp an instrument’s playability. A 
gesture that causes a difficult-to-predict change in the sound 
may be interesting at first, but it can drive a performer crazy if 
they are trying to control such a sound in front of a live 
audience. On another level, the actions of the performer should 
have clear consequences in order for the interaction to be 
perceived by the audience. Preserving some sense of mystery in 
the performance is also important though, and may be 
accomplished partly through a composition but also via the 
design of the instrument itself. 
A recent development that focuses on capturing traditional 
bowing gestures is the Ircam augmented bow [13] developed by 
Emmanuel Fléty. This system uses a coin-cell battery to power 
the electronic sensors mounted on a violin bow, and a radio link 
transmits the data to a receiver that communicates w ith the 
computer via OSC. The augmented bow can be used as a 
research tool to investigate the perception of bowing gestures as 
received by the computer, or as a live performance interface on 
stage. Gaining a better understanding of musical gestures such 
as those used in traditional bowing technique is an important 
step to perceptible gestures, and interfaces such as these greatly 
improve this by providing a high-resolution link to the digital 
world. 
There have been several other developments involving the 
capture and perception of traditional violin family gestures, 
such as those from the Hyperinstruments group at the MIT 
Media Lab. The Hypercello [8] as developed by Joe Paradiso 
and Neil Gershenfeld was based on a RAAD electric cello, and 
had an extensive array of sensors to catch as much detail as 
possible. The left hand finger position, finger pressure, and 
right hand bow position were all detected through the 
development of custom sensors. The Hyperbow Controller [16] 
by Diana Young is the most recent of the MIT developments, 
and also uses a wireless transmitter on the bow along with 
strain gauge sensors to gather data showing the changes in 
bowing pressure over time. 
Regarding the audience perception of violin-family 
instruments, public knowledge has accumulated to come to 
expect certain things from something that looks or is played 
like a violin – this common perception allows new 
developments that use traditional gestures to break the 
expectation, surprising the audience with previously unheard 
sounds. However, for non-traditional gestural interfaces there is 
no common reference as a key to comprehension for the 
audience, which puts the responsibility of helping an audience 
understand what is happening on the developer and performer 
of such instruments. Therefore, a novel instrument should 
carefully consider the perceptibility of its gestures both to the 
performer and to the audience. 
3.1.3 How Physical/Powerful are the Gestures? 
Making an obvious physical gesture should have a significant 
audible effect. Electronic technology allows even a tiny motion 
to have a huge outcome, however it is important to take into 
account the dramatic effects of a gesture in the design of a new 
instrument. As such, the performance interface should attempt 
to provide a vehicle for expressive communication with an 
audience. Human effort should be incorporated into the design 
where possible in order to bring out the inherent relationship 
between instrument and performer. Obviously, if a tiny gesture 
causes a big sound the performer may have difficulty 
controlling the instrument. In addition, the consideration of 
effort will have an impact on the music, lending it a “human 
feeling”, as more exertion is required for some musical ideas 
than others. 
Finally, the choice of whether or not to leave behind the core 
elements (strings, horsehair, rosin) of traditional bowed-string 
instruments when developing a new interface is crucial. The 
history, convention, and institution that comes with traditional 
instruments may or may not be desirable for a certain 
development, but dropping these core elements leaves behind a 
powerful interface for the trained musician. If the instrument 
has strings that are still playable in the traditional sense, then a 
single gesture can be made more powerful by simultaneously 
controlling the sound of the strings along with the digitally 
generated sound. Hybrid instruments such as Curtis Bahn’s 
Sensor Bass [1] and the Overtone Violin can provide a way of 
bridging the gap between the world of acoustic instruments and 
the new possibilities offered by computer music, as they 
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
392
incorporate multi-parametric control along side the traditional 
instruments interface. 
3.2 Sound Generation – Analysis, Synthesis 
and Manipulation 
The method of analysis, synthesis or sound manipulation used 
in a violin-family instrument has a vital effect on its playability, 
and many researchers have identified and experimented with 
signal processing algorithms for this purpose. 
3.2.1 How Well-Behaved is the Algorithm? 
A frequent approach to controlling a synthesized tone with a 
violin-family instrument is to use a pitch and amplitude-
tracking algorithm. While these trackers tend to be fairly well-
behaved in some situations (for example when used with an 
electric guitar), the violin family of instruments can induce 
errors in many such algorithms. Bowed-string traits such as 
‘fuzzy’ note-starts and indefinite pitches can be problematic for 
a tracker, and may result in incorrect pitch estimates. A 
synthesis algorithm that is fed this wrong information will then 
produce audible artifacts, an effect that can render them 
undesirable and displeasing to the performer and audience. 
Clearly, synthesis and processing algorithms should attempt to 
avoid such artifacts. Work in this area has been done by Tristan 
Jehan, who has developed an enhanced version of Miller 
Puckette’s fiddle~ Max-object called analyzer~ [7] that tries to 
avoid these problems, and also estimates loudness, brightness, 
and noisiness in the incoming signal. While it is imperative for 
some synthesis algorithms to know the pitch a performer is 
attempting to play, other processing techniques do not need this 
information at all, and therefore may be better choices in many 
situations. A simple example is a pitch-shifting algorithm, 
which manipulates the incoming sound directly, modifying the 
A/D input in either the time or frequency domain. This comes 
with its own challenges such as formant preservation, etc. but 
there is no external limit caused by errors in pitch tracking or 
loudness as to how well-behaved such synthesis algorithms can 
be. Developers should take these concerns into account when 
designing or choosing algorithms to use with a new instrument. 
3.2.2 How Realistic/Unique is the Sounds Identity? 
One development in synthesis that is related to the violin family 
is Bernd Schoner’s Digital Stradivarius project [14], based on 
the mathematical technique of cluster-weighted modeling. This 
method concentrates on the simulation of acoustic phenomena, 
thereby attempting to emulate an actual violin. The potential of 
this approach is evident in the types of parameters the synthesis 
algorithm has—bow pressure and speed that are applied to the 
mathematical model. Input from a controller then is easily 
mapped and can provide results closer to real world 
instruments. However, there are cases where exotic (non-violin) 
synthesis algorithms are desirable as well, and many performers 
would like to take advantage of sounds that have a more unique 
identity. In the final analysis, the appropriateness of a given 
sound depends on the musical task at hand.  
3.3 Mapping – Sensor Inputs to Synthesis 
Parameters 
It should always be remembered that the physical input device 
and the synthesis algorithm are only pieces of the whole 
instrument, and one must take into account the importance of 
the mapping as well. This stage can in fact “make or break” an 
instrument. 
3.3.1 How Rich is the Mapping Methodology? 
This topic concerns whether the controller inputs and synthesis 
parameters map in an intuitive manner to musical attributes like 
musical dynamics and articulation, or whether they are just 
mathematical variables with very little correlation to real-world 
perceptual or musical experience. Mapping is heavily 
interconnected with both sensor inputs and synthesis 
parameters, in that limiting factors can arise from both sides. 
For example, an instrument without a sensor for bow position 
could not directly control a physical model that expects this as a 
parameter, and a sample-playback-based synthesis engine 
would not respond in complex ways to bow sensor input. 
Evidently, every instrument uses some kind of mapping 
methodology in order to connect performer inputs to sound 
outputs, but there can be many levels of richness and variety in 
treating the problem. 
Camille Goudeseune has developed a system that uses a 
SpacePad motion tracker to map various synthesis techniques to 
the position of a violin in 3-dimensional space [4]. His 
examples proceed from very simple extensions of standard 
violin technique up to much richer demonstrations of what is 
possible when multiple layers of mappings are placed between 
the performer’s physical input and the system’s sonic output. 
The simplest uses the violin’s position in space to control the 
position of its sound source in stereo. One of the more 
sophisticated mappings controls Hammond Organ additive 
synthesis by “letting an automatic timbre rover explore a few 
thousand times of the instrument, with instructions to choose a 
dozen timbres that differed enough from each other to 
adequately represent the whole space” (the definition of 
difference comes from a psychoacoustic model of the human 
hearing system). This timbre rover is a tool for setting up a very 
rich mapping methodology that allows for a wide variety of 
sounds. 
3.3.2 What is the Widest Range of Expression? 
It is the authors’ view that new violin-related musical 
instruments should focus on deepening sensitivity to the control 
of micro-gesture that a well-trained violinist possesses. This 
can be accomplished in part through mapping by scaling 
control values and making the most of the available sensitivity 
of a given physical interface. Also, physical interfaces can 
incorporate very high-resolution sensors and force feedback – a 
technique Charles Nichols researched for his dissertation at 
CCRMA [9]. His development, the vBow, is a virtual bow 
controller designed to accurately sense the motions of a bowing 
gesture while providing haptic feedback in the form of tactile 
simulations of detents, elasticity, and barriers produced by 
electronic motors. 
4. EXPERIENCES 
In addition to the view of past developments, it is important to 
mention some personal experiences that we think give inside 
views on the contributions necessary to construct digital bowed 
stringed instruments.  
4.1 Traditional String Players 
Until now, we have focused mainly on developments that have 
culminated in research tools for the authors, however the next 
section deals with more general questions about the direction 
we are headed when it comes to string players throughout the 
world. As pointed out in [16] the study of the player – 
instrument interaction is important. One field to collect 
experiences for basic principles of violin playing is the field of 
violin pedagogy. 
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
393
It is a known circumstance that the change from one violin 
teacher to another can cause the need to change playing 
techniques and gestures, sometimes beginning even from the 
basics again. Such changes very often come along with a 
different overall view on "how music should be performed in 
order to be of high quality". According to our experience, all 
the differences cannot be explained with the simple statement 
that one way is simply a bad one while another is a good one. 
We conclude that different answers to the question, "What are 
the main needs of a string player in order to do what is 
necessary for playing music if we build a new instrument?" 
may not be too big a surprise.  Asking people around us, we 
indeed got many different answers on this question as presented 
in section 4.2.  
Testing different versions of digital violas [11], it was 
interesting to see what each subject did w ith the sonic artifacts 
(e.g. wrong pitch detections) the systems were producing from 
time to time. While most string players tried to avoid these, 
there were some instrumentalists who started to play with it and 
mentioned this might be a good opportunity to special kinds of 
sound production. However, this is not a primary feature of the 
instrument, but it may or may not become a feature primary by 
the definition of the player.  
4.2 >hot_strings SIG<  
Confronted with the fact that the knowledge about the 
fascinating new developments was rare in the world of more 
traditional string players, the first author started to do 
workshops presenting these developments to them. In 2004 this 
lead to a community of people interested in general kinds of 
inventions to the family of bowed stringed instruments called 
>hot_strings SIG<. The SIG includes professionals from 
performers, instrument builders, researchers and composers 
based in Europe. Meetings occur twice a year with the goal of 
sharing knowledge, presenting and discussing new instruments, 
repertoire, research results and aesthetic positions.  
Presenting some of the recent developments discussed here 
(using movies, sound examples, summaries of publications and 
demos) the assumption was that this would generate a lot of 
interest from the SIG members, since they are definitely 
interested in extending their expressivity and open for new 
sounds. However the feedback received was smaller than 
expected.  
This result raised questions about the subjective reasons for 
such reluctance, and the follow-up question of what the needs 
and wishes of the SIG members were if they could have 
digitally extended versions of string instruments. The reasons 
mentioned for this lack of enthusiasm were different from 
person to person. Here is a selection of the statements: 
- Some developments were not felt to be extensions of 
traditional bowed stringed instruments. By listening to sound 
examples and watching movies the most developments were 
estimated as to be interesting from a scientific point of view, 
but in terms of sound and expressivity estimated more as a 
reduction than an extension compared to existing instruments. 
- Reducing the right hand input to the bow parameters of 
position, pressure, and speed was said not to cover playing 
techniques like pizzicato, col legno, and a lot of techniques 
used in contemporary music. 
- In order to get the sound qualities of a bowed stringed 
instrument the resonances of the body (or in this case sound 
synthesis) have to resonate back to the strings. Otherwise there 
will always be a different playability and sound characteristic 
that may keep a lot of players unsatisfied. 
Discussing the needs an extended bowed stringed instrument 
should have brought different answers. Asking further it 
became clear that the reasons came from different aesthetic 
points and different experiences with computer-based stringed 
instruments. Statements found here were: 
- New instruments should not only have a string specific-
playability, they should also have a string specific sound, 
different from the one of traditional instruments but within a 
specific range that enables the player to use the known gesture-
input and sound-feedback loop. An important thing is to be able 
to create sensuality with the instrument. 
- I want to make new music with the new instrument and 
therefore I need it to sound very different from a traditional 
violin. Keeping a basic set of similar gestures is necessary for 
me, however an instrument with a different feel and sometimes 
unconventional reaction is quite ok. A Zeta ® violin with 
additional bow tracking methods would fit my needs. 
- New Instruments have to be flexible and extendable in the 
playing parameters that can be tracked, the mapping and the 
methods of sound synthesis. Building an instrument is an act of 
composition and includes an aesthetic point of view since it has 
to be defined what kinds of gestures and sounds are more or 
less important.  
- If we want to expand the violin with an electric/synthesizer 
violin, than the instrument has to be able to deal with the 
complexity of the player. The players string specific ability has 
to be assignable to the extended new instrument. Everything in 
terms of bow position, bow speed, more than that, everything 
that is done in nuances of sound has to be transmittable. 
While the aspect of timbre plays an important role when a 
string player tests traditional instruments, it became obvious in 
discussions that the timbral color palette a violin maker may 
want to offer to the players is thought of in a completely 
different way than a synthesizer developer might. A violin may 
sound for a synthesist always like a violin and therefore be 
boring in richness of sounds. A violin player however, can have 
a completely different opinion in this regard, since all the colors 
of sound she or he is controlling fall within this space and are 
sufficient to give a full range of expressivity. 
5. DISCUSSION 
Facing the evolution of developments in recent years, we still 
see a challenge to make the areas of new interfaces and 
synthesis more rewarding for the broader world of string 
players. Regarding the evaluation methods in papers and 
looking at the opinions presented in section 4.2, we think it is 
necessary to obtain a better feedback loop between developers 
and string players (as long as the development is focusing on 
that area). 
Taking the “top-down” approach, many of the developments 
analyzed in section 2 first define what the needs of a player are, 
then design the instrument, and finally evaluate whether the 
development has met the original criteria. Regarding the 
different needs articulated by musicians, different aesthetical 
positions, and different understandings of how to play bowed 
string instruments, we might try to avoid a view on string 
players through the glasses of an objective fixed average 
player-instrument interaction. We would instead like to discuss 
a “bottom-up” approach that is oriented at the needs of 
individual musicians as an apparent alternative. With respect to 
the criteria proposed in section 3 we feel there may be an 
effective way to build some basic digital instruments and then 
work to enhance them from the “ground up”, while 
incorporating feedback from instrumentalists. Of course we 
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
394
also expect that while our criteria is at present our best estimate 
of important design considerations, it may include 
presumptions which will have to be corrected according to 
individual positions that have yet to be found.  
6. CONCLUSION 
With respect to the fact that we find in the world of string 
players communities with similar aesthetic positions, we 
conjecture that over time some sets of criteria will arise that are 
specifically relevant for those communities. According to our 
own experiences and to the statements presented in section 4, 
we hypothesize that a set of three basic digital instruments in 
the violin family could look like this: 
- Playing without a defined and fixed parameter-set but reduced 
to ASDSS-sounds: an instrument like the eviola presented in 
[12]. 
- Playing with predefined playing parameters able to use any 
known synthesis method: a Zeta ® (or similar) type instrument 
expanded with a bow tracking system e.g. the Ircam Bow[13]. 
- Playing with the methods mentioned above and with new 
gestures: an instrument like the Overtone Violin[10]. 
With this approach we will be able to study the instrument-
qualities within the not yet known quality-criteria of the 
players, their playing-style and their aesthetics. These three 
instruments as proposed will surely not be the only or even the 
main ones used in the future, but we see in this way a 
possibility to bridge the gap between the fascinating and 
powerful possibilities the digital age has brought to us and the 
culturally powerful community of string players who are 
seeking to enhance their musical language. 
We have seen that many different approaches to violin-related 
instruments have occurred in last decade or two. W hile they all 
contribute to the whole, to a certain extent they tend to be 
idiosyncratic developments that have goals focused primarily 
on individual use. This could be partly because of the nature of 
doing research into new technologies, or possibly because we 
are simply in a transitional period in the history of violin 
interfaces, and the territory that lies ahead may lead towards 
developments that stick around longer. Call it a “new 
renaissance”, if you will — when digital instruments transpire 
to allow a new generation of virtuosi to emerge by providing 
the right affordances to performers and becoming practical 
enough to make it outside of the research labs. For any 
instrument to survive the test of time, it must be accessible 
(available throughout the world), have a repertoire (even the 
violin itself would not have survived without this), and most 
importantly it must be inspiring to future generations of 
performers and composers!  
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We have attempted to present a balanced view of the 
instruments discussed. Nevertheless, our bias toward hybrid 
instruments cannot be hidden. We apologize to those 
researchers whose developments were not explicitly cited in 
this article. The choice was biased by the instruments with 
which we were most familiar, having seen, played, or read 
about them in various articles. 
8. REFERENCES 
[1] Bahn, C and Trueman, D. Interface, Electronic Chamber 
Ensemble Proceedings of the CHI 01 Workshop New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME01), Seattle, 
USA, 2001 
[2] Chafe, C. Personal Communication, 2006  
[3] Goto, S. and Takahiko, S. The Case Study of Application 
of Advanced Gesture Interface and Mapping Interface, - 
Virtual Musical Instrument "Le SuperPolm" and Gesture 
Controller "BodySuit" Proceedings of the 2004 
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 
Hamamatsu, Japan, 2004, 207-208 
[4] Goudeseune, C. Resonant Processing of Instrumental 
Sound Controlled by Spatial Position Proceedings of the 
CHI 01 Workshop New Interfaces for Musical Expression 
(NIME01), Seattle, USA, 2001 
[5] Jaffe, D.A. and Smith, J. O. Performance Expression in 
Commuted Waveguide Synthesis of Bowed Strings. In 
Proceedings of the 1995 International Computer Music 
Conference, Tokyo, Japan 1995, 343-346.  
[6] Jaffe, David A. Ten Criteria for Evaluating Synthesis 
Techniques, Computer Music Journal  Vol. 19(1), MIT 
Press, Spring 1995, 76-87 
[7] Jehan, T and Schoner, B. An Audio-Driven Perceptually 
Meaningful Timbre Synthesizer Proceedings of the 2001 
International Computer Music Conference, Bejing, China 
2001, 381-388. 
[8] Machover, T. Hyperinstruments: A progress report 1987 – 
1991. Technical report, MIT Media Laboratory. 
[9] Nichols, C. The vBow: A Development of a Virtual Violin 
Bow Haptic Human-Computer Interface Proceedings of 
the 2002 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical 
Expression Dublin, Ireland, 2002, 29-32 
[10] Overholt, D. The Overtone Violin: A New  Computer 
Music Instrument, Proceedings of the 2005 International 
Computer Music Conference, Barcelona, Spain 2005, 604-
607. 
[11] Poepel, C. On Interface Expressivity: A Player-Based 
Study, Proceedings of the 2005 Conference on New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression, Vancouver, Canada, 
2005, 228-231 
[12] Poepel, C. and Dannenberg R. B. Audio Signal Driven 
Sound Synthesis, Proceedings of the 2005 International 
Computer Music Conference, Barcelona, Spain 2005, 391-
394 
[13] Rasamimanana Nicolas, Fléty Emmanuel, Bevilacqua 
Frédéric, Gesture Analysis of Violin Bow Strokes, GW 
2005, Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence 3881, S. 
Gibet, N. Courty, and J.-F. Kamp (Eds.), 2006, 145–155. 
[14] Schoner, B. Cooper, C. and Gershenfeld N. Cluster-
Weighted Sampling for Syntheis and Cross-Synthesis of 
Violin Family Instruments Proceedings of the 2000 
International Computer Music Conference, Berlin, 
Germany 2000, 376-379 
[15] Trueman, D. and Cook, P. BoSSA: The Deconstructed 
Violin Reconstructed, Proceedings of the 1999 
International Computer Music Conference, Bejing, China 
1999, 232-239 
[16] Young, D. S. New Frontiers of Expression Through Real-
Time Dynamics Measurements of Violin Bows, Master’s 
Thesis, M.I.T. 2001
 
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
395