Harmonic Intonation Trainer:  
An Open Implementation in Pure Data 
 
Hsin-Ming Lin 
Department of Music 
University of California, San Diego 
9500 Gilman Dr., La Jolla, CA 92093, USA 
 
 
Chin-Ming Lin 
Center of General Education 
Chang Jung Christian University 
1 Changda Rd., Gueiren, Tainan 711-01, Taiwan (R.O.C.) 
 
ABSTRACT 
Pedagogical research demonstrates theor ies and practices of 
perception or production of melodic or harmonic “intonation”, i.e. the 
realization of pitch accuracy. There are software and hardware to 
help students improve intonation. Those tools have various functions. 
Nevertheless, they still miss something which could benefit users 
very much. Even worse, they are not easy to be revised. Most 
importantly, there should be more amusing and engaging interaction 
between a tuning trainer and a user which is able to exchange roles of 
tuner and player. In this research, we implement an open-source 
program named “Harmonic Intonation Trainer” in Pure Data. It 
includes most of essential elements of a smart tuner. A user can 
tune his pitch while optionally hearing (through earphones) the 
target pitch and other harmonic intervals in respective octaves. 
Moreover, in its interactive accompanist mode, a user’s input 
pitch serves as the reference frequency; the program follows his 
intonation to generate corresponding harmonic intervals.  
Additionally, user can straightforwardly edit all parameters and 
patches by Pure Data. Any adoption or revision is absolutely 
welcome. Finally, we will initiate another research to test and 
to inspect experimental results from student orchestras so that 
its future version is expected to be more sophisticated. 
 
Author Keywords 
intonation, tuner, temperament, open-source 
1. INTRODUCTION 
1.1 Intonation 
Perception and production of intonation are very fundamental 
abilities to perform music in tune. Some instructors employ software 
or hardware to assist students. The most common one is a traditional 
tuner. Tuning is, however, merely the initial step. Rawlins claimed 
that “although most students tune their instrument at the beginning of 
each rehearsal, very few of them will adjust the intonation as they 
play.” [4] Students have to learn melodic and harmonic intonation 
through other courses. Scherber explained that “performing in-tune is 
an ongoing process and not merely a ritual to be performed at the 
outset of rehearsal.” [5] To support students become self-corrective, 
people have proposed and have experimented diverse methods, e.g. 
beat eliminations, vocalization, and singing intervals. [3] 
1.2 Training 
An instructor may assign separate training for a student to  
discriminate and to produce intonation better. Powell concluded 
that “no consistent relationship between the ability to hear and 
identify intonation problems (perception) and the ability to 
perform in-tune on a wind instrument.” [3] Also, Vurma found 
that “the musical interval perception ability of the singers is 
more finely honed for production than it is for perception.” [6] 
Furthermore, the changes of tuning system can bring distinct 
results because Karrick discovered that “deviation was greatest 
when compared to just tuning and least when compared to 
equal tempered tuning.” [1] 
1.3 Demand 
Research showed that instruction and student attributes are the 
most crucial aspects which affect wind-band’s intonation. [7] 
While instructors’ pedagogies may vary, students need more 
available and accessible to ols for self -training. Scherber 
summarized that “most directors described asking students to 
work with a tuner as they practiced in order t o increase 
sensitization to pitch discrepancies ... only 23% of directors 
indicated they required students to own a tuner, and a small 
subset of these indicated they owned classroom sets of tuners 
available to students for checkout.” [5] 
1.4 Comparison 
Companies have been promoting prominent products for both 
teaching and learning. First, Korg Cortosia is sufficient to 
monitor a player’s pitch stability and timbre. [8] Nonetheless, it 
addresses not much in terms of harmonic intonation. Second, 
Yamaha Harmony Director HD-200 provides customizable 
temperaments. [9] The physical keyboard makes users painless 
to play chord (inversions) in close or open position and to 
change each volume of individual pitch. It, however, lacks an 
elementary tuner to let users learn playing in tune through a 
visual feedback in addition to existing aural indications. Third, 
unlike HD -200, TonalEnergy’s [10] and Tunable’s [11] 
interfaces somewhat restrict the freedom of each chord pitch 
volume and octave. Even if they basically fulfill requirements 
of satisfactory smart tuners, they cannot build a precise chord 
upon a user’s playing pitch frequency. We suppose that the 
function could be very helpful to develop the user’s perception 
of harmonic intonation. 
1.5 Motivation 
All above three tools are neither open -source nor free. It 
decreases the accessibility and extendibility. Questionnaire 
results revealed that much fewer directors ask students to use 
software or apps for personal exercise outside class. [5] 
Therefore, we implement Harmonic Intonation Trainer, an 
open-source and easy -editing program. We will not only 
distribute this program but also deploy it in student orchestras 
for upcoming experiment. 
2. IMPLEMENTATION 
2.1 Design 
To keep this program open and effortless to alter, we choose to 
implement in authentic Pure Data (PD) without any external 
patch. It also enables us to quickly assemble the prototype so 
that we can faster conduct a pilot research to observe its effect. 
We design seven harmonic intervals with controls of octave and 
volume. Thus users can easily manipulate voicing position, 
chord inversion, and respective volumes. In pursuit of timbre 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on 
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME’15, May 31-June 3, 2015, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
38
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
richness, we include both simple oscillators and MIDI as sound 
sources. To realize microtones in MIDI, we employ “bendout” 
PD patches. Thereby, the MIDI has the capability to generate 
pitches outside twelve-tone equal temperament. Most important 
of all, users can activate an auxiliary oscillator for the purpose 
of listening to the last input (i.e. detected or selected) pitch. He 
can hear the beat, the interference between the input frequency 
and the target frequency, if they are slightly different. 
2.2 Roles 
We invent an operation which switches the role of this program 
between a tuner and an accompanist. In tuner mode, it works 
just like a smart tuner which allows a user to select the 
temperament and the reference frequency, listen to pitches in 
respective octaves, change each of their volumes, sing or play a 
pitch, and monitor the deviation. In interactive accompanist 
mode, the reference frequency always equals the user’s input 
pitch. Consequently, the program generates corresponding 
harmonic intervals. The user can experience and enjoy a perfect 
accompanist who has the best harmonic intonation. 
2.3 Interface 
The vertical radio buttons control and display each octave of 
harmonic intervals (see Figure 1). To change the window size of for 
pitch tracking in PD, we put another set of vertical radio buttons in 
the left-hand side of main screen. Thereupon, users can switch varied 
sizes according to the pitch he playing. 
 
Figure 1. Screenshot 
3. DICUSSION 
3.1 Application 
Harmonic Intonation Trainer (HIT) is a versatile program. First 
of all, a user can set the target pitch and simply use HIT as a 
basic tuner. With the intention of listening to the target pitch, he 
can turn on the volume. At the same time, he can activate the 
auxiliary oscillator on purpose to examine or to magnify the 
beat effect. Next, a user can turn on more or less harmonic 
intervals to constitute a chord (inversion) in open or close 
position. He can listen to the chord through earphones, mute the 
target pitch, and try to play it in-tune by himself. Last but not 
least, after switching to interactive accompanist mode, the 
user’s input pitch will also be the reference frequency, which 
commands HIT to follow his intonation to generate 
corresponding harmonic intervals. Those practices could 
facilitate the user’s both perception and production of harmonic 
intonation. 
3.2 Expansion 
Thanks to the innate convenience from PD, users can customize 
all parameters and adapt all patches with ease. Several sub-
patches are highly reusable, e.g. cent calculator and MIDI 
microtone; others are ready to expand or duplicate, e.g. more 
harmonic intervals and more target pitches. 
3.3 Limitation 
Even with an appr opriate window size, the pitch tracking 
sometimes retrieves an obviously wrong frequency. We create 
three ways to trigger the pitch detection: periodic, manual, and 
countdown. A singer should have no problem to use the manual 
one while an instrumentalist must rely on the periodic or the 
countdown. On the other hand, Kopiez outlined that 
“intonation ... is the result of an interaction among 
compositional features, the acoustics of the particular musical 
instrument, and deviation patterns in specific intervals.” [2] 
Although HIT may act as a tutor or an assistant, users should 
incorporate other knowledge and skills to pursue exceptional 
melodic and harmonic intonation proficiency. 
3.4 Expectation 
This program is an alternative but not a replacement for any 
other s pecific tool. We are going to  release and to keep 
updating the source code online. People are welcome to 
download, test, and modify it. We will be glad to see people 
adopt any approach from it and apply to other products as well. 
Besides, we plan to experiment on student symphonic or wind 
orchestras to measure its effectiveness. The results should be 
valuable to future improvement and research. 
3.5 Conclusion 
We reviewed literature on the training in intonation and 
compared current famous products. In answer to requests for a 
more accessible, versatile, and flexible tool, we implemented 
Harmonic Intonation Trainer, an open program in Pure Data.  It 
has numerous functions and a novel role beyond tuner. Our 
next step is to experiment on students and further revise it. 
4. REFERENCES 
[1] B. Karrick. An Examination of the intonation tendencies of 
wind instrumentalists based on their performance of selected 
harmonic musical intervals. Journal of Research in Music 
Education, 46, 1 (spring, 1998), 112-127. 
[2] R. Kopiez. Intonation of harmonic intervals: adaptability of 
expert musicians to equal temperament and just intonation. 
Music Perception: An Interdisciplinary Journal, 20, 4 (summer, 
2003), 383-410. 
[3] S. R. Powell. Wind instrument intonation: a research synthesis. 
Bulletin of the Council for Research in Music Education, 184 
(spring, 2010), 79-96. 
[4] R. Rawlins. Nuances of woodwind intonation and adjustments. 
Instrumentalist, 49, 7 (1995), 30-32. 
[5] R. V. Scherber. Pedagogical Practices Related to the Ability to 
Discern and Correct Intonation Errors. Ph.D. Dissertation, 
Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL, 2014. 
[6] A. Vurma. Mistuning in two-part singing. Logopedics 
Phoniatrics Vocology, 35, 1 (April, 2010), 24-33. 
[7] B. C. Wuttke. A Model Describing the Effects of Equipment, 
Instruction and Director and Student Attributes on Wind-Band 
Intonation. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Miami, Coral 
Gables, FL, 2011. 
[8] Cortosia: good sound tuner. Retrieved January 23, 2015, from 
Korg Incorporation: 
http://www.korg.com/us/products/software/cortosia/ 
[9] HD-200 harmony director. Retrieved January 23, 2015, from 
Yamaha Corporation: http://usa.yamaha.com/products/musical-
instruments/winds/harmony_director/harmony_director/ 
[10] TonalEnergy tuner. Retrieved January 23, 2015, from 
TonalEnergy: http://tonalenergy.com 
[11] Tunable: tuner, metronome, rec. Retrieved March 26, 2015, 
from Google Play: 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.affinityblue.t
unable 
39
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 