Using an Expressive Performance Template
in a Music Conducting Interface
Haruhiro Katayose
Kwansei Gakuin University
Gakuen, Sanda, 669-1337 JAPAN
http://ist.ksc.kwansei.ac.jp/~katayose/
Keita Okudaira
Kwansei Gakuin University
Gakuen, Sanda, 669-1337 JAPAN
keita@ksc.kwansei.ac.jp
ABSTRACT
This paper describes an approach for playing expressive
music, as it refers to a pianist's expressiveness, with a
tapping-style interface. MIDI-formatted expressive
performances played by pianists were first analyzed and
transformed into performance templates, in which the
deviations from a canonical description was separately
described for each event. Using one of the templates as a
skill complement, a player can play music expressively
over and under the beat level. This paper presents a
scheduler that allows a player to mix her/his own intension
and the expressiveness in the performance template. The
results of a forty-subject user study suggest that using the
expression template contributes the subject’s joy of playing
music with the tapping-style performance interface. This
result is also supported by a brain activation study that was
done using a near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS).
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.5.5 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: Sound and
Music Computing methodologies and techniques.
Keywords
Rencon, interfaces for musical expression, visualization
INTRODUCTION
Although it is fun to play a musical instrument, not a few
people have experienced embarrassment due to their lack of
skill in playing one. Sometimes this situation may be a
reason for quitting playing music and giving up a means of
self-expression. Interactive musical instruments are meant
to overcome this problem. They are expected to give users a
chance to express what they would like to express even if
they lack certain musical skills.
The score-follower based on beat tapping and proposed by
Mathews [1] is a simple, intuitive music interface to express
tempo and dynamics. It is intended especially for amateurs.
Mathews’ work has been followed by various conducting
systems [2,3,4].
If the note descriptions of the score given to the system are
nominal (quantized), the players’ expression would be
limited to the tempi and dynamics. We designed a score-
follower called iFP, which utilizes expression templates
derived from virtuosi performances. iFP enables the users
to enjoy the experience of playing music, as if he or she had
the hands of a virtuoso.
The next section outlines the design of iFP. We then
describe the procedures to obtain expression templates.
After introducing the user-interfaces, we discuss the
effectiveness of using the expressive performance template
as determined from a subjective evaluation and an
observation of the test subject’s brain activity.
SYSTEM OVERVIEW
In this section, we briefly describe the iFP design [5] and
Figure 1. Conceptual overview of performance calculation. The performance data are given by a mixture o f
the player’s intention and expressiveness described in the performance template. In this three dimensional
space, the vertical axis denotes the variance of deviations of all notes within the beat.
Templates of
Expressive data
Weighed
Expression
Tempo
Datum Point,
Without Expression
Delicate 
Control
within a 
BeatBeat
Dynamics
Datum Point,
Without Expression
+ User Gesture / Intention
Tempo
Beat
Dynamics
Delicate 
Control
within a 
Beat
=
User Gesture / Intention
Tempo
Beat
Dynamics
Delicate 
Control
within a 
Beat
Weighed
Expression
Datum Point,
Without Expression
Adopted
Expression Vector
some of its functions. We then illustrate how the expressive
performance template is utilized in iFP and describe its
principal functions.
Utilizing a Template
Beat tapping is an intuitive interface to input tempo and
dynamics to a performance system. However, the player
cannot express the delicate sub-beat nuance with only beat
tapping. The primary goal of utilizing the expressive
performance template is to fill in expressions at the sub-
beat level. The player’s intention and the expression model
described in the template are mixed as shown in Figure 1.
The player is allowed to vary the weight parameters
dynamically by using sliders, each of which is multiplied
with the deviation of tempo, dynamics, and delicate nuance
within a beat.  If all of these weight parameters are set to
0%, the expression of the template has no effect. On the
other hand, if it is set to 120%, for example, the player can
emphasize the deviations of the template.
iFP also provides a morphing function to interpolate
(extrapolate) two different expressive performance
templates of a musical piece.
Outline of Scheduling
Schedulers of interactive music systems have to calculate
the timing of notes dynamically. iFP adopts a predictive
scheduler, which arranges notes from the current beat to the
next beat by using the history of the player's tap. One of the
important points of using a predictive scheduler is that tap
(beat) detection and scheduling of notes should be
independent. This yields the merits of 1) compensation of
the delay when using a MIDI-driven robotic acoustic
instrument, and 2) easy implementation of the automatic
performance mode (sequencer of the performance template).
A predictive scheduler might produce undesired gaps
between the predicted beat timing and the actual players'
tap. Especially if the gap is a delay, it may be perceived as
spoiling the performance. We prepared two
countermeasures to improve the response; one is a function
to urge the system when player's tap precedes the scheduled
time, and the other is for receiving double taps for the given
tactus (see the Expressive Performance Template section).
Functions
The features described above and the other characteristic
functions are summarized as follows:
 Utilization of expressive performance template
 Real-time control of weight parameters regarding
expressions
 Morphing of two different performance templates
 Predictive scheduling which allows the player to tap
an arbitrary beat
 Pauses (breath) inserted based on release timing
 Real-time visualization (feedback) of expressiveness.
 Gestural input using a conducting sensor, a MIDI
keyboard and a computer keyboard.
EXPRESSIVE PERFORMANCE TEMPLATE
Format
Figure 2 shows a part of a performance template. The left
row represents the start timing of the events. Information
about each note, except for the start timing, is placed in
brackets. Each bracketed term, in order, represents, the
deviation regarding the start time, note name, velocity,
duration, and the deviation of duration, respectively. In this
format, the tempo is described using the descriptor BPM.
The description is followed by the tempo (in bpm beat per
minuets) and the beat name to which the tempo is given.
iFP’s predictive scheduler continues the performance, even
if the performer does stop tapping. The player does not
have to tap every beat. However, there often is the case that
the players wish to tap to each note, instead of the beat. We
introduced a descriptor TACTUS to explicitly describe how
many taps are received for the beat. The following
bracketed expression is an example of a TACTUS
description. (1.00 TACTUS 2 4)  This example means that
after time 1.00, two taps are received for quarter notes; in
other words, the system receives a tap every eighth note,
after time 1.00.
Preparing Expressive Performance Templates
This section describes the procedure to make performance
templates. The first step is to identify the canonical time
value of each played note of the given expressive
performance. It is not easy to obtain quantized notation,
because local tempi varies more than twice from the
average tempo. Manual quantization is extremely
troublesome. One possible approach is to use an automatic
.....
2.00   BPM  126.2  4
2.00  (0.00  E3  78  3.00  -0.11)
=2
1.00   TACTUS 2 4
1.00   BPM  128.1  4
1.00  (0.00  C#4  76  0.75  -0.09)  (0.04  E1  60  1.00  -0.13)
1.75  (0.10  D4  77  0.25  -0.14)
2.00   BPM  130.0  4
2.00  (0.00  B3  75  1.00  -0.03)  (0.00  G#3  56  1.00  0.03)
3.00   BPM  127.7
3.00  (0.00  B3  72  1.00  0.00)  (0.09  G#3  56  1.00  -0.12)  (0.14  D3  57  1.00  -0.21)
=3
1.00   TACTUS  1  4
1.00   BPM  127.6  4
1.00  (0.00  B3  77  2.00  -0.05)  (0.00  G#3  47  2.00  -0.05)  (-0.06  D4  57  2.00  -0.32)
3.00   BPM  129.7  4
3.00  (0.00  F#4  75  1.00  -0.15)  (0.00  D4   54  1.00  0.03)
=4
1.00   BPM  127.7  4
1.00  (0.00  D#4  73  0.75  -0.38)  (0.02  C4  65  0.75  -0.08)
....
Figure 2. Description of performance template.
matching procedure that matches the notes in the
performance with those in the score. However, the input of
score data is itself time-consuming. Therefore, we designed
a tool which identifies the notes in the performance given
only a sparse score and then assigns a canonical notation
value and deviation to all of the notes (see Figure 3) [6].
The DP matching procedure is utilized for the 1st step and a
Hidden Markov Model (HMM) is used for assigning the 2 nd
time value to the notes. This tool enables us to prepare
error-free expressive performance templates by giving only
10% of the notes as guides. At present, we have made over
100 expressive performance templates.
SCHEDULER
In this section, we describe the scheduler that realizes a
mixture of the player’s intention and expressiveness
described in the performance template.
Calculation of Tempo
The tempo is calculated using 1) the average tempo
obtained from the recent history (tactus-count: ) of the
tempo, 2) the tempo to which the player's veer is considered,
using the differential of the two most recent tapping, and 3)
the prescribed tempo in the performance template [TempoT].
Let stdTEMPO denote the overall average tempo of the
template, and wH, wP, and wT denote the weights for 1), 2)
and 3) respectively. The tempo after nth tactus, BPMn is
calculated as:
BPMn = wT  TempoT stdTempo() + wH
1
 BPMk stdTempo
k= n
n1

 
 
 
 
 
 
	 

 
 
 
 
 
 1
wT + wH
 BPMn1
BPMn2
 
  
 
  
wP
Figure 4 shows an example of tempo calculation. If the
player sets wT to a bigger value, more template data will be
imported, and the player can feel like conducting a pianist.
Setting wP to a bigger value quickens the response. By
setting wH to a bigger value, the tempo of the music will be
stable, affected by the recent average tempo. The user can
set the parameters as s/he likes.
Improvement of Response
The problem with using predictive control is the possibility
of undesired gaps between the predicted beat time and the
actual user input. We introduced the following function in
order to fill the gap, when a player's tap for the next beat is
prior to the scheduled (predicted) timing.
Figure 5 shows the scheduling status in a tempo map. In
this figure, the horizontal axis is the actual time, and the
vertical axis is the tactus. The line drawn at a gradient in the
map stands for tempo. Here, the adjustment level is a
parameter that stands for how much the scheduler has to
shrink the gap between the scheduled (predicted) time and
the player's real tap, that is, to re-schedule the system beat
time, when the player's tap is detected prior to the
scheduled time. The adjustment ratio stands for the weight
to fix the current beat time, between the player's tap and the
scheduler beat time in order that the system can predict the
next beat time.
Figure 5. Adjustment ratio and level in a tempo map.
Figure 4. Calculation of tempo
Figure 3. Acquisition of expressive performance template
based on D.P. and HMM.
Guide DataPerformance Data
D.P. matching
Quantization of notes between
guided notes using HMM
Guide
Performance
0.000 (m4 F4 1.000)
4.000 (m4 G4 3.000)
8.000 (m4 C4 2.000)
12.000 (m4 C#5 0.500)
 ýýĠĠ
8.462 Damper 127
9.000 (-0.122 m4 C3 50 0.250 -0.028) 
9.500 (-0.096 m4 F3 54 0.500 +0.110) 
9.750 (+0.061 m4 A3 59 0.500 -0.075) 
  ĠĠ
Expressive Performance Template
smf

Let denote the beat_posfix the current beat time to be set,
and beat_posscheduler and beat_postap denote the scheduled
beat time and the time the player taps for the beat,
respectively. If the player's tap is detected prior to the
scheduled time and the adjustment level is set to 100%, the
system instantaneously issues events that correspond to the
note on the beat, before the scheduled time. Then,
     beat_posfix (= beat_posscheduler) = beat_ postap
If the scheduler beat time and the player’s tap timing are
different,
     beat_posfix = AL /100 · beat_postap +
                               (100 – AL) /100 · beat_posscheduler
where, AL is the adjustment level.
Calculation of Note Event Timing
The timing of each note event (note-on, note-off) is
calculated using IOIn given by the inverse of BPMn (see the
Calculation of Tempo section), as follows,
 Timeeach_issue = IOIn · (posT_each_note + devT_each_note · wT_dev)
where, Timeeach_issue [s] is the time after the identified
current beat, poseach_note is the scheduled time of the note
without deviation, devT_each_note is the value of the deviation
term of the note, and the wT_dev is the weighting factor for
the template. When wT_dev = 0 is given, the temporal
deviation under beat level will be mechanical.
Calculation of Velocity (Note Intensity)
The notes are classified into the control notes (note on the
beat) and the remainder. First, the system decides the beat
velocity Vbeat for the beat. It is calculated, considering how
loud/quiet the player and the machine (performance
template) intend to play the note of the beat.
where, Vstd is the standard (average) velocity of the all notes
of the template, VT is the average of the note-on velocity
within the beat, VU is the velocity that the player gives, and
wT_v and wU_v are  the weights for VT and VU, respectively.
When wT_v
 and
 wU_v are 0, the intensity deviation under beat
level will be mechanical.
The velocity of the each note Veach_issue is calculated as:
     Veach_issue =
 Vbeat ·
(1 +
 VT_each_dev
 +
VU_dev)
where, VT_each_dev
 stands for  deviation in the template, and
VU_dev stands for the player's intensity veer.
    VT_each_dev
 =
(VT_each_note – VT) / VT ·
 wT_dev
    VU_dev =
 (VUcurrent
 –
 VUprior) / VUprior ·
(posT_each_note + devT_each_note
 ·
wT_dev) ·
wUd_v
where, VT_each_note is each note-on velocity within the beat,
and VUn
 denotes the velocity given by the n th player’s tap
and wUd_v denotes the weight for the player's intensity veer.
USER INTERFACE
GUI and Gestural Interface
Figure 6 shows the standard GUI to characterize the
performance. The users are given sliders so they can set the
weight parameters regarding tempo (template/user),
dynamics (velocity: template/user), and deviation (delicate
control within a beat: template). Figure 7 shows the GUI for
morphing two performance templates. The player can
interpolate and extrapolate the performance using each of
the morphing parameters. The player is also allowed to use
peripherals of MIDI instruments instead of the software
sliders. If the radio button “keying” is selected, the system
accepts the player's beat tap.  If “auto” is selected, the
Figure 6. Standard GUI for setting parameters.
Figure 7. GUI for morphing.
Figure 8. With a conducting gestural interface using
capacity transducers.
system does not accept the beat tap. The expressive
performance template is played without the control of the
player’s beat tap (automatic mode).
The gestural conducting sensor is based on capacity
transducers (see Figure 8). We used hardware of
DegitalTheremin manufactured by Yume-system
(http://www.moosys.co.jp/), for the prototype. The beat
signal is issued when the hand is located at the lowest
position. The range of hand movement is assigned to the
dynamics for the next beat. When the hand is lower than a
certain threshold, the system holds the performance, i.e.
gives a rest.
Visualization
iFP provides real-time visualization of the performance
trajectory in three-dimensional space, as shown in Figure 9.
The axes are the tempo, the dynamics, and the summed
variance of the expression deviation within a beat. The user
can observe the trajectory from various viewpoints.
If the player uses iFP with automatic (sequencer) mode, this
visualization function should be the view of the
expressiveness of the performance template.
 EVALUATION
We conducted two experiments to verify the effectiveness
of using expressive performance templates. One was an
evaluation regarding the players' introspection, and the
other was a brain activity measurement using near-infrared
spectroscopy (NIRS).
Introspection Evaluation
We focused on “ controllable” and “ expressive” aspects for
the introspection study. “ Controllable” stood for difficulty
in playing music. " Expressive" stood for how well the
player could express the music. For the experiment, we
used a conducting interface and an expressive template for
“When You Wish Upon A Star” for piano. The system
parameters for this experiment were those of a music
teacher who is also a conductor so that the performance
taste would be close to conducting, as shown in Figure 6.
We interviewed forty subjects, whose music experience was
0~33 years. We asked them “Which performance (with /
without the performance template) is more "controllable" or
more " expressive"? We limited the time to practice to 10
minutes in this experiment. The results are shown in Table
1.
Table 1. Introspection Regarding Expression Template Use:
The value in each column is the number of subjects who
preferred the condition.
Controllable
 Better: with
Template
Better: without
Template
sum
Better: with
template 13 15 28
Expressive Better: without
Template 01 2 1 2
sum 13 27 40
We investigated the response of the 27 subjects who
answered, “controllability is better without template”, by
changing the parameters affecting controllability. All of the
subjects answered that the controllability was improved
when the parameters of both adjustment level and ratio
were 100%. This meant dis-coincidence of the player’s taps
and heard beats makes the performance difficult. However,
some of the experienced subjects commented that this dis-
coincidence was indispensable to gain expressiveness.
Next, we investigated learning effects, for five of the 15
people who answered “expressive performance template
contributes to expressiveness, but it does not contribute to
controllability”. Four people among five subjects changed
their opinion to “prefer to use a template also for
controllability” after learning.
These results seem to indicate that the expressive
performance template contributes to both expressiveness
and controllability, after one has learned how to play the
music using iFP.
Evaluation using NIRS
Physiological measurements are good for verifying
subjective introspection results. Brain activity is a most
promising measure for what a subject is thinking and
feeling. Recently, a relatively new technique, near-infrared
spectroscopy (NIRS), has been used to measure changes in
cerebral oxygenation in human subjects [7]. Changes in
oxyhemoglobin (HbO) and deoxyhemoglobin (Hb) detected
by NIRS reflect changes in neurophysiological activity, and
as a result, may be used as an index of brain activity. It is
reported that the brain in the Fz area is deactivated (HbO
decrease), when a subject is relaxed, in meditation, or in
immersion in playing games. We measured brain activities
around the Fz area when the subjects played with the iFP,
or did other musical tasks (control tasks).
Figure 9. Example of visualization of a performance.
K.331 played by S. Bunin.
Figure 10 shows the results of some of these experiments.
These are data of a subject, who answered, “The expressive
performance template contributes to both expressiveness
and controllability.” The subject is educated in music, and
received her Master of Music degree from a music
university. Figure 10.a) is a comparison of using and not
using the expressive performance template. We can see the
decrease of HbO, when the subject played with iFP using
the expressive performance template. The right data of
Figure 10.a) were obtained by chance. It is interesting to see
the response of the subject when something unexpected
happened. Figure 10.b) is a comparison with other music
activities. HbO was lower when the subject listened to the
music carefully imagining that the subject was playing the
piano, and played with the iFP. The decrease was more
salient at with the iFP. These results correspond to the
reports of the subjects’ introspection regarding pleasantness
very well. Although the interpretation of deactivation at Fz
itself is still controversial [8], we may say that introspection
of using iFP is supported by the NIRS observation of brain
activity.
CONCLUSION
This paper introduced a performance interface called iFP
for playing expressive music with a conducting interface.
MIDI-formatted expressive performances played by
pianists were analyzed and transformed into performance
templates, in which the deviations from the printed notation
values are separately described. Using the template as a
skill-complement, a player can play music expressively
over and under beat level. The scheduler of iFP allows the
player to mix her/his own intension and the expressiveness
in the performance template. The results of a forty subject
user study suggested that using the expression template
contributes to a player’s joy of expressing music. This
conclusion is also supported by the results of brain activity
measurements.
We are just beginning our experiments using NIRS. We
would like to trace the changes of the subjects' introspection
and brain activity, as they learn to play with the iFP. We are
also interested in investigating interactions between brain
regions when the subjects are playing music.
Another important task is to provide more data to be used in
iFP. So far, a tool to produce a performance template from
MIDI-formatted data has been completed. We would like to
improve the tool, so it can convert acoustic music into the
expressive performance template.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors would like to thank Mr. Kenzi Noike, Ms.
Mitsuyo Hashida, and Mr. Ken’ichi Toyoda for their
contributions to the study. Prof. Hiroshi Hoshina and Mr.
Yoshihiro Takeuchi made valuable comments, and they
were very helpful. This research was supported by
PRESTO, JST, JAPAN.
REFERENCES
1. Mathews, M. The Conductor Program and Mechanical
Baton, Proc. Intl. Computer Music Conf., (1989) 58-70.
2. Nakra, T. M. Synthesizing Expressive Music Through
the Language of Conducting. J. of New Music Research,
31, 1,(2002), 11-26.
3. Morita, H., Hashimoto, S. and Ohteru, S. A Computer
Music System that Follows a Human Conductor. IEEE
Computer, (1991), 44-53.
4. Usa, S. and Mochida, Y. A Multi-modal Conducting
Simulator,” Proc. Int. Computer Music Conf . (1998),
pp.25-32.
5. Katayose, H., Okudaira, K.  sfp/punin: Performance
Rendering Interfaces using Expression Model, Proc.
IJCAI03-workshop, Methods for Automatic Music
Performance and their Applications in a Public
Rendering Contest, (2003), 11-16.
6. Toyoda, K., Katayose, H., Noike, K. Utility System for
Constructing Database of Performance Deviation,
SIGMUS-51, IPSJ, (2003 in Japanese) 65-70.
7. Eda, H., Oda, I., Ito, Y. et al. Multi-channel time-
resolved optical tomographic imaging system. Rev. Sci.
Instum. 70, (1999) 3595-3602.
8. Matsuda., G., and Hiraki, K. Frontal deactivation in
video game players, Proc. Conf. of Intl. Simulation And
Gaming Assoc.(ISAGA), 110 (2003).
Figure 10. Brain activity measured with NIRS. Measured during listening and playing “When You Wish Upon A
Star” using iFP. Arrows shows the duration of the performance. A single emitting source fiber was positioned at Fz.
The red line shows the sum of Oxi-Hb.
Without Expression
 Template
With Expression Template
Sensor ErrorWith Expression Template
tasktasktask
3min. 3min. 3min.0min. 0min. 0min.
listen listen carefully playing iFP
  just shaking a hand 
without playing iFP
3min.0min.
task
0 2 min.
task
0 2 min.
task
0 2 min.
task
a) using expression template b) for other conditions