Y ouHero - Making an Expressive Concert Instrument from
t
he GuitarHero Controller
Palle Dahlstedt
Dept. of Applied IT
Univ. of Gothenburg, Sweden
palle.dahlstedt@gu.se
Patrik Karlsson &
Katarina Widell
Duo EN.D.E
info@patrikkarlsson.se
T ony Blomdahl
Geiger Musik
tony.blomdahl@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
The idea behind the YouHero was two-fold: First, to make
an expressive instrument out of the computer game toy gui-
tar controller from the famous game GuitarHero. With its
limited amount of control parameters, this was a challenge.
Second, we wanted to provide an alternative to the view
that you become a hero by perfect imitation of your idols.
Instead, play yourself. You are the hero. In this paper, we
describe the design of the instrument, including its novel
mapping approach based on switched timbre vectors scaled
by accelerometer data, unconventional sound engines and
the sound and mapping editing features, including manual
editing of individual vectors. The instrument is evaluated
through its practical applications during the whole project,
with workshops with teenagers, a set of state-funded com-
missions from professional composers, and the development
of considerable skill by the key performers.
Keywords
gestural interface, guitar hero, mapping, synthesis, music
pedagogy, performance, improvisation
1. INTRODUCTION
The YouHero project was initiated in 2009 by Patrik Karls-
son and Martin Q Larsson, inspired by the electronic instru-
ments developed by Palle Dahlstedt, and by his ideas about
electronic improvisation. The goal was to make a concert
instrument based on the Guitar Hero controller, expressive
enough to be used as a concert instrument, but also easy
enough to learn, so that it can be played and written for by
school children in workshops. In the Guitar Hero computer
game, you are trained in imitating your idols. Instead, we
wanted to inspire users to really play music. Hence the
name of the project – you are the hero. The project has
included a series of workshops with school kids, but also
several concerts at contemporary music festivals.
1.1 System overview
The YouHero instrument consists of four main parts: the
physical controller, a mapping engine, a pitch engine, and
a couple of sound engines (see Fig. 1). It uses an Xbox
360 GuitarHero controller, providing a set of performance
controls (neck switches, plectrum switch, whammy bar, ac-
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME'14, June 30 – July 03, 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Figure 1: An overview of the YouHero instrument,
c
onsisting of a standard GuitarHero controller and
custom software.
celerometers) and meta controls (octave select, timbre push
and pop, preset selection). Through USB, it communi-
cates with a laptop running custom software, implemented
in Max, Java and Synth-Maker (now FlowStone), all con-
tained in a Max wrapper handling control data parsing, data
ﬂow, user interaction (dialog boxes) and sound streams.
The mapping engine is implemented in a Java object in-
side Max, and the sound engines are implemented in Syn-
thMaker, compiled into VSTi plugins, hosted by Max. The
whole package was compiled into a runtime application.
In this paper we concentrate on the technical and design
aspects and implementations, and some preliminary discus-
sion about the pedagogical ideas behind the instrument and
the musical results.
1.2 Previous work
There are some previous attempts at using the Guitar Hero
controller as an instrument for conventional rock, e.g., the
Guitar Zeros band [1], using an approach quite similar to
ours, but with less focus on expressivity and novelty. It has
also been used as controller in a system for music therapy,
using custom sound and playback engines [5], providing sim-
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
403
pliﬁed interaction for disabled players. A related project
u
ses the internals of the Guitar Hero as a platform for a
game controller based on muscular signals, for amputees[7].
In contrast to these projects, our goal was to make an
expressive, experimental concert instrument to be played
by both kids and professional musicians. By expressive, we
mean nuanced control of dynamics and timbre, and access
to a wide variety of timbres.
2. IMPLEMENT ATION
The software is developed in Max (general framework, in/out
handling), SynthMaker (sound engines) and Java (mapping
computation).
2.1 Interface and mapping
The game guitar controller, connected through USB to a
Windows Laptop, has ﬁve switches on the guitar neck, and
a plectrum switch in the middle, a two-axis accelerometer
and a whammy bar (bend arm). Control data is accessed
through the Max hi object. The ﬁve colored neck switches
are used for pitch control, while the plectrum switch trig-
gers notes. The three continuous sensors are essential for
expressive playing. The whammy bar is used for pitch bend,
while one accelerometer dimension is used to detect tilt, i.e.,
how much the neck is raised. This feature is used as a pri-
mary control parameter, scaling dynamics and timbre vec-
tors, which ﬁts the look and feel of the instruments – this is
indeed an archetypical rock gesture. The second accelerom-
eter dimension indicates tilt along the central axis of the
guitar. This was used for minute modulation of synthesis
parameters, giving life to the sound. For example, it can be
used to produce a vibrato or tremolo by shaking the gui-
tar up and down. The accelerometer mappings encourage
interesting theatrical performance qualities.
Each neck switch activates a vector in synthesis param-
eter space, and several switches can be pressed at once.
Active vectors are scaled by the tilt angle of the guitar and
summed, to calculate the current synthesis parameter set.
If an interesting sound is found, the whole vector mecha-
nism can be transposed to the current position, altering the
characteristics of the instrument. These transpositions are
pushed to a stack and can be popped or reset to the original
origin at any time, using buttons on the guitar controller.
This vector mapping is a novel and somewhat diﬀerent
implementation of a previously developed algorithm [3]. It
was a challenge to implement it for a more limited control
interface, where most of the playing is done with a small
set of switches. The tilt mapping to scale amplitude and
vector length simultaneously turned out to be a good solu-
tion, providing enough control and expressivity for normal
playing. In the other instruments based on this vector map-
ping approach, the vectors have been randomized at design
time. However, in this instrument they can be either ran-
domized or hand-tuned by ear. This is possible since there
are not so many degrees of freedom, and the number of vec-
tor components (8) is manageable. The software provides
an interactive vector editor where random vectors can be
tested, or speciﬁc values for the vector components can be
entered with the mouse (Fig. 2).
2.2 Sound Engines
There are two diﬀerent sound engines, called Sheperd and
Karplus, each with a set of synthesis parameters, modulated
by the output of the vector mapping engine. The Sheperd
sound engine is based on intermodulating FM synthesis,
with some unusual features. Since harmonic FM synthesis
is dependent on integer frequency ratios between oscillators,
a particular system was used to ensure smooth transitions
between diﬀerent integer ratios. It has two oscillators, each
modulating the other, providing potential for chaotic re-
sults, depending on modulation strengths [2]. Each oscil-
lator consists of a bank of sub-oscillators tuned in octaves
(2nf , n= 1 ,2...) in one case, the harmonic series ( nf) in
the other. As the pitch is modulated by values from the
mapping engine, the sub-oscillator bank is scanned (with
cross-fade). The fundamental pitch does not rise, but in-
stead the oscillator smoothly enters a higher register. In
this way, there is always an integer ratio between the actual
output of the two oscillators. There is still potential for
noise and complex sounds, depending on the FM strengths.
The range of those can be set globally, and stored in a sound
preset, allowing for some control of the complexity or harsh-
ness of the sound.
The Karplus sound engine is based on Karplus-Strong
string models and emulated room feedback, essentially emu-
lating a guitar, the amp and the room around it at the same
time. Because of the nonlinear feedback paths, including a
reverb model to emulate the room, pitch is sometimes dif-
ﬁcult to control, just like a real guitar played with speaker
cabinet feedback. Essentially, it eliminates the loud process
of feedback from guitar ampliﬁer through the guitar micro-
phones while keeping the sonic results and the nonlinear
pitches that result from it.
2.3 Pitch engine
Pitch is controlled through an additive system, where each
neck switch corresponds to an interval of 1, 2, 4, 7 and
12 semitones. Simultaneously pressed switches add up, and
the component intervals were chosen based on a decomposi-
tion of common diatonic scales and harmony (minor second,
major second, major third, ﬁfth and the octave). An inter-
val set based on 2n semitones would allow for more variety,
but would make less sense musically, and common intervals
would be diﬃcult to play. Similar pitch mappings have been
used in other electronic instruments [3].
The sum interval is added to a base note, which can be
set diﬀerently for each preset, and the range controlled with
octave selectors on the controller.
Playing the neck switches aﬀects both pitch and timbre,
which might be perceived as a limitation. However, this is
how acoustic instruments work [4], where diﬀerent parame-
ters are coupled to each other. E.g., each note of a clarinet
has a diﬀerent timbre, because of changing ratios between
the pitch and the ﬁxed shape of the instruments causing
formant-like ﬁltering, etc.. For most notes, there are sev-
eral neck switch combinations to produce them, so it is in
theory possible to even make a timbre trill.
With the choice of sound engine, a number of sound pa-
rameters available for tweaking, and the ability to hand-
tune the vectors, a wide range of sounds and sonic behav-
iors can be produced. To take advantage of this, the user
can store ten presets, to be recalled during a performance.
In the preset, all parameters visible in the main dialog and
in the vector editing dialog are included.
3. PERFORMANCES AND WORKSHOPS
Four works were commissioned for the YouHero instrument,
funded by the Swedish Arts Council through a series of
commission grants. These compositions ranged from game
pieces (see Fig. 3 for a score fragment) to noise quartets1,
where loudness and stage appearance was in focus, rather
than the details of the musical structure. One composer
(Lisa Ull´ en) made very intimate duets for recorder and
1h ttp://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_gydrs6hs9o
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
404
Figure 2: A screenshot of the YouHero software
u
ser interface. To the left is the main dialog box,
with VU meter, general sound controls, and access
to various settings. It also contains some sound pa-
rameters, as well as sound preset management. To
the right is the vector editor dialog box, where the
user can hand-tune the underlying vectors of the
mapping engine.
YouHero guitar. Finally, one composer (Lars Br ¨ondum)
composed really detailed written scores and provided cus-
tom presets. He also made a series of requests to the soft-
ware designer (PD), to make his ideas possible to realize.
This relates to the conclusions by McPherson and Kim [6]
regarding the issue of creating a community around a new
instrument. In their case study, there were several requests
for a relaxation of constraints, to accommodate the wishes
of the composers. This is probably a natural part of the
evolution of musical instruments, and the interplay between
musician and instrument maker.
The commissioned pieces were performed in a series of
concerts around Sweden, together with group improvisa-
tions on the instruments. One other contemporary compo-
sition, originally composed for a guitar and recorder duo
was transcribed to be performed on the YouHero guitar,
and proved very successful in this new arrangement2.
We also gave a number of workshops for schoolchildren
aged 12-17 around Sweden, centered around the YouHero
instrument and contemporary music composition and per-
formance (Fig. 4). In the workshops, the YouHero guitar
was used like a normal instrument. The kids got a short
introduction to the instrument, and could then play freely.
Some searched for sounds similar to an electric guitar, while
others started composing their own tunes. We used the in-
strument as an ice-breaker, to get to know them, and to
start to talk about how music is made and how it can sound.
Many kids have a very strong opinion about what is music
and what is not music. They were deﬁnitely not without
prejudice, probably because they had been taught conser-
vative or conventional attitudes about music in school. In
the concerts following the workshops, there were never any
ﬁghts over who would play the YouHero guitar. When the
novelty faded, it was regarded as any other instrument.
4. DISCUSSION
The YouHero sound engines are not really made for conven-
tional tonal playing, even if this is possible. Instead, they
provide exploration of complex sound spaces, thanks to the
dynamic mapping algorithm and the simple but expressive
control. Gesturally, it is possible to have minute, intimate
2h ttp://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fw2I6fnXgXQ
Figure 4: Teenagers performing on the YouHero
g
uitar during school workshops.
control of pitch, timbre and dynamics, as well as to let go
and play wild explorations. This approach is quite diﬀer-
ent from how most instruments work, and may take some
time getting used to. The musicians that participated in
the project were accustomed to contemporary music, but
had never before encountered an instrument like this.
When evaluating an instrument, it is important to spend
a lot of time acquiring skill, and to play it in many diﬀer-
ent contexts. Only then can you judge how well it works in
practice, in contrast to short lab experiments, which rarely
tells you something useful. To get a better picture of how
the instrument works in practice, one of the main perform-
ers (Patrik Karlsson, professional guitarist and lutenist) was
asked about how he felt about the instrument, after using it
regularly over a couple of years in concerts and workshops.
Here, we summarize his answers.
Q: How do you think the two sound engines have worked,
performance-wise and timbre-wise? Any comments regard-
ing timberal ﬂexibility?
A: They are diﬀerent, of course, and have diﬀerent condi-
tions for use. You can always just reset all parameters and
use your own eﬀect boxes, and then you just get a normal
distorted electric guitar sounds. As with all instruments,
you sometimes wish for diﬀerent sounds than what can be
produced. They are not enormously ﬂexible as they are.
Q: How did the instrument turn out compared to your
initial expectations?
A: I had no idea about timbre before we started testing it.
I am very much a classical musician, so I work with what I
have in front of me. But before I started to tweak the sounds
and the vectors, I thought it was to unreliable. Version 2
was better, with the introduction of presets.
Q: How did the commissioned composers relate to the
possibilities of the instrument, from your perspective as a
musician?
A: Only composer A really notated exact pitches and sound
instructions. Maybe composer B and C practiced on the in-
strument, but it is not visible in the compositions. The work
of composer D is the same, (s)he did not really learn how the
instrument works. The music doesn’t become worse when
they do not know the instrument, but it is more challenging
to play, technically, when they do. In the other works, the
composer hands over a large part of the responsibility to ﬁnd
new sounds and expressions to the musicians. But we are
accustomed to that...
Q: How did you use the vector editor? Was it useful or
necessary, or would a randomization function be enough?
A: To be able to control the vectors is what makes the
instrument meaningful to me. It is there I can express my
personality, like my own tone when playing the lute, the
guitar or any other instrument. The random function I re-
gard more as something for those who do not know how it
works, or those who do not care to practice. The vector ed-
itor works well, and I can produce sounds that I am happy
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
405
Figure 3: An excerpt from the commissioned composition S hort Term Memory by Palle Dahlstedt. This
piece uses instructions about how to interact between the players, in a kind of game piece form. Video
example: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bvIuDEhq-5A.
with, save them and bring them out before each work. It
also contributes to the virtuosity of the performance when
you change sound and quickly create diﬀerent moods.
Four essential properties of a musical instrument are: playa-
bility, repeatability/learnability, timberal control, and id-
iomatic playing techniques. Playability is related to vari-
ability, and there is clearly a wide range of possibilities with
this instrument. Some can only be achieved using presets
and on-the-ﬂy switching, but quite complex music can also
be produced with the real-time controls only. The dynamic
mapping, with the origin shift mechanism which is part
of the performance controls, provides means for extensive
variation during a performance or during an improvisation.
Still, volume is tightly coupled to timbre parameter scal-
ing, somewhat limiting the expressive playing. Since there
is no randomness involved in the performance, any playing
pattern can be repeated, as long as all parameters are the
same. However, the Karplus sound engine has some internal
feedback paths which sometimes makes it behave in chaotic
ways. As evident from the musicians involved in the project,
it is possible to acquire considerable skill on the instrument.
Both traditional virtuosity regarding pitch, dynamics and
timing control, but also regarding navigation of the timbre
space using the dynamic mapping and the more intricate
process of direct vector design, essentially customizing the
behavior of the whole instrument. The learning threshold
is quite low, because it is easy to make cool sounds from
the start. Still, there is a learning curve to attain virtuos-
ity. This is not unlike the learning curve of a normal guitar,
even though the YouHero instrument of course is much sim-
pler.
Finally, the implementation details of any instrument gives
rise to a set of playing techniques, things that are easy or in-
teresting to play, or rewarding or challenging to learn. Some
performance techniques that have emerged are:
• timbre vibrato by shaking the guitar body in speciﬁc
angles
• quick alternations between sound presets
• pushing the Karplus engine into feedback and explore
the highly nonlinear space of sounds there
• using the Sheperd engine with low FM strength to
perform more strictly tonal material
• using the relative intervals of the neck switches to
make quick tremoli on those intervals
• explore legato playing, holding the plectrum while chang-
ing pitch and timbre with the neck switches
• raising the guitar neck as a means to scale the timbre
vectors, at the same time doing a theatrical gesture
with rock connotations – but this can also be turned
upside down, by doing the neck raise with a stone-face
expression, in contrast to the clich´ e
4.1 Future work and conclusions
Future possibilities include an integrated sequencer system
based on the GuitarHero game tablature, with both record-
ing and playback, as well as oﬀ-line composition modes.
Further sound engines would also be desirable, and should
not be too diﬃcult, since the mapping engine is generic and
can be applied to any parameter set. A dream scenario
would be to implement the instrument in a a game console
version, but this seems unlikely, given that the GuitarHero
game has fallen out of fashion, at least for the moment.
To conclude, we successfully developed a concert instru-
ment from a computer game guitar controller, which in spite
of its simplicity allows for a wide range of playing techniques
and sophisticated timberal control. It is not so suitable
for traditional music, but lends itself well to improvisation
and experimental explorations. Some experimental features
turned out to be essential for professional use, such as the
vector editor, while the sound engines were perceived as dif-
ﬁcult by some. The initial learning threshold is low, but it
is still possible to build up considerable skill on the instru-
ment. It has been used in a number of school workshops
to inspire kids to create experimental music, as well as a
concert instrument for a series of commissioned composi-
tions from professional composers. We did attain our goals,
learned a lot on the way. And we had fun doing it.
5. REFERENCES
[1] C. Cunningham. The guitar zeros @ maker faire. Make:
online. http://makezine.com/2008/04/01/the-guitar-
zeros-maker-fa/.
[2] P. Dahlstedt. Sounds Unheard of: Evolutionary
algorithms as creative tools for the contemporary
composer. PhD thesis, Chalmers University of
Technology, 2004.
[3] P. Dahlstedt. Dynamic mapping strategies for
expressive synthesis performance and improvisation. In
LNCS 5493, pages 227–242, 2009.
[4] C. Goudeseune. Interpolated mappings for musical
instruments. Organised Sound , 7(2):85–96, 2002.
[5] M. Luhtala, T. Kym ¨al¨ainen, and J. Plomp. Designing a
music performance space for persons with intellectual
learning disabilities. In NIME, 2011.
[6] A. McPherson and Y. Kim. The problem of the second
performer: building a community around an
augmented piano.Computer Music Journal , 36 (4),
2012.
[7] C. Reiley. Air guitar hero. Make, 29:44–51, 2012.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
406