The Accordiatron: A MIDI Controller For Interactive Music
Michael Gurevich
Center for Computer Research in Music and
Acoustics
Department of Music, Stanford University
Stanford, California 94305-8180, USA
gurevich@stanford.edu
Stephan von Muehlen
Joint Program in Design
Stanford University
P.O. Box 11922
Stanford, California 94309, USA
svm@stanford.edu
http://www.stanford.edu/~svm/accordiatron.html
ABSTRACT
The Accordiatron is a new MIDI controller for real-time
performance based on the paradigm of a conventional
squeeze box or concertina. It translates the gestures of a
performer to the standard communication protocol of
MIDI, allowing for flexible mappings of performance data
to sonic parameters. When used in conjunction with a real-
time signal processing environment, the Accordiatron
becomes an expressive, versatile musical instrument.  A
combination of sensory outputs providing both discrete and
continuous data gives the subtle expressiveness and control
necessary for interactive music.
Keywords
MIDI controllers, computer music, interactive music,
electronic musical instruments, musical instrument design,
human computer interface
INTRODUCTION
The Accordiatron was initially conceived as a class project
for a course in human-computer interfaces at the Center for
Computer Research in Music and Acoustics (CCRMA) at
Stanford University. Its designers brought their respective
expertise in product design and interactive performance
together to create a new device that aims to combine
aesthetic appeal, comfortable operation and useful output
from gestural sensing.
THE NEED FOR NEW CONTROLLERS
There exists a highly debated problem in interactive music
that is characterized by a lack of correlation between
performance gestures and their musical consequences. This
can create a difficulty in perception and indeed reception of
interactive music; the music can often be reduced to a
“challenge” of seeking some relationship between the
actions of the performer and the resulting sound. The
listener can feel a gap between him or herself and any
meaningful purpose to the music. The remedy to this
problem is certainly partly the responsibility of the
    
     Figure 1 - The Accordiatron
composer, who, if concerned, should try to make more
accessible music, but there are some limitations inherent in
the instruments used in these compositions that prevent the
bridging of this gap.
The practice of employing traditional instruments in
interactive performance situations, either by retrofitting the
instrument with various sensors or simply tracking its
audio output, can prove to be problematic for the audience.
Musical listeners have an ingrained urge to identify the
source of a sound. They have a similar expectation of the
nature of the sound that will be produced by an instrument.
Presently, people have little difficulty accepting the fact
that a computer or a recording can be a sound source and
have come to expect all sorts of sounds from these media.
However, in the case where a traditional instrument is used
as a controller for computer music, these expectations are
abandoned. The paradox in seeing a familiar instrument
and hearing sounds other than those associated with the
instrument can be difficult to overcome. In such a case,
there is no apparent source for the sound; only this
contradiction. The listener is left with the task of trying to
associate specific performance gestures with sonic events.
In itself, this can be a novel game, but it is certainly not the
goal of every composer of interactive music. Traditional
instruments are limited in this context in that they are
designed for the sounds they produce, not the gestures
associated with playing them. There is therefore a need, in
NIME01-27
Proceedings of the CHI'01 Workshop on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-01), Seattle, USA
the authors’ view, for new gestural controllers designed
specifically for interactive music situations.
DESIGN INSPIRATION
Upon setting out to create a new controller that could
function as an electronic instrument, the authors devised a
set or requirements for the new device. Experience with
other gestural controllers for interactive music, such as the
Theremin, generated several criteria for the nature of a new
controller, while traditional instruments determined others.
Multi-Dimensionality
Traditional instruments are capable of producing variations
in numerous dimensions such as pitch, loudness, timbre,
articulation, etc., all of which can be altered at varying
rates and applied to determine auditory parameters in real
time. In order to be versatile and as useful as an acoustic
instrument for interactive applications, an electronic
controller similarly needs to provide multi-dimensional
data (several unique streams) capable of simultaneously
controlling multiple sonic parameters. This has been one
limiting factor of the Theremin as a controller, rather than
as an instrument: the performer has control in only two
dimensions, pitch and loudness.
Discrete and Continuous Data
A further requirement was that the sensory output provide
a combination of discrete and continuous data. This is
necessary to suit diverse interactive musical applications,
where both singular, isolated events and smooth changes
can occur. This is again a limitation of other controllers,
like the Theremin, where the only outputs are continuously
changing.
Visual Intrigue
In order to attempt to satisfy a live audience’s desire for
visual and auditory correspondences as described above, a
new controller needed to have strong visual appeal. A
performance instrument should be interesting to watch as
well as to hear, otherwise part of the purpose of live
performance is lost.
Constrained Motion
The final requirement was that the gestures of the
performer be constrained in some way. While free motion
in space may be visually expressive, it can be difficult to
translate to musically useful information. Furthermore,
there are several such systems in existence. The goal in this
case was to design an instrument that could be physically
manipulated. Motion with limited constraint allows for the
control and precision required for musical expression.
THE SQUEEZE BOX PARADIGM
The paradigm of the squeeze box satisfies many of these
design requirements. A number of buttons on the
instrument allow for discrete events, while the squeezing
motion of the hands and arms is continuous. Sensing the
unique button presses as well as the constrained hand
motions in several directions allows for multi-dimensional
output.  The squeeze box was also a compelling starting
point because of the expressive physical engagement of the
performer and the subsequent value for live interaction.
Capturing gesture as an input for electronic music seems to
be a very effective means of overcoming the distance
between the audience’s expectations for a musical
performance and the static nature of computer hardware.
In designing the Accordiatron, three types of motion
borrowed from the squeeze box were chosen for
continuous positional sensing. These are the distance
between two ends panels attached to the hands (amount of
“squeeze” or “pull”), and the rotation of each hand in
relation to the mechanism connecting the two end panels.
These are natural motions associated with playing a
squeeze box, and while the angle of the hands is not
essential in a performing role, it occurs nonetheless. The
discrete sensors in the Accordiatron are in the form of a
series of buttons, borrowed directly from the design of a
concertina.
THE ACCORDIATRON
The way in which the Accordiatron breaks from the mould
of its acoustic counterpart is in the flexibility to apply the
sensory data from these motions and buttons to any
number of sonic parameters. In a traditional concertina,
button presses determine which note the instrument
sounds, while the velocity of the squeezing action (and
hence the pressure applied by the bellows to the reed)
determines the loudness (and incidentally the timbre) of the
resulting sound. The output of the Accordiatron could
easily produce the same results, simply by mapping button
presses to note events in a synthesizer and mapping the
rate-of-change of the distance between the two ends to the
overall loudness. However, the Accordiatron is capable of
much more. In conjunction with a real-time audio
processing environment, it can control any aspect of sound.
The Communication Medium
This is achieved by the use of the MIDI protocol [1]. The
Accordiatron outputs MIDI data from a standard 5-pin
MIDI connector and can be connected to any device
equipped to receive MIDI. It specifically uses control
change messages on channels 1-3 for the three continuous
controllers, using controller numbers 16-18, which are
designated as general purpose controllers. Each is assigned
a value from 0 to 127 (the standard 7-bit encoding of
MIDI) based on the sensed position on the controller. Only
changes in position are transmitted so that filtering of
repetitive data by a receiving device is unnecessary. The
MIDI standard therefore prevents truly continuous data
transmission, but the MIDI transmission rate allows for
roughly 1000 total events per second.
Button presses are encoded as note-on messages, each of
the 10 buttons with a unique note number from 60-69, on a
unique channel from 4-13. A note-on with velocity 127 is
transmitted when a button is pressed, and another with
velocity 0 upon release. No data after the initial note-on is
sent while a button is held down.  Button presses are
therefore transmitted as truly discrete events.
The Accordiatron presently contains one extra non-
performance button that transmits a note-on number 70 on
NIME01-28
Proceedings of the CHI'01 Workshop on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-01), Seattle, USA
channel 14. This can be used for mode changes or as an
additional trigger for setup. Future Accordiatron versions
could contain two more such buttons either for transmitting
messages on channels 15 and 16, or for changing aspects
of the Accordiatron’s internal program.
The Guts
At the heart of the Accordiatron is the Parallax Basic
Stamp II programmable microprocessor [2]. The
Accordiatron’s program, based on code by Craig Sapp [3],
is therefore flexible and can easily be modified in future
versions. The continuous sensory input comes from 3
potentiometers that are mechanically rotated by the
motions of the performer. The distance between the two
ends is sensed by a logarithmic pot attached to one of the
linkages with its angle-of-rotation changing as the
mechanism opens and closes. The other two potentiometers
linearly measure the rotation of each the end panels. These
yield output voltages proportional to the motions, whose
ranges are adjusted in three operational amplifier circuits,
in order to maximize the 0-5V range of the analog-to-
digital converters (ADC’s). The sensory data is digitized
by two 12-bit 8-channel MAXIM ADC's, the first 5 bits of
which are ignored to suit the MIDI standard. The button
presses are similarly digitized based on high-low voltage
changes. The entire system is run from a 9V battery.
DESIGN
The starting point for the physical design of the
Accordiatron was a traditional squeeze box.  It evolved
from that model into its final form by incrementally
eliminating the non-essential details and resolving the
issues that came with the integration of the circuitry and
mechanical elements.  The approximate dimensions, the
kinds of motions the designers wanted to capture, and the
combination of continuous and discrete inputs (in the form
of buttons) all come from its acoustic counterpart.   The
reasons for the differences between the two range from
prototyping considerations to issues of ergonomics and
interface design.
From the squeeze box the designers took the basic layout,
two end panels with buttons assigned to each hand and a
mechanism between them with some form of continuous
control.  By isolating the kinds of gestural motion of the
performer, a mechanism that could translate that motion to
three trim-pots was devised.  1/4 inch acrylic sheet was
chosen as the material for the linkages (and end panels)
because of its physical and visual characteristics as well as
the ease of fabricating the parts with a Computer-Aided
Design (CAD) software package and a laser cutter. Ashlar
Vellum was the CAD package the designers used in
conjunction with Lasercamm's computer-aided machining
(CAM) software and laser cutter.   Custom hardware was
machined from aluminum for the hinges at the end panels
and the attachment points of the pots. The remaining
hardware consists of off-the-shelf stainless steel and
aluminum fasteners used to assemble the various parts.
The end panels each contain nylon hand straps, five
buttons, and an offset pad for the palm of the hand.  This
allows for improved leverage for the fingers and a more
natural hand position.  The buttons are off-the-shelf parts,
but after some user testing they had to be modified with
levers hinged over them in order to provide better action
and allow for a range of hand sizes.
All of the circuitry is contained on the inside of the right-
hand panel.  The wiring from the buttons and pot on the
left side are carried along the linkages through eye-hooks
to the right, where they are soldered along with the rest of
the wiring to the circuit board.  Stops preventing
interference from the mechanism and an additional cover-
plate mounted to the end panel protect the circuit board.
The careful consideration of these details in the design
serves two purposes.  From the standpoint of the user, the
Accordiatron feels very much as a musical instrument
should.  The mechanical movement is smooth, the action
of the buttons is very similar to valves or keys, and the feel
of the Accordiatron in the hands of the musician is quite
natural.  For the audience the exposed electronics and
mechanism and their movements become a point of interest
during a performance and give visual clues linking the
viewer’s expectations with the sounds being created.
APPLICATIONS
The Accordiatron is well suited for interactive performance
applications. The following URL contains both video and
audio examples of a performance of a piece for the
Accordiatron composed and performed by Michael
Gurevich using the Max/MSP programming environment:
http://www.stanford.edu/~svm/accordiatron.html
This piece demonstrates some of the capabilities of the
Accordiatron. The buttons in this case are mapped to
wavetable synthesis using accordion samples, on one hand
to single notes, on the other to clusters of notes. These are
convolved in real time with a sound file.  A cross-fade
from the raw sound of the two sources through the
convolution of the two is controlled by the distance
between the two ends. The angles-of-rotation of the end
panels control various other parameters, including the
playback rate (pitch) of the accordion samples, reverb
room size and several kinds of modulation.
This certainly does not represent the full extent of the
musical possibilities of the Accordiatron, but is an
indication of its usefulness as a performance instrument in
this interactive context.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Jonathan Berger, Bill Verplank,
Max Mathews, Tamara Smyth and Aaron Hipple for their
guidance and assistance in the realization of this project.
REFERENCES
1. Harmony Central: MIDI Tools and Resources.
Available at  http://www.harmony-central.com/MIDI/.
2. Edwards, Scott. Programming and Customizing the
Basic Stamp Computer. McGraw-Hill, 1998.
3. Sapp, Craig. "Electronic Music Devices for Basic
Stamp IIsx". Available at
http://devices.sapp.org/micro/stamp2sx/.
NIME01-29
Proceedings of the CHI'01 Workshop on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-01), Seattle, USA