DAMPER: A Platform for Effortful Interface Development. 
Peter Bennett, Nicholas Ward, Sile O’Modhrain, Pedro Rebelo 
{pbennett02, nward04, sile, p.rebelo}@qub.ac.uk
Sonic Arts Research Centre 
Queen’s University Belfast 
BT7 1NN, Northern Ireland 
+44 (0)28 90974829
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper proposes that the physicality of an instrument be 
considered an important aspect in the design of new interfaces for 
musical expression. The use of Laban’s theory of effort in the 
design of new effortful interfaces, in particular looking at effort-
space modulation, is investigated, and a platform for effortful 
interface development (named the DAMPER) is described. 
Finally, future work is described and further areas of research are 
highlighted.  
Keywords 
Effortful Interaction. Haptics. Laban Analysis. Physicality. HCI. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The exploration and design of digital musical instruments and 
musical performance interfaces raises numerous issues, including 
those surrounding concepts of synthesis, mapping, gesture 
analysis, and movement capture. One aspect of musical 
performance however that is often overlooked in the design of 
electronic musical instruments is the role of the body as a site for 
performance, and bodily effort as the impetus of musical 
expression. Simply expressed, “Physical effort is a characteristic 
of the playing of all musical instruments. Though traditional 
instruments have been greatly refined over the centuries the main 
motivation has been to increase the range, accuracy and subtlety 
of sound and not to minimize the players physical input. Effort is 
so closely related to expression in the playing of traditional 
instruments. It is the element of energy and desire, of attraction 
and repulsion in the movement of music.” [1]. 
Most digital musical instruments are characterized by a 
decoupling of the synthesis of the instruments’ sound from the 
physics of its sound producing mechanism. This decoupling of 
interface from sound production has removed the need for driving 
energy in the context of a computer based musical instrument. 
Indeed, with many synthesis techniques, excluding physical 
modelling, the notion of driving energy or excitation has no direct 
equivalent. The performer is no longer tied to a requirement to 
input energy in a particular place within the sound production 
system. Instead of being the source of the energy in the sound, the 
gesture is used to trigger, command or control various parameters 
of the sound-producing algorithm. Elsewhere we have discussed 
the problematic notion of control in relation to music performance 
and have suggested alternative paradigms [2]. 
In addition to shaping the performer’s interaction the notion of 
physicality and effort in musical performance also impacts upon 
an audience’s perception. The act of listening/observing in a 
musical context has been described by Cone [3] as “vicarious 
performance”. In this sense listening is ultimately a physical 
involvement - a virtual performance experience for the audience. 
An artist playing an acoustic instrument usually exploits a mental 
model that the audience has of the instrument's action-to-response 
characteristics, allowing virtuosity to be readily appreciated. But 
what can we say about the case where the instrument obfuscates 
this action to response relationship? A criticism of many 
electronic controllers, especially those with overly complex high-
level mappings or relatively hidden interfaces (e.g., a laptop 
keyboard or bioelectric sensors) is that they can confuse an 
audience, who often can't follow and relate to what the performer 
is doing [4-7]. As Bahn, Hahn and Truman point out “the more 
familiarity the listener has with the musical context, the more 
vivid the empathetic experience can become. This describes a 
connection of the body to sound production, a kinaesthetic 
empathy with the act of creating sound and the visceral/gestural 
interaction of the performers in the musical context” [8]. 
With an acceptance of effort and physicality as key components in 
musical expression, we then ask the question, how can we 
integrate the notion of physicality into the design of new 
interfaces?   
This paper presents a new interface test platform that addresses 
the notions of physicality and effort. It draws on prior work in the 
description of effort as part of a general description of movement 
to suggest ways in which effort could guide instrument design. 
However rather than taking a mimetic approach based on the 
physicality of traditional instruments we present an interface that 
allows for the dynamic variation of a braking force. 
1.1 Physicality and Effort 
To begin to consider the role of effort and physicality in musical 
performance it is first helpful to define these terms more closely.  
Several definitions of physicality exist. Here we consider 
physicality to be “The fact, state, or condition of being physical 
(as opposed to mental, spiritual, etc.).” [9].  
Effort is often defined in terms of a “strenuous putting forth of 
power, physical or mental;” or a “laborious attempt; a struggle.” 
[9]. This view of effort however is overly simplified, emphasizing 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
Nime’07, June, 2007, New York. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
273
a notion of some difficulty to be overcome. A more detailed 
insight into effort that we believe is relevant to designing an 
effortful interface is that of Rudolf Laban, who carried out an in-
depth analysis of movement in the context of manual labour [10]. 
1.2 Laban’s Theory of Effort 
Laban’s theory of effort gives a formalized approach to studying 
effort as part of a wider analysis of movement known as Laban 
movement analysis. Effort, or what Laban sometimes described as 
dynamics, is a system for understanding the more subtle 
characteristics about the way a movement is executed with respect 
to inner intention. For example, in terms of body organisation 
there is little difference between punching someone and reaching 
for an apple on a tree – both involve the extension of the arm. 
However, the attention to the strength, control and timing of the 
movement is very different. In his description of effort, Laban 
indicates four components that generate what is termed effort 
space. These are commonly referred to as Weight, Flow, Time 
and Space. 
 
Figure 1. Laban Effort Notation [11] 
Often represented in notation form (fig.1) this system allows the 
depiction and description of a given effort in terms of these four 
factors. A detailed overview of Laban’s theory of effort is beyond 
the scope of this paper, however it is useful to explain briefly 
what each of the four components refers to. 
Weight refers to the level of exertion involved in effort while flow 
refers to control. So for example the swinging of an axe would 
require a strong fluent effort, whereas the placing of a delicate 
object at an exact place would require a light bound effort. Any 
skilled movement is led along a definite path in space. An effort 
applied through a meandering path would be termed indirect 
whereas an effort with a straight or tightly defined path through 
space would be termed as direct. Finally consideration is given to 
the time characteristic of the effort: Sustained exertion is 
represented by a line parallel to fluent flow and quick exertion by 
a line parallel to bound flow. 
Table 1. Laban’s Effort Actions 
Laban Effort Time Space Weight 
Gliding Sustained Direct Light 
Pressing Sustained Direct Strong 
Floating Sustained Indirect Light 
Wringing Sustained Indirect Strong 
Dabbing Quick Direct Light 
Punching Quick Direct Strong 
Flicking Quick Indirect Light 
Slashing Quick Indirect Strong 
The combination of the three dimensions, Space, Weight and 
Time produces eight distinct types of action, commonly known as 
Effort Actions or Action Drive. These are shown in the table 
above (Table 1). With an understanding of these primitives we 
can then look closer at a movement that transitions from one 
effort type to another in terms of a modulation of one two or three 
of our basic effort components, i.e. a transition from a Gliding 
effort to a Pressing effort would involve a change in the Weight 
component from light to strong. This is illustrated below in the 
effort-action cube (Fig.2). 
 
Figure 2 Effort-Action Cube [11] 
2. BACKGROUND 
Laban Movement Analysis has been primarily used as a means of 
notating choreography. More recently, the extraction of Laban 
parameters from motion-capture data has been investigated as a 
means of classifying the expressive nature of motion with a view 
to its application in procedurally driven computer animation [12]. 
Other research has looked at its possible use in the description of 
ancillary gestures of clarinetists [13].  
Our emphasis in this paper is to look at the influence of an 
instrument’s construction upon the movement range of the 
performer. The construction of the instrument, its weight, degrees 
of freedom, sensing technologies, mapping strategies etc, define 
the range of movement the performer will find rewarding when 
playing the instrument,. Here Laban’s theory of effort is used as a 
basis for considering movement in terms of the effort-space 
affordances of the instrument (using Norman’s definition of 
affordance [14]).  
2.1 Related Work 
The G-Sping [15] is an instrument that utilises the bending of a 
large spring, and was designed with the idea of incorporating 
physical-effort in its performance. In the discussion, the authors 
note that the spring stiffness requires that force be constantly 
applied to it in order to maintain a bent position making the 
instrument uncomfortable. They comment, "an instrument 
requiring a constant physical effort by the performer may not 
necessarily be desirable". It must be noted however that all 
movement no matter how fine requires physical effort. It is the 
quality of this effort not its presence or absence that varies. 
Examples of an interface that requires the maintenance of a 
constant force over a prolonged period of time are not evident in 
traditional acoustic instruments. Rather we see interfaces that 
support rhythms of force and relax. The Damper interface 
provides a configurable test-bed to explore the multidimensional 
qualitative properties of physical effort. 
2.2 Dynamic Resistance modulation  
In considering the effort-space of an interface, we draw a 
distinction between the aspects of an interface that can be 
modulated and those that are static. Although the static aspects are 
important, they are the ones that have been thoroughly 
investigated in traditional instrument design. The aspect that 
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
274
interests us is the relatively unexplored area of actively modifying 
the physical characteristics of the interface. 
To achieve effort-space modulation it has been decided to restrict 
the research to the particular area of dynamic resistance. This in 
effect allows the interface to change its resistance to the users 
movement and thus influence the effort-space that the interface 
occupies. In terms of Laban’s theory, resistance modulation can 
be viewed as influencing the required Weight component of the 
effort (from strong to light) for a given movement. Indirectly 
however it will also influence the range of Time and Flow. 
When thinking of mapping in this context it is worth considering 
aspects of traditional instrument performance practice that can be 
related to notions of dynamic resistance. Although traditional 
instruments do not display the types of dynamic change described 
above, it is worth observing how physical changes are related to 
changes in musical space. As guitar frets get closer together as 
one moves through the fret-board, the level of resistance and its 
relation with musical articulation varies. A clear feedback 
mechanism is in place here as we learn to relate high fret positions 
to changes in timbre. Most acoustic instruments display 
characteristic changes in resistance that are closely coupled with 
articulation and timbre.  
3. The DAMPER 
The DAMPER interface has been created to act as a test-bed for 
dynamic resistance interface mappings. It is a simple one-degree-
of-freedom interface consisting of two handles connected to a 
magneto-rheological fluid brake. The main action available to the 
user is the relative movement of the two handles towards and 
away from each other. By applying an electric current to the MRF 
brake the resistance to this motion can be varied. The relative 
position of the two handles to each other is measured using a 
continuous turn potentiometer. This setup is shown below (fig.3). 
 
Figure 3. System Diagram. 
3.1 MRF Brake 
The Magneto-Rheological Fluid brake is the key component as it 
allows a highly controllable damping force to be applied between 
the arms of the interface. The brake works by applying a current 
to a coil contained inside the device, hence creating a magnetic 
field that stiffens the magneto-rheological fluid and increases the 
braking force. Due to the nature of the fluid there is some residual 
viscosity when no control current is applied, however the leverage 
of the arms makes this force negligible. The maximum stated 
continuous braking force that can be achieved is 4Nm when 1A is 
applied; however it is possible to safely apply up to 1.5A as long 
as the signal is not continuous. The robust nature of the brake 
allows it to double-up as the axle holding the two arms together. 
The response time of the brake is relatively fast at a stated 10ms. 
In practice however it has been found that frequencies higher than 
100Hz can be applied to the brake with the amplitude of the 
experienced braking force dropping off with increasing frequency.  
 
Figure 4. The DAMPER in the “edge-trimmer” configuration. 
3.2 Edge-trimmer Configuration 
In the first configuration, a force-sensing resistor (FSR) has been 
added to the top of one of the handles, which can be depressed 
using the thumb. The FSR and potentiometer are interfaced to a 
PC via an Arduino microcontroller board. A MaxMSP patch 
running on the PC uses the potentiometer signal to set the 
frequency and the FSR signal to set the amplitude of a rectangular 
wave. This wave is fed from the audio out port of the PC to the 
MRF brake’s input via an amplifier. 
The novel aspect of this configuration is that the rotation of the 
axel of the MRF brake, which is being switched on and off at 
audio frequencies, causes sufficient vibrations that with the use of 
a soundboard (such as a desk), the instrument can be played 
‘acoustically’ without the need for speakers. This results in a very 
tight correlation between the haptic and auditory feedback, as they 
are produced from the same mechanical vibrations. The resulting 
tone of the instrument is somewhat like that of a bowed cello. It is 
possible in this configuration for the user to achieve a continuous 
pitch with a slight vibrato, by moving the handle rapidly back and 
forth around a fixed point. When the FSR is untouched the 
amplitude of the wave is set to zero and only increases as pressure 
is applied to the FSR. This allows the users to both turn off the 
volume, so that silence can be produced between notes, and 
increase the volume of a note as needed. 
In terms of musical performance and expressivity, it is best to 
view the edge-trimmer as an infra instrument [17] as it fulfills the 
criteria of having a constrained interactive repertoire, making use 
of few sensors and few gestural movements, it engenders 
relatively simple music and finally is restricted in the possibility 
of virtuosity/expressivity. 
3.3 Stretched-String Configuration 
In the second configuration the resistance to movement is directly 
proportional to the angle between the handles. As the handles are 
moved further apart the resistance increases. A MaxMSP patch 
running a physical model of a string receives the position 
information from the potentiometer, and updates the models 
tension parameter. The excitation of the string model is mapped to 
the approximate acceleration of the handles. In this configuration, 
the output from the model is played over speakers, thus keeping 
the haptic and audio feedback disconnected.    
4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Considering the effort space occupied by the Damper by virtue of 
its physical construction we see that due to its limited degree of 
freedom the Space component of effort is confined to being 
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
275
Direct. This leaves the performer with the ability to vary the 
Weight, Flow and Time components of any effort applied. If we 
consider a static case, where the resistance is fixed at a given 
value independent of the position of the handles, we see that large 
resistance to movement will support a strong Weight component 
in the effort. Conversely low resistance to movement will support 
light effort. However the resistance the device offers to any 
movement will also influence the range of Flow and Time 
components of effort that the performer finds natural or rewarding 
on the instrument. For example increased stiffness can support the 
execution of more bound and also quick efforts. Conversely a 
lower stiffness can assist in the execution of fluent efforts.  
Introducing the ability to dynamically vary the resistance during 
movement however affords the instrument a greatly expanded 
gesture set and encourages the transition between different effort 
types. In the first configuration, where separation of the handles is 
inversely proportional to the frequency of the driving oscillator, 
the stiffness increases with increased separation due to the MRFs 
frequency response. This mapping therefore supports a continuum 
of effort types depending on the angle between the handles with 
bound, strong, quick efforts being well supported at large 
diversion of the handles due to the increased resistance and light 
sustained and fluent efforts being better supported when the 
handles are closer to each other. 
5. FUTURE WORK 
The role of effort in music performance is still to be understood in 
a way that can be useful for the design of new instruments. Much 
work is needed to both expand and hone the theories of effortful 
interaction, effort space modulation and dynamic resistance 
modulation. It is hoped that through a series of iterations in the 
design of the DAMPER it is possible to refine both design 
techniques and the accompanying theories. 
5.1 Potential Mappings 
Even with such a simple interface there is a large range of 
possibilities for mappings other than those described above. So as 
to give a better idea of where the development of the device is 
heading, some potential mappings are outlined below. 
5.1.1 Pump 
Using the handles in a pump like fashion it would be possible to 
generate a similar experience to pumping bellows. This may work 
suitably well with a physical model of a foot-pump organ. This is 
a particularly suitable use of the brake, as bellows only impart a 
resistive force on the user. Using this method it would be possible 
to generate some non-traditional interaction such as actively 
changing the size of the virtual aperture from which the virtual air 
is being pumped through, and hence changing the resistance of the 
action. 
5.1.2 Waveform Scrubbing 
In this mapping, a sample could be played by using the handles to 
scrub back and forth through a sample. If the sound generated by 
the scrubbing is fed directly into the brake, it is possible to 
produce interesting haptic feedback straight away. For instance, it 
would become harder to move through a louder part of the sample 
than a quieter part, thus allowing the user to accurately feel their 
position within the sample. This could be further refined with 
filtering and frequency analysis so that only the relevant parts of 
the sample (for instance the rhythm) are presented to the user 
through the haptic feedback. 
6. CONCLUSION 
A new interface was presented that features the ability to 
dynamically vary the effort space it occupies. Observations were 
made on how Laban’s theory of effort may prove useful when 
considering physical effort in musical interface design.  
Particularly it has been shown that dynamic resistance modulation 
can potentially modify the effective effort-space of an instrument.  
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Thanks to Jim Knox and Norman Cornett for their help in the 
fabrication of the DAMPER. 
8. REFERENCES 
[1] Ryan, J. Some Remarks on Musical Instrument Design at 
STEIM, 1991 
[2] Rebelo, P. Haptic Sensation and Instrumental Transgression, 
Contemporary Music Review Vol. 25, No. 1/2, 
February/April 2006, pp. 27 – 35. Routledge 
[3] Cone, E. Musical Form and Musical Performance, W. W. 
Norton, 1968 
[4] Cadoz, C. and M.Wanderley, M. Gesture - Music Trends in 
Gestural Control of Music, 2000 
[5] Iazzetta, F. Meaning in Musical Gesture, 2000 
[6] Goldstein, M. Gestural Coherence and Musical Interaction 
Design, Proceedings of IEEE SMC98  
[7] Fels, S. S. Intimacy and Embodiment: Implications for Art 
and Technology, Proceedings of the ACM Conference on 
Multimedia, 2000, 13-16 
[8] Bahn, C. Hahn, T. and Truman, D. Physicality and feedback: 
a focus on the body in the performance of electronic music, 
Proceedings of the International Computer Music 
Conference, 2001, 44-51 
[9] Oxford English Dictionary, Second Edition. 
[10] R. Laban and F.C.Lawrence, Effort: Economy of human 
movement, second edition, MacDonald & Evans Ltd, 1974 
[11] R. Laban revised by L. Ullman, The Mastery of Movement, 
fourth edition, Northcote House, 1988, 169-189 
[12] Costa, M. Zhao, L. Chi, D. and Badler, N.  I.  The EMOTE 
model for effort and shape, in Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 
2000, (2000).  
[13] Chagnon, M. Campbell, L. Wanderley, M. M. On the use of 
Laban Bartenieff techniques to describe ancilliary gestures 
of clarinetists. McGill University 2005 
[14] Norman, D., Affordances, Conventions and Design. 
Interactions 6(3):38-43, May 1999, ACM Press. 
[15] Lebel, D. and Malloch, J. The G-Spring Controller, NIME'06 
[16] Nichols, C. The vBow: Development of a Virtual Violin Bow 
Haptic Human-Computer Interface, Proceedings of 
NIME’02 
[17] Bowers, J. and Archer, P. Not Hyper, Not Meta, Not Cyber 
but Infra-Instruments, Proceedings of  NIME’07
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
276