Wicked Problems and Design Considerations in
Composing for Laptop Orchestra
Luke Dahl
Center for Computer Research in Music and Acoustics
Department of Music, Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
lukedahl@ccrma.stanford.edu
ABSTRACT
Composing music for ensembles of computer-based instru-
ments, such as laptop orchestra or mobile phone orchestra,
is a multi-faceted and challenging endeavor whose param-
eters and criteria for success are ill-deﬁned. In the design
community, tasks with these qualities are known as wicked
problems. This paper frames composing for computer-based
ensemble as a design task, shows how Buchanan’s four do-
mains of design are present in the task, and discusses its
wicked properties. The themes of visibility, risk, and em-
bodiment, as formulated by Klemmer, are shown to be im-
plicitly present in this design task. Composers are encour-
aged to address them explicitly and to take advantage of
the practices of prototyping and iteration.
Keywords
Design, laptop orchestra, mobile phone orchestra, instru-
ment design, interaction design, composition
1. INTRODUCTION
We typically think of the activities of composing music and
creating musical instruments as occurring in diﬀerent do-
mains. In the Western art music tradition composition is
an artistic endeavor in which a composer applies knowl-
edge of musical instruments, forms, and idioms to create an
artifact, a musical score which when performed addresses
certain artistic aims. Instrument design is a separate craft
carried out independently of any particular musical work.
This distinction is blurred when composers invent ex-
tended techniques that redeﬁne traditional instruments, and
in electronic and computer music, where the studio can be
seen as an aggregate instrument assembled from available
devices. As the tools for creating custom computer-based
instruments become increasingly accessible, more composers
and musicians become builders of the instruments for which
they compose.
As the art of composition and the craft of instrument
design collapse into a single task, the number of choices a
composer must confront explodes. When composing for an
ensemble of such instruments, such as a laptop orchestra,
the complexity increases further. The composer must “com-
pose” the instrument, the musical sound, the interactions
between performers, and in some sense they even compose
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’12,May 21 – 23, 2012, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
a deﬁnition of what it means to make music. This task is
daunting to say the least.
The design community has a name for such situations
where the task is complex, few guidelines are available, and
the criteria for success are not known in advance. They call
them wicked problems. This paper aims to show how com-
posing for computer-based ensemble can be productively
framed as a design task, and compares it to the wicked prob-
lem theory as described by Buchanan[1]. It also discusses
themes from design thinking which composers should con-
sider, namely visibility, risk, embodiment, and the beneﬁts
of the practices of prototyping and iteration.
1.1 Orchestras of performers with computers
The laptop orchestra is a new format for ensemble musical
performance which is centered around the laptop computer
as an instrument. The practices described here originated in
2005 with the Princeton Laptop Orchestra[10], and contin-
ued with the Stanford Laptop Orchestra founded in 2008.
Musical performances with computers are not new, but a
few characteristics distinguish laptop orchestra from other
practices. Firstly, the laptop orchestra is organized simi-
larly to a traditional orchestra in that there is an ensemble
of performers, each with their own instrument, who per-
form pieces created by a composer, and who may be led by
a conductor. Unlike traditional orchestras, these roles may
be enacted by diﬀerent people for each piece. For example,
it is common for the composer of a piece to be a member of
the orchestra who also conducts the piece.
Secondly, each performer in a laptop orchestra has their
own sound source, typically a small hemispherical speaker
array, located nearby. This creates a distributed sound ﬁeld
where each performer can hear their own activity and the
audience can associate sounds with their performer. This
makes performances suitable to small settings where the
audience is close, and is distinguished from performance
practices in which each performer’s sound is mixed into a
single, possibly distal, sound system.
The mobile phone orchestra[8] is a continuation of these
practices, with the laptop computer being replaced by mo-
bile computing devices. Laptop orchestra performers usu-
ally sit at their stationary computer, while mobile phone or-
chestra performers hold their “computers” and have speak-
ers attached to their bodies, allowing them to move through
the performance space. Both laptop and mobile phone or-
chestra performances are typically held in a concert-hall set-
ting, and the audience follows social practices associated
with traditional orchestras, such as listening quietly and
clapping after pieces.
The author was a founding member of the Stanford laptop
and mobile phone orchestras. For the purpose of this dis-
cussion, composing for laptop orchestra and mobile phone
orchestra can be considered equivalent design tasks.
2. COMPOSING AS DESIGN PROBLEM
Composing for laptop orchestra is multifaceted and com-
plex. The composer must work simultaneously on a num-
ber of diﬀerent levels while satisfying multiple stakeholders,
including the audience, the performers, the composer him
or herself, and possibly members of the hosting institution.
In his inﬂuential 1992 paper, ‘Wicked Problems in De-
sign Thinking’[1] Richard Buchanan describes four broad
areas in which design is practiced: 1) the design of material
objects, 2) the design of activities and organized services,
3) the design of symbolic and visual communications, and
4) the design of complex systems or environments for liv-
ing, working, playing, and learning. These tasks are not
independent and cannot be assigned to diﬀerent individu-
als to be performed in isolation. Rather they are “places of
invention” from which the uniﬁed design task is considered.
By reinterpreting these categories we can map them to four
aspects of composing for laptop orchestra: 1) the design of
instruments, 2) the design of structured interactions, 3) the
design of visual elements, and 4) musicking.
2.1 Design of material objects
In a traditional symphony orchestra the instruments are
given or chosen from those available, but in laptop orches-
tra the instrument is initially undeﬁned. A computer is a
meta-instrument, a platform with general capabilities upon
which a speciﬁc instrument can be built. It grants cer-
tain physical aﬀordances – the built-in input and output
devices such as keyboards, touchpads, displays, etc. as well
as peripheral devices such as joysticks – and software aﬀor-
dances such as sound synthesis languages and application
development frameworks. From these the composer crafts
an instrument consisting of a piece of software, the phys-
ical means by which the performer interacts with it, and
the methods by which these actions are mapped into sound.
This activity corresponds to Buchanan’s “design of material
objects” in that it is the creation of an artifact which we in-
teract with physically. Its primary user is the performer,
and thus the design will be constrained by the skill level
and enthusiasm of the performers, as well as the available
rehearsal time.
2.2 Design of structured interactions
Traditionally an orchestral composer writes a score which
the conductor and performers use to guide their perfor-
mance. Written scores and musical notation may be part
of a laptop orchestra piece, but more generally what the
composer designs is the interactions between the conductor
and performers, or amongst the performers themselves if no
conductor is speciﬁed, and how these interactions are struc-
tured in time in order to achieve the desired musical eﬀect.
This corresponds to Buchanan’s “design of activities and or-
ganized services”. The primary user is the performer who
must enact the interactions speciﬁed, but the visibility of
interactions (see 4.1) also aﬀects the audience’s experience.
Diﬀerent strategies can be used to structure interactions
between performers. For example, in the laptop orchestra
piece ‘Crystalis’[5], the conductor uses symbolic arm ges-
tures to communicate desired ranges of parameters within
which performers may improvise. In the mobile phone or-
chestra piece ‘InterV’[8], performers receive on-screen tex-
tual instructions sent from a central computer which follows
a predetermined timeline. These two strategies lead to dif-
fering levels of visibility and risk (see 4.1, 4.2.)
2.3 Design of visual communications
In addition to the auditory component of a piece the com-
poser must design any visual elements. From the perspec-
tive of the performers these include the visual information
available to the performer from their instrument as well as
any visual communication between performers. Some lap-
top orchestra pieces also include graphic or video displays
that are visible to the audience. These correspond roughly
to Buchanan’s category of “design of symbolic and visual
communications”.
2.4 Design of Complex Systems
What is it we do when we produce or participate in a mu-
sical event? Buchanan’s last area is the design of “complex
systems or environments for living, working, playing, and
learning.” The human activity of music is one such com-
plex system. However, the meaning or goal of our musical
activities is never entirely clear or explicit. The partici-
pants, event organizers, composers, performers, and audi-
ence co-produce the musical event and its meanings through
multiple hermeneutic acts of interpretation. The perform-
ers interpret the instructions of the composer and the ac-
tions of the conductor and other performers. The audience
interprets the relationship between the performers’ actions
and their sonic results, mediated by visibility, and inter-
prets these with respect to the possible intentions of the
composer. And every participant interprets the meaning of
their own role within the musical event.
Small[9] uses the term musicking, or the verb to musick,
to describe the ways in which groups of people self-deﬁne
through their musical activities. Fallman[4] describes how
design “takes the form of a hermeneutic process of inter-
pretation and creation of meaning, where designers itera-
tively interpret the eﬀects of their designs on the situation
at hand.” In both cases the composer or designer, as the
nominal locus of‘creativity, has the opportunity and respon-
sibility to think explicitly about the interpretations which
may occur around his or her work. It is this indeﬁniteness
of meaning which makes composing music (or any artistic
endeavor) diﬃcult, yet in a sense it is also what makes it so
fascinating for practitioners and audiences alike.
3. WICKED PROBLEMS
The wicked problems perspective on design was originally
formulated by Rittel in the 1960’s, and elaborated upon by
Buchanan. Wicked problems are a “class of social system
problems which are ill-formulated, where the information is
confusing, where there are many clients and decision makers
with conﬂicting values, and where the ramiﬁcations in the
whole system are thoroughly confusing[1].” The formulation
was proposed as a counterargument to the linear model of
design where a problem is broken into a problem deﬁnition,
which is then followed by a problem solution.
Buchanan enumerates the qualities of wicked problems.
While composing for a musical performance is not a true
wicked problem due to the limited scope of its consequences
(people’s lives or health are usually not at stake), it does
share some of these qualities. In addition to making the
task diﬃcult and the linear model useless, these qualities
also make it impossible to eliminate risk (see 4.2.)
• “Wicked problems have no deﬁnitive formulation, but
every formulation of a wicked problem corresponds to
the formulation of a solution.”
This relates to the hermeneutic nature of music as de-
scribed above. The composer must decide what it is that
constitutes this new piece for laptop orchestra, and by doing
so they simultaneously describe their task and its solution.
• “In solving wicked problems there is no exhaustive list
of admissible operations.”
• “Wicked problems have no stopping rules.”
Only the composer can decide what sounds, techniques,
instrumental aﬀordances, and interactions, are part of a
piece, and only the composer can decide when a piece is
complete.
• “Solving a wicked problem is a ‘one shot’ operation,
with no room for trial and error.”
• “No formulation and solution of a wicked problem has
a deﬁnitive test.”
Whatever a composer’s intention for a piece may be, he
or she cannot predict how it will be received or interpreted.
They may revise a piece after its performance, but they
cannot take back or undo a performance once it is done,
and there is no way to deﬁnitively say how successful it
was. This risk can be mitigated somewhat through multiple
iterations of prototyping and rehearsal (see 5).
• “The wicked problem solver has no right to be wrong –
they are fully responsible for their actions.”
• “Every wicked problem is unique.”
The composer takes an artistic risk, but the performers
and event producers also experience forms of risk (see 4.2).
Thus the composer is responsible to these parties. Once
these design issues have been addressed for one composition,
they must be addressed anew for the next.
• Every wicked problem is a symptom of another higher
level problem.
Again this relates to the hermeneutic nature of musicking.
One reason computer-based music (or any music for that
matter) is diﬃcult to compose is that we don’t know for sure
what music is or why we engage in it. Thus, a composition
can be seen as a statement regarding the deﬁnition of music.
4. INTERACTION DESIGN THEMES
The wickedness of the design task is unavoidable. Further-
more the themes of visibility, risk, and embodiment are im-
plicitly present in all computer-based music performance
and cannot be avoided. These can be seen as further con-
straints to design, or they can be explicitly acknowledged
and used as opportunities for structuring the design pro-
cess. This discussion draws heavily on Klemmer’s themes
for interaction design[7].
4.1 Visibility
When considering the perspective of the audience it is use-
ful to take into account visibility. Computers allow com-
plex sonic eﬀects to be controlled by small movements such
as keystrokes or mouse movements, but unless the instru-
ment’s GUI is projected onto a large screen, the audience
remains oblivious as to what actions were performed and
how they relate to the sounds produced. In the case of tra-
ditional performance the audience’s familiarity allows them
to feel comfortable not seeing the instrumentalist’s every
ﬁnger movement. While the audience may be familiar with
using a laptop, they likely have no experience with the soft-
ware being used.
The composer must decide what visual information will
be made available to the audience and anticipate how this
might aﬀect their conception of what is taking place. Dif-
ferent strategies for increasing visibility were used in two
pieces for mobile phone orchestra. ‘Touch Patterns’ fea-
tured a projected graphic display on which appeared colored
squares corresponding to every note performed, creating a
visual ﬁeld highly correlated to both the music and perfor-
mance gestures. In ‘SoundBounce’[2] performers controlled
sound by making bouncing gestures with their iPhones.
Sounds could be passed from one player to another by mak-
ing throwing gestures in the recipient’s direction. This de-
sign allowed the performers to focus visually on eachother
instead of their screens, and made performers’ interactions
easily visible to and interpretable by audience.
4.2 Risk
Putting an artistic work into the world comes with artis-
tic risk. However there is a more corporeal form of risk
which we experience every day, and which is ampliﬁed for
performers. Klemmer et al.[7] give a phenomenological ac-
count of this risk: “One’s unmediated experience of acting
in the physical world is characterized by uncertainty and an
awareness of corporeal vulnerability... In social interaction
[we can substitute ‘performance’], risk may not necessarily
entail physical harm,but can also come from the imperative
to act in the presence of others.” Performers experience this
vulnerability when they place their bodies on stage in front
of an audience and subject themselves to scrutiny and the
risk of mistakes. To perform they must act, and they can-
not step out of the performance to reﬂect on these actions
or their possible consequences. These are characteristics of
what Heidegger calls the experience of thrownness[11].
It seems that this risk is an essential element of perfor-
mance, since if there were no chance of mistake or mishap
the audience would likely feel that they were not witness-
ing a true performance. Technology is often used to mini-
mize risk, e.g. the ‘undo’ function in software applications.
In recordings it is acceptable to use the technology of the
recording studio to achieve a “perfect” rendition of a piece.
However, in the case of live performance the composer must
allow the possibility of imperfection or failure in order to
ensure a valid performance situation.
Through appropriate use of visibility the audience can
better appreciate the risk being taken. Interestingly, vis-
ibility of risk may also reduce the consequences of failure.
During a performance of ‘SoundBounce’[2], there was an in-
stance where a performer clearly intended to throw a sound
to another performer, but the sound ended up going to a
diﬀerent performer. The audience responded with laughs
and sympathetic vocalizations that conveyed their partici-
pation in the event and their appreciation of the risk the
performers were taking.
It seems that audiences may be willing to accept some
types of mistake. However none of the participants in a
concert wish to experience the type of failure that occurs
during a technical breakdown, such as when a computer
crashes or communication between devices fail. Perhaps
this is because such failures destroy the sense of a special
space that surrounds a performance. It is a risk that all
performing music technologists dread, and which it seems
will never disappear.
4.3 Embodiment
The body is the means by which performers interact with
any instrument. Before the use of electronic remote sens-
ing interfaces such as cameras or capacitive sensing, all in-
struments required physical contact with the body, and the
majority of those involved the use of the hands.
The hand is exquisitely sensitive and dexterous. Like all
actions, the actions of the hand can be used simultaneously
to eﬀect a result (pragmatic actions), or to explore and learn
about objects and their possibilities (epistemic actions).[7]
Epistemic actions are an important aspect of learning to
play a newly encountered instrument. By creating instru-
ments that aﬀord and sense a rich range of physical actions,
we beneﬁt from the body’s ability for skilled performance
and allow performers to develop kinesthetic motor memory
which is fast and reliable.
The goal should be that the instrument becomes inte-
grated into our physical experience such that we no longer
notice its presence. When this occurs the instrument has
become what Heidegger calls equipment, and he would say
that it is ready-to-hand[3]. This state enables a feeling of
transparent translation from musical intention to expres-
sion in sound. Most traditional instruments require years
of dedicated practice to achieve this state. With computer-
based instruments the designer confronts a tradeoﬀ between
approachability and the ﬁne level of expression available
when expertise is allowed to develop. When an instrument
exists for the sake of a single piece, performers are not well-
motivated to invest the time necessary to achieve true ex-
pressivity.
Part of instrument design is creating the mapping from
sensor input to sound output, or from the physical world of
movement to the abstract realm of musical sound. Visibil-
ity may be facilitated by using metaphor-based mappings
which draw on common associations between movement and
music[6]. When performers’ actions are visible to the audi-
ence, and those actions are mapped to sound through mo-
tion/music metaphors that are part of the biological or cul-
tural background shared by the audience, it will be easier
for the audience to attribute causal relationships between
what they see and what they hear.
5. PROTOTYPING AND ITERATION
Composition, like design, is a process of moving from the
abstract – the composer’s general artistic aims and the re-
sources available to her or him – to the concrete, i.e. a spe-
ciﬁc piece and the artifacts and practices that make up its
performance. Many design practitioners emphasize the im-
portance of prototyping in this process. Making working
instruments early in the compositional process allows com-
posers and performers to try out interfaces and controls,
their mapping to sound, and the interactions they enable.
The prototype allows the composer and musicians to have
a “conversation” with the instrument, and to explore epis-
temically its potentials as well as possible problems. The
prototype also enables the composer and performers to have
a conversation with each other through the instrument and
serendipitously discover unexpected interactional possibili-
ties.
For example, while creating the piece ‘Colors’ for mobile
phone orchestra[8], the composer and performers rehearsed
with early versions of the instrument, allowing them to dis-
cover and reﬁne various interactions that became part of
the ﬁnal piece, such as musical “conversations” between per-
formers and a sequential round-robin interaction similar to
the game ‘Simon.’
The beneﬁts of prototyping are only available if it is part
of an iterative cycle of design, prototype, test, and reﬂect.
Enough time must be allowed for playful exploration with
working prototypes, and revision based on the outcomes.
More generally, given the situated and hermeneutic quality
of artistic endeavors, reﬂection on one’s own design process
allows one to extend the beneﬁts of an iterative cycle from
within a single work to the larger scale of one’s creative
career.
6. CONCLUSIONS
Composers of music for laptop and mobile phone orches-
tras create not only music, but instruments and interac-
tions. This task shares many of the features of wicked de-
sign problems, and can beneﬁt from incorporating design
practices such as prototyping and iteration. By taking into
account the visibility of the technologies applied, the em-
bodied nature of using instruments, and the risk inherent
in performance, composers can better create new musical
practices and therefore new opportunities for musical self-
deﬁnition for composers, performers, and audiences.
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to Terry Winograd and Dean Eckles for early feed-
back on this paper as part of their course Phenomenologi-
cal Foundations of Cognition, Language and Computation .
Thanks also to one of the anonymous reviewers for partic-
ularly detailed and thoughtful feedback.
8. REFERENCES
[1] R. Buchanan. Wicked problems in design thinking.
Design issues, 8(2):5–21, 1992.
[2] L. Dahl and G. Wang. SoundBounce: Physical
Metaphors in Designing Mobile Music Performance.
In Proceedings of the 2010 conference on New
Interfaces for Musical Expression , Sydney, Australia,
2010.
[3] H. L. Dreyfus. Being-in-the-world : a commentary on
Heidegger’s Being and time . MIT Press, Cambridge,
Mass., 1991.
[4] D. F ¨allman. In Romance with the Materials of Mobile
Interaction : A Phenomenological Approach to the
Design of Mobile Information Technology . PhD thesis,
UmeˇN University, Informatics, 2003.
[5] R. Fiebrink, G. Wang, and P. R. Cook. Don’t forget
the laptop: using native input capabilities for
expressive musical control. In Proceedings of the 7th
international conference on New interfaces for
musical expression, NIME ’07, pages 164–167, New
York, NY, USA, 2007. ACM.
[6] M. Johnson. ” Something in the Way She
Moves”-Metaphors of Musical Motion. Metaphor and
symbol, 2003.
[7] S. Klemmer, B. Hartmann, and L. Takayama. How
bodies matter: ﬁve themes for interaction design.
Proceedings of the 6th conference on Designing
Interactive systems, pages 140–149, 2006.
[8] J. Oh, J. Herrera, N. J. Bryan, L. Dahl, and G. Wang.
Evolving The Mobile Phone Orchestra. In Proceedings
of the 2010 conference on New Interfaces for Musical
Expression, pages 82–87, Sydney, Australia, 2010.
[9] C. Small. Musicking: the meanings of performing and
listening. Music/culture. University Press of New
England, 1998.
[10] S. Smallwood, D. Trueman, P. Cook, and G. Wang.
Composing for laptop orchestra. Computer Music
Journal, 32(1):9–25, 2008.
[11] T. Winograd and F. Flores. Understanding
Computers and Cognition: A New Foundation for
Design. Ablex, Norwood, NJ, 1986.