An Elementary Method for Tablet
Michael Zbyszy/.notdef.g0003ski
Center for New Music and Audio
Technologies, UC Berkeley
1750 Arch Street
Berkeley, CA 94709 USA
+1.510.643.9990
mzed@cnmat.berkeley.edu
ABSTRACT
This paper proposes the creation of a method book for tablet-
based instruments, evaluating pedagogical materials for
traditional instruments as well as research in human-computer
interaction and tablet interfaces.
Keywords
Wacom tablet, digitizing tablet, expressivity, gesture,
mapping, pedagogy, practice
1. INTRODUCTION
In 2006, Christopher Dobrian asked whether the ‘e’ in NIME
(expression) was being adequately addressed by researchers
and performers of real-time computer music.[10] He went on
to define musical expression as “the nuance that a live
performer adds to the available materials.” Examining
whether or not machines can be expressive is beyond the
scope of this work. In the case of a live performer, the
possibility for expressive nuance is constrained by the
sensitivity of the interface/instrument and the performer’s
ability to take advantage that sensitivity.
It is difficult to be expressive on a new instrument because the
fact of its newness means that the performer has not had the
time to learn it 1.T h ea c t i v i t yo fi n s t r u m e n tb u i l d i n gi sv e r y
involving, and it is hard to resist the temptation to keep
building until the last possible second. It is important to
schedule time to learn to play our instruments, but even with
days or weeks of practice we are still beginners. It has been
suggested that it takes more than a decade to learn a musical
instrument.[16] Furthermore, traditional instrumentalists are
aided by centuries of pedagogical materials and methods,
which demonstrate that there is more to practicing and
learning than just playing repertoire. With a newly developed
instrument it is hard to know how to practice; nobody else has
ever learned to play this instrument and there is no body of
repertoire to suggest how it could be played.
This paper addresses the question of how to practice by
proposing a method book for tablet-based instruments.
Suggesting that more emphasis be placed on expression was
the first step. With the focus now on expression, we can
inspire performers to practice by showing them how. The
strengths and weaknesses of the pedagogical methods of
traditional instruments are examined first. These methods are
1 There are performers in the NIME Community – Michel
Waisvisz with The Hands
(http://www.crackle.org/TheHands.htm) and Laetitia
Sonomi with the Lady’s Glove
(http://www.sonami.net/lady_glove2.htm) are two examples
–w h o h a v e d e v o t e d s u b s t a n t i a l t i m e t o d e v e l o p i n g t h e i r
own personal performance practice, and to great effect.
then compared to research on human-computer interfaces,
with the goal of combining the best of both fields. Finally, the
creation of a new method book for tablet-based interfaces is
proposed, and the details of this book are described.
2. INSTRUMENT PEDAGOGY
Many musicians choose new instruments specifically to
escape the baggage that comes with a “classical” instrument.
As someone who plays both, I appreciate the freedom of being
in uncharted territory with an interface I have designed. I am
not worried about playing in all twelve keys, memorizing
excerpts, or learning riffs. However, I also miss some of the
discipline: the focus of playing the same warm-up exercise or
the same bit of repertoire over many years and coming
understanding how my own technique develops. Traditional
method books tend to have a few different kinds of material:
Études (short musical pieces focussing on a particular musical
skill), exercises (scales, patterns, etc.), and practical advice
(how to practice, how to hold the instrument, etc.)
2.1 Études
Études are the quintessential pedagogical material, and
represent both the best and the worst of learning an
instrument. Études range from music that is extremely
expressive and wonderful, such as Chopin Opp. 10 and 25 or
Bartók’s Mikrokosmos, to pieces that are, at best, mechanical
and utilitarian. Students of the piano are probably familiar
with method books by Hanon [14] and Czerny [6,7]. These
methods are explicitly designed to develop the physical skills
of playing the piano. Although widely used, they are often
criticized for their emphasis on repetition and lack of
musicality.[27] It is clear that physical skills are required to
interpret virtuosic repertoire, but teachers [23] question the
need to develop these skills in a context that is not expressive
and may even cause physical damage.
If there is any element that pushes students away from
classical training, it is here. This kind of étude, as part of an
overall curriculum, can be successful in developing a certain
dexterity, but that dexterity is useless without musicality. It is
important for students to tackle challenges that are beyond
their current abilities, and to work. But it is also important for
students to be mentally, as well as physically engaged [11]. If
one must learn to play octaves, for instance, it would be better
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
NIME08, June 5-7, 2008, Genova, Italy
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
245
to learn by playing Chopin Op. 25 no. 10, rather than just
scales in octaves.
2.2 Basic techniques
The most successful methods address the development of
executive skills in a larger context of attentive practice and
musical development. When physical skills need to be
practiced, they should be focused on specifically and with the
same intensity as music making. This describes the approach
of Joe Allard [19], who strongly influences David Liebman’s
method (see table 1). [17] Liebman does not offer the student
any musical études, instead he devotes the first seven chapters
of his book to the act of making a sound with the saxophone,
covering the mechanism part by part, offering visualizations
and physical exercises. His discussion of expressive
techniques covers devices such as pitch bends, portamento,
and vibrato, but does not address how to be expressive, as
defined above, but presents techniques that could be used for
“furthering one’s personal expression, so long as it is within
the bounds of artistic and musical taste.” Finally, he offers
advice on practicing, which make it clear that Liebman
expects the student (or teacher) to find other sources for
études (e.g. [21]) and repertoire that will round out a whole
curriculum.
Table 1. Chapter headings fromDeveloping a Personal
Saxophone Sound[17]
Chapter One Overview of The Playing Mechanism
Chapter Two Breathing
Chapter Three The Larynx
Chapter Four The Overtone Exercises
Chapter Five The Tongue Position and Articulation
Chapter Six The Embouchure
Chapter Seven Reeds and Mouthpieces
Chapter Eight Expressive Techniques
Chapter Nine Practicing
In a two-hour practice session, one hour is devoted to
different categories of tone exercises, 20 minutes to sight-
reading, and 40 minutes to “scales, arpeggios, and intervals …
in order to learn the alphabet of music.” For a method book to
function in the context of “new” music and new interfaces, the
possible alphabet(s) of music would need to expand beyond
these patterns. Also, there is no expressive music making in
this practice session – that happens at some other point. The
point of practicing is “to insure that the needed and physical
and technical manipulations occur quickly and efficiently, so
that a musical idea is immediately transferable from ear to
mind with the soul (emotions) monitoring the entire process.”
2.3 Practical Information and Advice
At h i r dt y p eo fm a t e r i a li nap e d a g o g i c a lm e t h o di sp r a c t i c a l
information and advice. Steve Lacy offers a wealth of
information in his bookFindings [15]. In addition to standard
fare, such as fingering charts, he advises against smoking and
poetically describes the rigors of life as an improvising
musician. This book also has exercises and études.
The Inner Game of Music[13] moves away from the category
of method book entirely, offering exclusively advice in prose.
With no musical examples, this is still an important addition
to instrument pedagogy. Like the methods above, the authors
understand that other texts will provide the missing pieces of
the curriculum. In the case of the tablet method, there are no
other methods to fill in the gaps. It will be important that all
three of these categories are represented.
3. STYLUS and TABLET RESEARCH
3.1 An extremely short history
The first appearance of a pen-computer interface is the
Lincoln TX-0 computer from the MIT Lincoln Laboratory in
1957 [31]. There are many music-specific implementations of
tablet and spatial interfaces, including Fairlight CMI 2
(although not for real-time performance), Xenakis UPIC [18],
Buxton SSSP [5], Boie/Mathews/Schloss Radio Drum [3].
3.2 HCI
Much can be learned about tablet and stylus interfaces from
literature of human-computer interaction.[22] An important
early study of pointing technologies was done by Paul Fitts in
1954.[12] His formulation, now referred to as Fitts’ Law,
predicts the time required to rapidly move to a target area, as
a function of the distance to the target and the size of the
target. This work has been expanded with the Steering Law,
[1] which deals not just with targets, but also with trajectories.
This work shows that tablets out-perform other input devices
(mouse, trackpoint, touchpad, and trackball). While both laws
have wide reaching implications for designers of interfaces,
the focus on untrained movements limit applicability of
authors of method books. However, the underlying metrics for
evaluating interfaces (indexes of performance) could be
applied to evaluating performers and their progress. Also,
selection of mappings and gestural situations are especially
critical when preparing an instrument for students. [25]
4. A TABLET METHOD BOOK
4.1 Why Tablet?
It would be impossible to write a method book that addressed
the entire range of instruments that arrive at NIME. While
practicing and learning can be addressed in a general context,
the details of implementation and developing performance
skills are specific to an instrument. Since specific skills are
critical to understanding performance practice, it is desirable
to develop a whole method, from basics to real music, around
one instrument as an example for other instruments. The
Method for Table could potentially spawn a whole series:
Method for Wii Remote, Method for Footswitch, etc.
Previous work [29] surveyed musical work with tablets, and
presented reasons why digitizing tablets make good interfaces.
Briefly, the tablet interface offers:
2 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fairlight_CMI
Figure 1: Bert Sutherland at the TX-2, with light pen [1]
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
246
/.notdef.g0001Low cost
/.notdef.g0001Easy availability
/.notdef.g0001High resolution output data
/.notdef.g0001Fine temporal resolution
/.notdef.g0001Multiple axes of control
These qualities are even more important in choosing the focus
for a method book than they are for choosing one’s personal
instrument. It would be impractical to write a method for a
unique interface, no matter how good it is. The desire is for
people to use this text, either for individual practice, in
groups, or in the classroom.
Tablet interfaces offer other benefits as an instrument for
beginners. Stylus-based interfaces outperform other pointing
devices, such as joysticks, because they leverage the high
bandwidth of the thumb and finger in combination [2]. Most
performers come to the tablet with pre-existing pen skills, and
physical demands of the instrument are such that they are
attainable by a large number of users. (There are no issues
with handedness, for instance.) Tablet interfaces have been
part of the NIME community since the beginning [26] and are
now are well established, appearing both in performance and
print [8, 24, 29].
Figure 2 An Elementary Method for Tablet
4.2 The Method
The method book will have three basic sections: Practical
Issues, Basic Exercises, and Études.
The practical issues section covers topics of getting situated
with a tablet interface, including a discussion of which tablet
to acquire (sizes and models, strengths and weaknesses), the
use of alternate pens, etc. Setting and adjusting the driver and
sensitivities for musical performance follow, then
recommended software implementations and conventions
specific to the method book. The exercises and études in the
method use Max/MSP 3 and Jean-Marc Couturier's Wacom
Object4. They are programmed so that students can use the
free, runtime version of Max, and distributed under a Creative
Commons License5 that allows sharing in a non-commercial
context. (It is also worth considering implementing some of
3 http://www.cycling74.com/
4 http://cnmat.berkeley.edu/
5 http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/
the method in Pd6,t ob ec o m p a t i b l ew i t ht h el a r g e s tn u m b e r
of possible users.) Incoming tablet data is mapped using an
Open Sound Control [28] wrapper, which is part of the
CNMAT Max/MSP/Jitter Depot. [30]
The second section consists of basic exercises, analogous to
scales and arpeggios of classical instrumental technique. Their
nature as interactive software means that some of the pitfalls
of exercises (e.g. mindless repetition) are avoided. While the
instrument mapping should stay the same, the content and
difficulty of an exercise adapts to the level of the student. An
alternate model for these exercises is a computer game[9].
The third section is the largest and most musically interesting.
It consists of études by a number of composers. For example:
• M. Zbyszy ski’s/.notdef.g0003News Cycle #2[29] requires the player to
pull lines from a video stream to generate sound.7 AF i t t s -
esque exercise involves quickly and accurately putting the
pen down in a zone on the tablet surface.
• News Cycle #2 also uses the buttons and sliders on an
Intuos3 tablet, and requires the user to switch pens.
• N. D’Alessandro’s HandSketch [8] controller uses a polar
coordinate system, calibrated to the ergonomics of a
performer’s arm. This mapping is presented, and
calibrated for individual users. Individual gestures
(forearm for pitch, fingers for intensity) are practiced in
isolation and in combination.
• Ali Momeni [29, 20] uses multiple interpolation spaces:
one controlled by the tip of the pen and one by the tilt.
While initially difficult, this complex spatial navigation
scheme has huge expressive potential.
• Matthew Wright [29] employs a scrubbing metaphor,
where a click on the tablet defines the material to which a
long trajectory is applied. 8 This method also generates
multiple spaces and navigation challenges.
In addition to myself, I have already invited other members of
the NIME Community to contribute, and I anticipate
involving additional composers in response to this paper.
Études should be short, focused pieces that deal with a
technical issue from the composer’s musical practice.
Hopefully, the pieces will be more in the model of Chopin
than Czerny, fully formed pieces of music and not simply
exercises.
Further important topics will be addressed in an appendix or
the Advanced Method. These include:
/.notdef.g0001Études and exercises that are intended for use in pairs, or
larger groups are also desirable in this section.
6 http://crca.ucsd.edu/~msp/software.html
7 video at: http://www.mikezed.com/music/nc2.html
8 video at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4dTcSeDTq84
Figure 3: An exercise based on Engraver Script by Willis
A. Baird (http://www.zanerian.com/BairdLessons.html)
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
247
/.notdef.g0001Extensions to the tablet interface by employing an
alternate controller in the other hand, including the
Qwerty Keyboard, fader boxes, and FSR’s.
/.notdef.g0001Material that has a more explicit connection to the use of
the stylus in other arts, such as writing, drawing, and
painting – Calligraphy or sumi-e inspired études.
5.ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to my colleagues Richard Andrews, Adrian Freed,
David Wessel, and Matthew Wright and to Wacom Co., Ltd.
6.REFERENCES
[1] Accot, J. and S. Zhai “Performance evaluation of input
devices in trajectory-based tasks: An application of the
steering law.ACM Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. Pittsburg, PA, 1999, pp.466-472.
[2] Balakrishnan, R. and MacKenzie, I. S. “Performance
differences in the fingers, wrist, and forearm in computer
input control. Proc. of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing SystemsAtlanta, Georgia, United
States, March 22 - 27, 1997. S. Pemberton, Ed.
[3] Boie, B, M. Mathews, and A. Schloss “The Radio Drum
as a Synthesizer Controller,” InProc. of the International
Computer Music ConferenceColombus, OH, 1989,
pp.42-45.
[4] Buxton, B. Sketching User Experiences: getting the
design right and the right design.Morgan Kaufmann,
San Francisco, 2007.
[5] Buxton, W, R. Sniderman, W. Reeves, S. Patel and R.
Baecker “The Evolution of the SSSP Score Editing
Tools” InComputer Music Journal(The MIT Press:
Cambridge, MA, V olume 3.4, Winter 1979), pp. 14-25.
[6] Czerny, C. The Art of Finger Dexterity.G. Schirmer,
New York, 1986.
[7] Czerny, C. The School of V elocity.G. Schirmer, New
York, 1986.
[8] D’Alessandro, N. and T. Dutoit “Handsketch Bi-Manual
Controller” Proc. of the New Interfaces for Musical
Expression Conference. New York, June 2007, pp.78-81.
[9] Denis, G. and P. Jouvelot “Motivation-driven educational
game design: applying best practices to music education”
Proc. of the 2005 ACM SIGCHI International Conference
on Advances in computer entertainment technology, June
15-17, 2005, Valencia, Spain, pp.462-465.
[10] Dobrian, C. and D. Koppelman “The ‘E’ in NIME:
Musical Expression with New Computer Interfaces”
Proc. of the New Interfaces for Musical Expression
Conference.P a r i s ,F r a n c e ,J u n e2 0 0 6 ,p p . 2 7 7 - 2 8 1 .
[11] Ericsson, K. A., R. Th. Krampe, and C. Tesch-Römer
“The role of deliberate practice in the acquisition of
expert performance” Psychological Review,1 0 0 ,1 9 9 3 ,
pp.363-406.
[12] Fitts, P . “The information capacity of the human motor
system in controlling the amplitude of movement”
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 47, 103-112, 1954.
[13] Green, B. and T. GallweyThe Inner Game of Music.New
York, Doubleday, 1986.
[14] Hanon, C. L.The Virtuoso Pianist in 60 Exercises.G .
Schirmer, New York, 1986.
[15] Lacy, S.Findings: My Experience with the Soprano
Saxophone.P a r i s ,O u t r eM e s u r e ,1 9 9 4 .
[16] Lehman, A. A. “Efficiency of deliberate practice as a
moderating variable in accounting for sub-expert
performance” in Deliege and Sloboda (eds.)Perception
and Cognition of Music. Hove, East Sussex, Psychology
Press 1997.
[17] Liebman, D.Developing a Personal Saxophone Sound.
Medfield, MA, Dorn Publications, 1994.
[18] Marino, G, M. Serra, and J. Raczinski “The UPIC
System: Origins and Innovations” InPerspectives of New
Music Seattle, WA, V olume 31.1 1993, pp. 258-269.
[19] McKim, D. J.Joseph Allard: His Contributions to
Saxophone Pedagogy and Performance.P u b l i s h e d
Doctor of Arts Dissertation, University of Colorado,
2000.
[20] Momeni, A. and D. Wessel “Characterizing and
Controlling Musical Material Intuitively with Geometric
Models” Proc. of the New interfaces for Musical
Expression Conference,M o n t r e a l ,C a n a d a ,2 0 0 3 ,p p . 5 4 -
62.
[21] Niehaus, LJazz Conception for Saxophone.Hollywood,
Try Publishing Company, 1965.
[22] Orio, N., N. Schnell, and M. Wanderly “Input Devices
for Musical Expression: Borrowing Tools from HCI”
Proc. of the New Interfaces for Musical Expression
Conference. Seattle, WA, 2001.
[23] Sand, B. L.Teaching Genius: Dorothy DeLay and the
Making of a Musician. New York, Amadeus Press, 2000.
[24] Schacher, J. “Gestural Control of Sounds in 3D Space”
Proc. of the New Interfaces for Musical Expression
Conference.N e wY o r k ,U S A ,J u n e2 0 0 7 ,p p . 3 5 8 - 3 6 2 .
[25] Wanderly, M. “Gestural Control of Music”Proc. of the
International Workshop on Human Supervision and
Control in Engineering and Music.Kassel, Germany,
2001.
[26] Wessel, D. and M. Wright “Problems and Prospects for
Intimate Musical Control of Computers”ACM
Computer-Human Interaction Workshop on New
Interfaces for Musical Expression,S e a t t l e ,W A ,2 0 0 1 .
[27] Whiteside, A.On piano playing.Amadeus Press,
Portland, Or., 1997.
[28] Wright, M. and A. Freed “Open Sound Control: A New
Protocol for Communicating with Sound Synthesizers”
Proc. of the International Computer Music Conference.
Thessaloniki, Hellas, 1997, pp.101-104.
[29] Zbyszy ski, M., M. Wright, A. Momeni, and D. Cullen/.notdef.g0003
“Ten Years of Tablet Musical Interfaces at CNMAT”
Proc. of the New Interfaces for Musical Expression
Conference.N e wY o r k ,U S A ,J u n e2 0 0 7 ,p p . 1 0 0 - 1 0 5 .
[30] Zbyszy ski, M., M. Wright, and E. Campion “Design and/.notdef.g0003
Implementation of CNMAT 's Pedagogical Software”
Proc. of the International Computer Music Conference,
Volume 2, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2007, pp.57-60.
[31] “The TX-0: Its Past and Present”The Computer Museum
Reports, Vol. 8.B o s t o n ,C o m p u t e rH i s t o r yM u s e u m ,
1984.
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
248