Instrumental Investigations at the Emute Lab 
 
Thor Magnusson 
Experimental Music  
Technologies Lab 
Department of Music 
University of Sussex 
Brighton, UK 
t.magnusson@sussex.ac.uk 
 
Alice Eldridge 
Experimental Music  
Technologies Lab 
Department of Music 
University of Sussex 
Brighton, UK 
alicee@sussex.ac.uk 
 
Chris Kiefer 
Experimental Music  
Technologies Lab 
Department of Music 
University of Sussex 
Brighton, UK 
c.kiefer@sussex.ac.uk 
 
ABSTRACT 
This lab report discusses recent projects and activities of the 
Experimental Music Technologies Lab at the University of Sussex. 
The lab was founded in 2014 and has contributed to the development 
of the field of new musical technologies. The report introduces the 
lab’s agenda, gives examples of its activities through common themes 
and gives short description of lab members’ work . T he lab  
environment, funding income and future vision are also presented. 
 
Author Keywords 
NIME, lab report, new technologies for musical expression. 
 
CCS Concepts 
• Applied computing → Sound and music computing; • Applied 
computing → Arts and humanities → Performing arts; • CCS → 
Human Computer Interaction (HCI) → HCI design and 
evaluation methods → Laboratory experiments; 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The Experimental Music Technologies Lab was founded in early 2014 
to create a sustainable platform for original research in music  
technologies at the University of Sussex. The aim was twofold: firstly, 
to maintain the existing research collaboration between the Music and 
Informatics departments at Sussex  after some departmental 
restructuring, and, secondly, to create an outward-facing hub for 
collaborative activities and information source for researchers in other 
institutions and the general public. Sussex has a long tradition of 
research into computational creativity [4] and the development of new 
technologies for perception and expression, often related to the 
activities of the COGS centre (Centre of Cognitive Science) where 
perceptual prosthesis and artificial intelligence have been considered 
fruitful ways to study the human mind [10]. For us in the Emute Lab, 
musical instruments have been instruments for musical expression as 
well as instruments of science, following a millennia old tradition of 
scholarly enquiry [17]. Our artistic work is practice-based and in 
addition to interdisciplinary collaboration and lab-based research and 
development we see live musical performance as a laboratory setting.  
 The Emute Lab has organised concerts, exhbitions, workshops, 
symposia and conferences, on campus as well as in Brighton centre 
and in other cities. By joining forces we have been able to collaborate 
and share research with other scientists and people all over the world, 
following open science methods [18]. For lab members, the function 
of th ese activities goes beyond communication of research or 
“impact”: they represent an essential activity to gather data from users 
and audience, feeding into the design of new systems or improvement 
of current work, as well as autoethnographic or ethnomethodological 
studies of our own experience as performers. This experience and 
feedback of our research results in the next iteration of the work. We 
seek to do our research in the open, with people, encouraging people 
to use our technologies, as real users with specific defined artistic goals 
are the best commentators on artistic-research. A history of some 
organised lab events can be seen here:  
http://www.emutelab.org/events  
2. RESEARCH THEMES AT EMUTE LAB 
Members of the lab work equally independently and collaboratively 
on research projects. Our approach tends to be dynamic and quick 
groupings of people form around certain experiments or events. In the 
following sections we list our key activities under themes that have 
emerged as central nodes of focus in the lab’s six years of operation. 
2.1 Instrument Design 
As musicians in the 21st century, instrument design has become a 
principal mode of composing [16]. The established notions of 
composer, performer and instrument designer have fused into more 
fluid terms like inventors, producers or simply musicians, where the 
musical piece is often an open system that is performed by the 
inventor. At the Emute lab we are all involved in instrument design 
ranging from musical pieces as instruments in the work of Ficarra or 
Magnusson to more substantial general instruments in the form of 
feedback instruments or modular audiovisual systems, such as the 
halldorophone (see below). Topics of expressivity, notation, 
sustainability and cultural adoption and adaptation of the instruments 
are all of interest. Based on interest in cognitive science accounts of 
embodiment and enactivism [20], the lab has focussed on building 
instruments that combine expressive gestural control of acoustic 
instruments with programmability of software instruments, and 
increasingly hybridised instruments which integrate these. We have a 
shared interest in extending hu man agency into material or 
computational processes, whether that is through acoustic or 
algorithmic properties. The methods are often a hybrid between music 
and engineering in terms of methodology, integrating intuit ion, 
technique, imagery as performer, with measurements and empirical 
analysis of engineering practice. Eldridge captures this well when she 
describes her  approach to music research as “three -fold 
experimentation: experimenting as a musician (exploring musical 
paths of unknown outcomes a la Cage), as an engineer (tinkering, 
following hunches, testing things out in the real world), as a scientist 
(forming hypothesis and testing through empirical analyses).”  
2.2 Live Coding 
Live coding has been a prominent research trope at Sussex, long before 
the Emute Lab was established. The live coding pioneer Nick Collins 
(aka. Click Nilson) worked on live coding research at Sussex from 
2005 and Thor Magnusson released his ixiQuarks system with live 
coding capability [14] around this time and ixi lang in 2008 [13]. 
Magnusson’s latest live coding system is the Threnoscope [15]. In 
2013, Magnusson and Alex McLean founded the Live Coding 
Research Network (LCRN), from an AHRC network grant , and 
organised various activities that promoted live coding research and 
development between 2014-16. The LCRN is still operating, and this 
year we s aw the fifth instance of the International Live Coding 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
509
Conference in Limerick, a conference emerged out of this network. 
Chris Kiefer is a long-term live coder and works on various systems 
for example the use of embedded mini-languages within other larger 
languages. Through the MIMIC research project  ( Musically 
Intelligent Machines Interacting Creatively), which is a collaboration 
with Goldsmiths College and Durham University, we gained a new 
member of the lab, Francisco Bernardo. Bernardo is currently working 
with Magnusson and Kiefer on developing t he Sema live coding 
system [1] for live coding language design with machine learning [2].  
2.3 Feedback Instruments 
There is a pronounced research strand in the lab focusing on feedback 
instruments. A long-lasting interest by members of the lab, related to 
dynamical systems [7][11], the research of feedback as a design 
principle in instruments became grounded with the membership of 
Halldor Ulfarsson, whose research project is on the innovation of his 
electroacoustic, cello-like string instrument called halldorophone [19]. 
The halldorophone (Figure 1) has spawned further research projects, 
such as Eldridge and Kiefer’s feedback cello project [9]; their current 
research investigates the application of language and mathematical 
tools of complexity and dynamical systems to understand and finesse 
the musical behaviour of feedback instruments. Eldridge and Kiefer 
are members of the Brain Dead Ensemble (Figure 2) together with 
Thanos Polymeneas Liontiris (feedback bass) and Thor Magnusson 
(Threnoscope). This is an acoustically network ensemble [18] that has 
performed widely and recently released an album, EFZ on Confront 
Recordings and featured on a Silent Records compilation (see 
www.emutelab.org/label). 
 
 
Figure 1. The halldorophone 
2.4 Cybernetic and Dynamical Systems 
Related to work in feedback instruments is a more general research 
focus on cybernetic and dynamical systems. Joe Watson has recently 
completed his doctoral research on the tape recording studio as a 
cybernetic system drawing inspiration from the ideas of artist-
cybernetician Gordon Pask. Likewise, during his PhD at Sussex, 
Thanos Polymeneas-Liontiris created cybernetic immersive music 
theatre pieces where the audience would influence the inner workings 
of the piece and its realtime composition and progression. These works 
are often long-duration, generative and self-evolving performances, 
that incorporate human-computer or interpersonal interaction. Kiefer’s 
conceptular synthesis [11] is another project that appea rs on 
intersections between machine learning and dynamical systems - 
training sound generators that are complex dynamical systems which 
can be manipulated further to change sound qualities. Much of the 
work exploring agency of musical instruments when system is literally 
self-determined is inspired by artificial life, cognitive science and 
cybernetics: topics at the heart of internationally renowned COGS 
centre for cognitive science (http://www.sussex.ac.uk/cogs/), with 
which many Emute Lab members are affiliated. Kiefer and Eldridge 
have also collaborated on evolutionary agent-based models of acoustic 
niche formation [9], exploring territory at the interstices of 
experimental music, Alife and ecoacoustics, an area in which Eldridge 
has carried out pioneering research (see below). 
 
 
Figure 2. The Brain Dead Ensemble in action 
2.5 Musical Materialities 
Various members of the lab study the material aspects of music and 
musical media. This ranges from the materialities of instruments to 
recording technologies to listening contexts. As an example, Dylan 
Beattie uses disc inscription technologies in an attempt to reframe 
‘record cutting’ as a creative, performative and public-facing act 
through composition, performance and sound installation practices. 
Here the inscription and production technology is used as a creative 
driver for an archaeological approach into our historical technologies. 
Following a Musical Materialities conference in 2014, the Musical 
Materialities symposium was hosted in the Sussex Humanities Lab 
(2019) with associated live performances from guest speakers taking 
place at an arts venue in Brighton. Another lab member, Alex Peverett, 
investigates historical methods for the creation of electronic art and 
integrating them with contemporary practice to create hybrid 
procedural systems for the generation of synthetic audio-visual works. 
Interrogating and experimenting with ideas around analogue and the 
digital as signal at the material level. 
 Magnusson’s work has engaged with the materiality of music from 
a theoretical perspective, whether as physical instruments and systems 
or algorithmic virtual musical software. In his recent book on Sonic 
Writing, he explores how musical practice is conditioned by 
technology and its evolution in human culture [16] but also on the 
phenomenological qualities of the instrument itself and its design, 
developed through the ideas of ergodynamics and ergomimesis [12]. 
2.6 Sound Installations 
Lab members also work with sound installations as a mode of sonic 
expression. These include installations that become live instruments, 
for example with Chevalier and Kiefer’s Listening Mirrors [5] that 
warps and blurs the boundaries between real and imagined realities, 
opening up a new space for participants to explore these two worlds as 
one through augmented reality hearing devices that intereact with the 
perception of physical objects (see Figure 3). Other examples are 
Chevalier & Duff’s 200.104.200.2 copper sound art installation, 
exhibited at NIME 2017, or Evelyn Ficarra’s audiovisual instillation 
that explores encounters between recorded digital artefacts and the 
physical world, searching for the ‘voice of the object’, and ways in 
which to engage musically with both the sonic and metaphoric 
resonance of objects. Another of Evelyn’s interest is the ‘death’ of the 
object, often expressed through deconstructed pianos and smashed 
teacups. At the core of this is an investigation into agency for the 
composer, the listener and the object itself. 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
510
 
Figure 3. Chevalier and Kiefer’s Listening Mirrors installation 
 Dylan Beattie is another member who works on installations, for 
example the Brecord sound art installation which focused on the 
language of Brexit presented in mainstream news media and 
particularly concerned with the notion of the performative 
portmanteau. The work comprises three 7-inch records reflecting 
repetition within tautological language, generative disc inscription 
cutting processes and composition responding to intensity of language. 
These were performed together and cut live to a fourth record. Danny 
Bright has created various installation works, such as the Chalk Pit 
(2014) which explores post-industrial sites in Sussex through 
multimodal sonic fracture. Bright is interested in the hauntology of 
landscapes, and his Ghosting the Periphery (2016) is a sonic ghosting 
work reflecting on the histories and spaces of the Hatton Gallery in 
Newcastle-upon-Tyne looking at how technology transforms our 
embodied relation in the world and how imagined instruments made 
real can forms new expressions.   
2.7 Feminist Approaches to Computational 
Technology 
The FACT///.network (2018) was born from a desire to form and 
support a community around issues of representation, diversity and 
inclusion within the broad area of computational practices (e.g. coders, 
DIY coders, programmers) and thinking. It has created an active 
network and community within and beyond the Emu te Lab that 
supports thinking of gender and representation in computing and 
encourages alternative demographics in current digital spaces, 
environments and practices from which computational thinking is 
made possible (Figure 4). 
 
 
Figure 4. From a FACT///.network workshop 
 Throughout 2019-20 a programme called ‘Feminist Approaches to 
Computational Technology: Read, Write, Code’ was run by Cécile 
Chevalier and Sharon Webb, that includes coding space, materialising 
feminist voices and growing support community through a series of 
events (e.g. workshop, symposium, reading group and writing space). 
2.8 Machine Listening 
A former Sussex person, Nick Collins is an honorary member of our 
lab and he has conducted research into machine listening for over two 
decades and has released SuperCollider library for machine listening 
and as part of the MIMIC project he has developed a machine listening 
library for JavaScript (
https://github.com/sicklincoln). Another lab 
member, Alice Eldridge, applies machine listening in her applied 
ecoacoustic work. C ollaborating with engi neers, conservation 
biologists, geographers and anthropologists, she has carried out 
Leverhulme, H2020 and DEFRA funded research into acou stic 
approaches to biodiversity monitoring and wilderness mapping from 
Ecuadorian Amazon and cloud forests to Indonesian reefs and the 
Swedish Arctic. Her current work investigates next generation of 
analysis tools taking inspiration from experimental music and  
neuroscientific time-series analysis methods. In 2017 she organized 
the AHRC-funded research network Humanising Algorithmic 
Listening, see http://www.algorithmiclistening.org. 
2.9 Performance 
Most members of the lab are involved in musical performance as a 
method of research as well as emptying the mind. Through actual 
practising and performing, with the pre and post-concert discussions 
with organisers and audience is an important part of finding out the 
nature of a new instrument or a system. We observe users of our work 
in performance and learn from that. An example of such “stress 
testing” of feedback instruments is the Brain Dead Ensemble, The 
ensemble explores new concepts of shared, networked performance, 
where Magnusson feeds sounds from the Threnoscope into two 
feedback cellos and feedback bass  [18]. Eldridge is currently 
commissioned by the ERC FluCoMa project to make new machine 
listening/ machine learning performance using their tools.  
 Other work includes Bright’s Passages of Time (2016), with Chisato 
Minamimura, is a work that explores the deaf experience of music 
through dance. The score invol ved live processing of dancer’s 
movement on-stage, eletroacoustically processed Foley, and a live 
score performed using samplescapes and processed guitar. The sound 
design also featured extensive use of very low frequency, and the 
building of a vibrotactile interface to allow audience members to feel 
some of the sound cues. 
2.10 Audiovisual Performance 
In terms of audiovisual composition and performance, Andrew Duff 
and Alex Peverett have been developing digital and analogue 
visualisation systems for over two decades. Peverett’s work explores 
generative digital processes as well as analogue video in the style of 
the Vasulkas, whereas Duff’s work has recently focussed on vector 
graphics, visualising the sonic output of modular synthesisers through 
vector graphic matrix screens. Kiefer developed an audiovisual 
instrument using conceptors and machine learning (see '10k video' 
here 
http://www.seeingsound.co.uk/2018-performances/) and 
Magnussson’s Threnoscope is an audiovisual live coding system. 
Ficarra’s work continually applies video as part of the performance. 
Indeed, for many it does not make sense to separate the visual from the 
musical experience: sound, silence, image, colour, movement - all are 
time-based materials to be deployed compositionally. 
2.11 Theory of Music Technologies 
The Emute lab regularly organises research events on campus with an 
overall focus on the technological conditions of musical practice. This 
thread can be detected in lab members’ work in various ways and 
Magnusson’s Sonic Writing research project (with related book 
publication [16] is a good example here. The project investigates the 
material conditions of musical practice, tracing genealogies through 
ancient Greek, medieval and early modernist thinking in order to build 
a grounded platform to understand future technologies of music 
making. Magnusson’s work has a philosophical basis, whereas others 
might be rooted in different sciences, such as Eldridge’s ecology and 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
511
cognitive science. For her hybrid techno-musicking operates in the 
space between cognitive science, conceptual art , and music 
composition and performance. She has explored generative music 
making and studies its parallels with Alife (simulation as opaque 
thought experiment) [6]. Bernardo’s theoretical work situates at the 
intersection of innovation studies in music technology and creative 
industries [3] and human-centred machine learning. He investigates 
human-centred approaches to the design of toolkits to accelerate and 
broaden user innovation with interactive machine learning 
2.12 Musical Robotics 
Evelyn Ficarra spearheaded the Robot Opera Research Project at the 
Centre for Research in Opera and Music Theatre at Sussex, which has 
had two events so far: Opera Takes a Robotic Turn which considered 
issues of performance, embodiment and vocality, and Robot Opera, 
What’s Next? which focused on theatrical and musical human/robot 
interaction (Figure 5). She collaborated with Ron Chrisley, director of 
the Centre for Cognitive Science and member of the Emute Lab. These 
human-non-human events have shown us our humanity through an 
unusual mirror. These events have ty pically ended with public 
symposia discussing the reality of non-humans in the performing arts, 
facilitated by theorists such as Prof Nicholas Till and Ron Chrisley. 
 
Figure 5. From Ficarra’s Robot Opera, What’s Next? event 
2.13 Music and AI 
The main work in this domain at the lab is represented by the MIMIC  
(Musically Intelligent Machines Interacting Creatively) project. 
Bernardo worked on the RAPID-MIX project during his doctoral 
studies, and is now the postdoc on  MIMIC. His research on the 
usability of machine learning technologies is implemented in the Sema 
system [2]. Kiefer’s conceptular synthesis is applies AI technologies 
and Eldridge’s ecoacoustics applies music information retrieval, and 
she is currently thinking about role of experimental and interactive 
music practices in “perceptualizing” large audio data sets to support 
interpretation of environmental data and public engagement. 
2.14 New Notations 
We have explored and developed non-standard notations for some 
time, ranging from common standard notation to live coding to 
graphics and animation. Magnusson’s Threnoscope [15] is an example 
of a notation system in live coding, mixing prescriptive (here textual) 
with descriptive (here visual) notation. The Syncphonia project 
(
https://www.syncphonia.co.uk/) has been developed by Hughes, 
Kiefer and Eldridge [8] aiming to help novice players to more easily 
follow notation in ensemble performance. Ulfarsson has worked with 
composers to explore new notational practices for his halldorophone 
instrument [19]. In addition to the Syncphonia project, Bright has 
worked on an AHRC-funded research project on new notations and 
we continue exploring this domain with our postgraduate students and 
through workshops. As an example, Ryan Ross Smith ran a workshop 
on animated notation with us a few years ago, a collaboration resulting 
in his Study 57 composition featuring on the cover of Magnusson’s 
Sonic Writing monograph published by Bloomsbury. 
2.15 Modular Synthesizers and Audio 
Hardware 
Andrew Duff has for many years researched and organised activities 
around modular synthesisers and related DIY culture. He and Derek 
Holzer, a guest workshop leader and performer at the Emute Lab 2 
event, both incorporate handmade and modular electronic units with 
the performance of vector oscillographics whilst in parallel exploring 
media archaeological themes around reuse of obsolete and modified 
home games consoles and their technological wartime history going 
back to developments in radar (in Holzer’s case), and additionally 
exploring past ideas of the future both visually and sonically (in Duff’s 
work). Future explorations of modular synthesisers will be further 
exploring accessible audio and video synthesis as such techniques 
from the 1970s and 80s are being made more accessible through the 
development of reverse engineered circuits and shared information via 
online communities. Duff explores how and why these technologies 
appear to signify something ‘futuristic’, as devices, sounds and 
techniques are regularly reinvented, reused and resold. One of Duff’s 
activities has been the organisation of the Brighton Modular Meet, 
where synth enthusiasts from around the world gather to demonstrate 
latest technologies, present research and perform.  
 
Figure 6. Brighton Modular Meet on Sussex campus 
 Relatedly, Danny Bright and Lee Westwood have developed a part-
composed, part-improvised performance system for two people, two 
pedalboards, and four amplifiers involving the re-appropriation of 
guitar effects pedals to create independent musical interfaces capable 
of generating and manipulating their own sounds.  
2.16 Practice-based Media Archaeology 
A considerable focus in the lab is media archaeological understanding 
of the music technologies. Watson has written about the role of the 
cybernetic ergonomics of the tape studio as shaping musical practices 
in the pre -digital studio [21]. Beattie is developing performance 
systems out of lathe cutters, inscribing sound directly onto vinyl during 
performance. Paul McConnell and Alex Peverett have worked on 
research into early personal computers, programming chips and 
working with languages such as BASIC and HyperCard. Common to 
all of these projects are the discovery of elements that have become 
implicit or tacit in our ways of working with digital technologies, but 
through the archaeological method are capable of revealing how 
certain decisions in the development of our technologies have been 
taken, why we have come to work in music in a certain way, shedding 
light on the evolution of certain musical tropes in contemporary music. 
 This work relates strongly to the theoretical media archaeological 
work by Sussex colleagues such as Ben Roberts and David Berry who 
are members of the Sussex Humanities Lab.  
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
512
3. RESEARCH ENVIRONMENT 
The Emute lab receives yearly funding from the School of Media, Film 
and Music to support research activities. It is also generously 
supported by the Sussex Humanities Lab which has offered spaces, 
equipment and technical support for various activities. Many of the 
Emute lab members are also members of the Sussex Humanities Lab 
and research and planning often overlaps. The lab also functions as a 
central research context for members of the lab when applying for 
research grants in this area, and the recent £1m MIMIC (Musically 
Intelligent Machines Interacting Creatively) AHRC research project 
and Magnusson’s AHRC Leadership Fellowship are good examples 
of that. The lab is also part of the TENOR (Technologies for Music 
Notation and Representation) international research network together 
with Concordia, McGill, Georgia Tech, IRCAM, and more partners. 
The lab received direct funding from the TENOR network to run the 
MIMIC Summer School in live coding language design , see 
www.emutelab.org/blog/summerworkshop 
 Other funded projects include  Eldridge’s AHRC-funded 
Humanising Algorithmic Listening Network and Kiefer’s British 
Academy Rising Star Designing Interfaces for Creativity project. The 
NETEM project that resulted in the Syncphonia app for realtime note 
following in musical education was funded by the AHRC and so was 
its follow-on grant that enabled the researchers to put the application 
onto app stores. These are examples of the type of funding that 
supports the activities of the lab.  
4. EVENT ORGANISATION 
In 2016 lab members organised the third ICLI (International 
Conference on Live Interfaces) conference at Sussex. It took place in 
the newly renovated Attenborough Centre for the Creative Arts on the 
Sussex campus, as well as on various locations across the city. The 
paper proceedings and video documentation can be found on the 
conference website: 
http://www.liveinterfaces.org/2016  
 The lab regularly organises symposia and workshops in theoretical 
and practical matters from ecoacoustics to live coding language 
design. All of these events are open to the public, other researchers and 
our students. This public engagement also takes the form of organising 
concerts and gigs in various locations, and we have built a lasting 
relationship with the Rose Hill music venue and arts hub in central 
Brighton. As part of Magnusson’s AHRC fellowship in 2016, he 
organised the Musical Organics symposium on new instrument design 
at STEIM (
www.sonicwriting.org/steim.html) and the New Notations 
symposium at IRCAM (www.sonicwriting.org/ircam.html) on new 
musical notations for intelligent instruments. 
 Recent workshops include the FACT/// symposium for feminist 
computational work (http://fact.network), the MIMIC summer school 
in live coding performance and language design for machine learning 
(http://www.emutelab.org/blog/summerworkshop) and the musical 
materialities workshop (http://www.emutelab.org/blog/materialities). 
5. FUTURE VISION 
A research laboratory in the arts is not a physical space or a collection 
of equipment: it is rather the sum of relationships and activities that 
emerge when people work collaboratively on common projects. As 
such, a lab can be informal, dynamic and spontaneous set of activities 
that emerge around common interests. A research lab is an umbrella 
of activities that appear under an identity, and people who have been 
involved with industry collaboration or grant applications know how 
important such an identity can be. We have resisted the idea of turning 
the lab into a university wide research centre, which would involve a 
more formal top-down approach with boards and operational scrutiny, 
and sought to keep the spirit one of bottom -up project-driven 
collaborations based on shared enthusiasm and vision of what future 
musical practice research might be and might become. 
6. REFERENCES 
[1] F. Bernardo; C. Kiefer and T. Magnusson. An AudioWorklet-
based signal engine for a live coding language ecosystem. In 
The Proceedings of the Web Audio Conference, Trondheim, 
Norway, 4-6 December 2019. 
[2] F. Bernardo; C. Kiefer and T. Magnusson. Designing for a 
pluralist and user-friendly live code language ecosystem with 
Sema. In International Conference on Live Coding, Limerick, 
Ireland, 5 - 7 February 2020. 
[3] F. Bernardo and L. Martins. Disintermediation Effects on 
Independent Approaches to Music Business. in International 
Journal of Music Business Research (IJMBR) 2014. 
[4] M. A. Boden. The Creative Mind: Myths and Mechanisms. 
London: Wiedenfield and Nicholson. 1990. 
[5] C. Chevalier and C. Kiefer. Listening mirrors: prototyping for a 
hybrid audio augmented reality installation. In Proceedings of 
ICLI, Porto. 2018. 
[6] A. Eldridge. Generative sound art as poeitic poetry for an 
information society. In Proceedings of ICMC. Ljubljana. 2012. 
[7] A. Eldridge. You pretty little flocker: exploring the aesthetic 
state space of creative ecosystems. In Artificial Life, 21 (3). 
2015. pp. 289-292. 
[8] A. Eldridge; E. Hughes and C. Kiefer. Designing dynamic 
networked scores to enhance the experience of ensemble music 
making. In Processing of TENOR. Cambridge. 2016. 
[9] A. Eldridge and C. Kiefer. Toward a synthetic acoustic ecology: 
sonically situated, evolutionary agent based models of the 
acoustic niche hypothesis. In Proceedings of the Artificial Life 
Conference (ALIFE 2018). 2018. 
[10] I. Harvey, E. Di Paolo, R. Wood, M. Quinn & E. Tuci, 
Evolutionary robotics: A new scientific tool for studying 
cognition. Artificial Life, 2005. 11 (1–2): 79–98. 
[11] C. Kiefer. Sample-level sound synthesis with recurrent 
neural networks and conceptors. PeerJ Computer Science, 
5, 2019. p.e205. 
[12] T. Magnusson. Ergodynamics and a semiotics of 
instrumental composition. Tempo, 73 (287). 2018. pp. 41-
51 
[13] T. Magnusson. ixi lang: a SuperCollider parasite for live 
coding in Proceedings of ICMC. 2011. 503-506 
[14] T. Magnusson. The ixiQuarks: Merging code and gui in 
one creative space. In Proceedings of ICMC. 2007. pp. 
332-339 
[15] T. Magnusson. Improvising with the Threnoscope: integrating 
code, hardware, GUI, network, and graphic scores. In 
Proceedings of NIME 2014. Goldsmiths, University of London, 
Jun 30-Jul 4, 2014. 
[16] T. Magnusson. Sonic writing: technologies of material, 
symbolic and signal inscriptions. Bloomsbury, New York. 
2019. 
[17] M. Nielsen. Reinventing Discovery: The New Era of Networked 
Science. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 2011. 
[18] T. Polimeneas-Liontiris; A. Eldridge; C. Kiefer and T. 
Magnusson. The ensemble as expanded interface sympoetic 
performance in the Brain Dead Ensemble. In the Proceedings of 
ICLI. Porto. 2018. 
[19] H. Ulfarsson. The halldorophone: The ongoing innovation of a 
cello-like drone instrument. In Proceedings of NIME. Virginia 
Tech. 2018. 
[20] F. Varela; E. Thompson and E. Rosch. The Embodied 
Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 1991. 
[21] Watson, J. The Thing Breathed. In Proceedings of ICLI. Porto. 
2018. 
 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
513