WamBam: A case study in design for an electronic musical 
instrument for severely intellectually disabled users 
 
Arvid Jense 
Eindhoven University of Technology 
Den Dolech 2 
5612 AZ Eindhoven, the Netherlands 
a.jense@student.tue.nl 
Hans Leeuw 
Eindhoven University of Technology 
Den Dolech 2 
5612 AZ Eindhoven, the Netherlands 
h.leeuw@tue.nl 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper looks at the design process of the WamBam; a self-
contained electronic hand-drum meant for music therapy 
sessions with severely intellectually disabled clients. Using co-
reflection with four musical therapists and literature research, 
design guidelines related to this specific user-group and context 
are formed. This leads to a concept of which the most relevant 
aspects are discussed, before describing the user  studies. 
Finally, the plan for the redesign is discussed. 
 The WamBam has unique possibilities to deal with the low 
motor skills and cognitive abilities of severely intellectually 
disabled users while music therapists benefit from the greater 
versatility and portability of this design compared to other 
musical instruments. 
 A prototype was tested with twenty users. Participants proved 
to be triggered positively by the WamBam, but three limiting 
usability issues were found. These issues were used as the 
fundamentals for a second prototype. Music therapists confirm 
the value of the WamBam for their practice.  
 
Author Keywords 
Music interfaces, music therapy, vibrotactile  feedback, 
prototyping, real-time performance, product design. 
 
ACM Classification 
H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation] User Interfaces - 
Haptic I/O, H.5.5 [Information Interfaces and Presentation] Sound 
and Music Computing, K4.2 [Computers and Society] Social issues - 
Assistive technologies for persons with disabilities. 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Making music can help a severely intellectually disabled person 
to express himself, to relax, to communicate, to get more self-
awareness or just to have fun . [8] Because traditional 
instruments often don’t have suitable affordances for this user-
group, it is an interestin g design case to create a suitable  
electronic instrument. 
 The endless possibilities of electronic sound synthesis are 
useful to match the unpredictable moods of this user group. The 
challenge is to contain these possibilities to a comprehensive 
and expressive interface which is suitable for people with low 
motor skills. 
 Music therapists and caretakers are especially open to new 
tools assist them in their practice or improve the lives of their 
clients, making cooperation and user testing very accessible.  
1.1. Intellectual disabilities 
A person is indicated as having a severe intellectual disability 
when he or she has deficits in intellectual and adaptive 
functioning to such a degree that attainment of conceptual skills 
is limited, speech is limited and support is needed for nearly all 
daily activities. [1] Severely intellectually disabled user’s 
learning level usually stay in the sensomotoric phase of Piaget’s 
developmental model [9], meaning that learning goals are 
mostly focused on the development of the senses, motor skills, 
and memory. Specific considerations are: 
• Users often lack the intellectual or cognitive abilities to 
understand instructions; a product has to be self-explanatory 
and predictable. 
• Because of the lack motor skills and unpredictability of the 
user, a design needs to withstand a high level of abuse.  
• A lack of communication skills means that the intellectually 
disabled user cannot be interviewed, and user research has to 
be done by  careful observation and explanation by a 
caretaker. 
1.2. Music therapy 
Music therapy is defined as a “[…] practice and profession in 
which music is used to actively support people as they strive to 
improve their health, functioning and wellbeing.” [2] Benefits 
for p eople with severe intellectual disabilities range from 
triggering simple emotional responses, to advanced training of 
cognitive or motor skills.  [8] The music therapy sessions 
performed by the music therapists who were interviewed in this 
project, however, focus mostly on relaxation and interaction 
between therapist and client. 
 Essential in music therapy practice are the musical 
instruments. Each instrument is different in its s ounds, 
interaction, portability, fragility and usefulness towards 
different learning goals. To accommodate the diverse needs and 
unpredictably of their clients, music therapists often take a 
large number of instruments with them. This can lead to a 
feeling of being overburdened.  
 Another issue is the price and fragility of an instrument. 
Music therapists often need to work with a limited budget or 
even need to use their personal instruments in their practice. 
Using high -grade instruments poses risks through their 
fragility, while cheaper instruments are often less engaging. 
 The four music therapists interviewed for this project 
indicated that they need for an instrument that has: 
• Low price point. 
• High versatility and adjustability for use with clients with a 
diverse range of limitations and learning goals. 
• Engaging yet low threshold interaction. 
• Engaging and diverse sounds. 
• High structural integrity and cleanability. 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on 
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME’15, May 31-June 3, 2015, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
74
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
2. RELATED WORK 
A commercial musical interface is the “Skoog”, as shown in 
Figure 1. This is a soft cube with five colored areas that can be 
touched, shaken or twisted to create a sound . They have 
focused especially on creating musicality and created a musical 
scoring system which connects to the colors. This product, 
however, needs an external control and amplification system. 
The music therapists interview in this research felt that both the 
price and need for a connected laptop and speaker system are 
big disadvantages to this product.  
 
Figure 1. Skoog, by Skoogmusic.com 
 A number of design guidelines can be distilled from research 
in musical instrument design for (intellectually) disabled users 
[3] [4] [6]: 
• The main challenge is to create an instrument through which 
the user will feel that they can express themselves. 
• Subtle design decisions such as color can have a huge impact 
on how the users react to it. 
• There should be a clear, sensory-rich multimodal mapping 
between interaction and reaction. 
• The instrument need to be identifiable as a musical 
instrument. 
• The instrument should have a low learning curve for both 
usage and configuration.  
• All musical modalities (rhythm, timbre, pitch and time)  
should be available for interaction. 
• Make sure a satisfactory musical interaction is possible 
within the first impression. 
• Design learning and demonstration material to show the 
possibilities of the instrument. 
3. PROCESS 
The design is made specifically for interaction between music 
therapist and client, as such; a co-design process is used to 
provide maximum user input . To overcome the lack of 
communicative skills of the primary user, the ideation phase 
focusses on just the music therapists; being both secondary 
users as well as proxies for the primary user. User-tests were 
done in a later stage to validate design choices. 
 The WamBam concept was formed through interviews and 
brainstorming sessions with four music therapists. A prototype 
was made and tested with 20 users covering a wide variety of 
intellectual disabilities. The user test was analyzed through a 
“usability problem report” [5] out of which came three main 
usability problems. Parallel to this, an informal qualitati ve 
analysis was done. 
  
 
Figure 2. Interaction between client and  
caretaker in the user-test. 
4. CONCEPT 
The WamBam, in its essence, is a versatile wireless self -
sounding electronic hand-drum in the shape of a multi-sensory 
dome, of which an image shown in Figure 3. It is inspired by 
the hang drum, the Korg Wavedrum and the Omni, which is a 
special instrument located in the Klankspeeltuin1 at the 
Muziekgebouw aan ’t IJ in Amsterdam. The WamBam has 
ambitions to be : a n engaging multisensory music therapy 
activity; a versatile and reliable musical instrument that has the 
affordances to be used by people with a wide range of motoric 
and cognitive (dis)abilities; and easy-to-use, affordable and 
portable in a music therapy practice. 
4.1. Shape and interaction 
The WamBam is a dome about 60 cm in diameter and 20 cm in 
height and weighs ±2 kg. The brightly colored pads are textured 
with discernable patterns. When touched, struck or stroked, the 
instrument makes a sound and resonates. The type of sound, 
tuning and the sensitivity of the instrument can be configured 
by the music therapist in an external, wireless interface. 
 The shape allows th erapists and clients to sit around the 
instrument. It can be placed on the ground, a table, the lap of 
the client or on a wheelchair table. The WamBam has a high 
structural integrity and is easily cleaned with a damp cloth. 
 
Figure 3. Final prototype concept. 
4.2. Vibrotactile feedback 
Electronic and acoustic instruments both have their advantages 
and disadvantages. Where acoustic instruments have a very 
direct and rich feedback loop in their interaction, the loop is 
disconnected in electronic instruments, as their sound is heard 
from a different location than where the interaction takes place. 
The interviewed music indicated that this is something which 
can act as a major distraction in music therapy sessions.  
Research has shown  that adding vibrotacticle feedback can 
improving the interaction with an instrument  [7].  
 Vibrotacticle feedback can be generated with a  vibration 
speaker. This is a speaker which uses an external surface as the 
speaker cone. A big advantage of this component is that it 
creates both vibrotactile and audible feedback.  
  
 
Figure 4. Vibration speaker. 
4.3. Sounds 
Sounds can be chosen from several variations in the general 
categories shown in Table 1. These categories are chosen to 
function in for a wide range of learning goals. A lot of control 
                                                                 
1 http://jeugd.muziekgebouw.nl/informatie/Klankspeeltuin/ 
75
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
is left to the music therapist. For instance, in the recognizable 
sounds samples mode, the music therapist is able to choose 
sounds which have a special meaning for their client. They 
could record spoken words from all friends at the daycare, and 
then play them back at home to their own family members. 
Table 1. Categories of sound programs. 
Type of sound Example 
Recognizable 
sound samples 
Animal sounds or voices of family 
members. 
Musical sound 
samples 
Snippets of familiar songs or Patatap-like 
sounds. 
Meditative sounds Hang drum-like or gong-like. 
Percussive sounds Drum kit or different types of short noises. 
Melodic sounds Marimba-like or organ-like. 
Chords Tuned in the primary chords. 
5. USER STUDY 
5.1. Setup 
Twenty users with a wide range of severe intellectual 
disabilities in two care facilities took part in a user -test. A 
music therapist put the instrument in the lap or on the 
wheelchair table of the users. Then she showed him or her how 
it could make a sound. The music therapist would try different 
sounds to figure out what the user liked and in what ways the 
user would interact with the instrument. Sessions took in 
between two and twenty minutes.  The user-test sessions were 
recorded and notes were taken directly. Afterward, a usability 
problem report [5] and an informal qualitative analysis were 
performed.  
5.2. Prototype 
The prototype aimed to materialize all basic design features and 
make them available for practical testing. It functioned as the 
foundation to test the technology, as well as the sound design. 
Figure 5 shows the shape and internal electronics. 
 
 
Figure 5. Exterior (left) and interior (right)  
of the first prototype. 
 As to easily get a solid, easily cleanable shell, an off-the-shelf 
salad bowl was used as the basic structure. This bowl had a 
suitable teal color, which was supplemented by colored circular 
vinyl stickers at the locations of the pads. 
 It was chosen to use piezo elements to detect a hit by the user. 
An advantage is that the elements could be glued underneath 
the surface of the bowl, greatly simplifying the construction as 
well as keeping the surface smooth. A disadvantage is that all 
the pads would respond to any hit and heavy filtering was 
needed to get the desired response. This caused that each pad 
was only hittable right on top of the sticker.  
 The sensors are put through a simple filter and read out by a 
Teensy 3.1 microcontroller. This device processed the data and 
would send a MIDI message over USB to a laptop for the 
actual sound synthesis. The sound was generated from Ableton 
Live. Most of the sound programs used physical modeling to 
get a dynamic relationship how hard the pad was hit and the 
timbre of the sound; making the instrument feel more natural. 
 An off-the-shelf vibration speaker is used, mounted with a 
bolt through the top  of the shell . This provided maximum 
vibrational coupling to the device, but it caused the bolt’s head 
to protrude from the top. It was attempted to hide this with a 
sticker, though this was often mistaken for another pad by the 
users. The vibration speaker is powered by its own battery and 
the audio was fed through a mini-jack cable from the computer. 
5.3. Results 
5.3.1. Usability issues 
The usability problem report revealed three main problems with 
the prototype: 
• Users often hit too soft, resulting in no sounds. 
• Users often hit next to the pads (lack of motor  skills), 
resulting in no sound or an unexpected sound. 
• Users don’t understand that pads are distinct (lack of 
cognitive ability), leading to repetitive and non-exploratory 
use. 
These issues often caused users to either use the instrument in a 
repetitive way without exploration or to get disinterested. 
5.3.2. Reactions users 
The reactions of the users were as diverse as their personalities. 
Some thought the instrument was absolutely amazing while 
others were scared and some plainly disinterested. While 15 of 
the participants initially reacted positively, over half of these 
got disinterested with the instrument at some point and stopped 
interacting or even pushed it away. The reasons for this can be 
found in the unresponsiveness caused by the identified usability 
issues. 
 A peculiar reaction was from one participant, who seemed to 
think the device would hurt him. He would hit the instrument, 
feel the vibration for a second with his hand palm and quickly 
retreat while shaking his hand as if he had received a small jolt 
of electricity. He would repeat this for more than five times. 
We could not identify what the source of this assumed pain 
was. 
 Several users were particularly interested in the vibrotactile 
feedback. They would hold the instrument with two hands and 
would hit the device only when it stopped vibrating. They kept 
playing with the same sound for a prolonged time and reacted 
disappointed when a sound with a lesser vibrotactile component 
was put on. 
5.3.3. Reactions music therapists 
While the music therapists were generally positive, they felt 
like the instrument still needed serious work before they could 
be able to use it in their practice. They noted the usefulness of 
being able to switch sounds,  but wanted more diversity of 
sound and more pads. Some of the sounds, like meditative got 
used a lot, while the melodic sounds got lesser interest. This 
might differ for users with a higher level. 
 A big drawback was that the instrument still had a wire 
attached to a laptop in the user -test. Combined with the 
knowledge that this was “just a prototype”, the music therapists 
did not regard the prototype as a full instrument, causing them 
to stay close to the instructed interaction, instead of daring to 
look for new forms of interacting.  
 An idea that got the music therapists excited was the 
possibility of putting their own recorded sounds on the 
instrument. They felt this would give the device a serious added 
value even outside of the context of music therapy. 
 An interesting suggestion wa s to add mounts to the 
instrument through which straps could attach the WamBam on 
a solid surface. This would allow the instrument to be used 
even with aggressive or uncoordinated users. 
 Music therapists suggested making the pads customizable in 
its graphics to can make the device more personal and to allow 
76
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
to coupling visual meaning and sounds. This could also help in 
making the instrument more acceptable for picky clients. 
 Another suggestion was to use lighting underneath the pads 
as an extra modality, as to trigger the users to touch a pad 
which lights up. 
6. REDESIGN 
Taking note of the evaluation from the user-tests, construction 
of a second prototype was started. The aim is to solve the three 
main usability issues. This prototype is yet to be tested. 
 As two of the three usability issues dealt with users missing 
the pads, this prototype was made into half a t runcated 
icosahedron instead of a dome. The separated surfaces should 
make it clearer in which way the active areas are separated. The 
shape was made by laser-cutting MDF, which was glued and 
painted. 
 
Figure 6. Exterior of the second prototype. 
 The piezo sensors of the previous prototype only responded 
to medium to hard hitting on the exact location of the pad. This 
required too much motor skill for some users. An alternative 
was found in using velostat force sensors. With these sensors, 
even a soft touch can be detected. A disadvantage is that the 
sensors need to be placed on top of the surface of the structure. 
The pads consist of multiple sensitive areas, enabling the 
detection of stroking, pushing and hitting. 
 To improve tactile and explorative qualities, each pad would 
get a specific pattern. These pads were 3d printed in a soft 
rubber material. It is expected that the extra tactile modality of 
these pads will also have a positive influence on the ability to 
play the instrument intuitively.  
 
 
Figure 7. Velostat sensor (left) and variations  
in tactile patterns (right). 
7. DISCUSSION 
7.1. Design evaluation 
The WamBam prototype was received well; users got engaged 
with the instrument and music therapists found the instrument 
to be useful in their practice. Still, more iterations are needed 
before the WamBam could be deployed in the field. As a first 
step, the three main usability issues need to be fixed through a 
new prototype and more user studies. 
 While designed with severely intellectually disabled persons 
in mind, there is no reason that the WamBam wouldn’t b e 
suitable for other user-groups. Maybe with some variations in 
color or shape, but with all the same technology, this 
instrument could be seen as a serious musical instrument. 
 Other researchers and designers could benefit from using a 
similar approach as this project, when designing for a difficult 
user group. It allows for the finding of real needs through 
interviews, while assumptions are quickly dealt by quick 
through testing. The design guidelines identified at the 
beginning of this paper could be applied to similar projects. 
8. FUTURE WORK 
With the three usability issues identified, the next step would be 
to test the second prototype and see how the interaction 
changed. The use of multimodality should be a focus in these 
tests; do the users react to tactility and sound? Is adding another 
modality, such as light, beneficial? Or is it better to keep the 
focus on one modality?  
Interface design fell outside of the scope of this paper, but is 
essential for the adoption of the WamBam. Once the 
technology and i nteraction of the basic design have been 
defined, the focus can shift towards the interaction on the music 
therapist’s side. 
 An interesting point from the interviews with the music 
therapists which did not get explored yet, was that they felt 
there was a need for an instrument that was usable by their 
clients without a therapist being present; as a way to continue 
the positive effects of music therapy outside of session time. 
9. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
All the participants of the user-tests. 
 Music therapists Lizzy Dinghs, Sasja van der Oord, Josephine 
te Pas and Annemiek Vink for helping in the research, ideation 
and user-testing phases of the process. 
 Losserhof and Jelle’s mother for allowing and hosting the 
user-testing sessions. 
 The employees of  TU/e /d.search lab for supporting the 
construction of the prototypes. 
References 
[1] American Psychiatric Association, "Intellectual Disability," 
in Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 
5th Edition: DSM -5 [5 ed.] .: American Psychiatric 
Publishing, 2003, 33-41. 
[2] Australian Music Therapy Association. (2012) What is 
Music Therapy? [Online]. 
http://www.austmta.org.au/content/what-music-therapy 
[3] B. J. Crowe and E. Ratner, "The Sound Design Project: An 
Interdisciplinary Collaboration of Music Therapy and 
Industrial Design," Music Therapy Perspectives, vol. 30, 
no. 2, p. 101, 2012. 
[4] A. Hunt, R. Kirk, and M. Neighbour, "Multiple Media 
Interfaces for Music Therapy," IEEE Multimedia, 2004, 50-
58. 
[5] D. Lavery, G. Cockton, and M. P. Atkinson, "Comparison 
of evaluation methods using structured usability problem 
reports," Behaviour & Information Technology, 1997, 246-
266. 
[6] M. Luhtala, T. Kymäläinen, and J. Plomp, "Designing a 
music performance space for persons with intellectual 
learning disabilities," in International Conference on New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression, Oslo, 2011. 
[7] M. T. Marshall and M. M. Wanderley, "Vibrotactile 
Feedback in Digital Musical Instruments," in Conference on 
New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Paris, 2006. 
[8] T. Meadows, "Music therapy for children with severe and 
profound multiple disabilities: a review of literature," 
Australian Journal of Music Therapy, vol. 8, p. 3, January 
1997. [Online]. http://www.thefreelibrary.com/Music 
therapy for children with severe and profound multiple.-
a0189828370 
[9] J. Piaget, The Psychology Of The Child . Paris: Presses 
Universitaires de France, 1969. 
 
 
77
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 