Network Latency Adaptive Tempo  
in the Public Sound Objects System 
 
Álvaro Barbosa 
† ‡
 
† 
Music Technology Group 
Pompeu Fabra University 
Calle Ocata 1, 08003  
Barcelona, Spain 
+34 93 542 21 04 
abarbosa@iua.upf.es 
Jorge Cardoso 
‡ 
Research Center for Science and 
Technology of the Arts (CITAR)  
Portuguese Catholic University 
Rua Diogo Botelho 1327,  
4169-005 Porto, Portugal 
+351 22 616 62 91 
jccardoso@porto.ucp.pt 
Gunter Geiger 
† 
Music Technology Group 
Pompeu Fabra University 
Calle Ocata 1, 08003  
Barcelona, Spain 
+34 93 542 21 04 
ggeiger@iua.upf.es 
 
ABSTRACT 
In recent years Computer Network-Music has increasingly 
captured the attention of the Computer Music Community. With 
the advent of Internet communication, geographical displacement 
amongst the participants of a computer mediated music 
performance achieved world wide extension. However, when 
established over long distance networks, this form of musical 
communication has a fundamental problem: network latency (or 
net-delay) is an impediment for real-time collaboration. From a 
recent study, carried out by the authors, a relation between 
network latency tolerance and Music Tempo was established. 
This result emerged from an experiment, in which simulated 
network latency conditions were applied to the performance of 
different musicians playing jazz standard tunes. 
The Public Sound Objects (PSOs) project is web-based shared 
musical space, which has been an experimental framework to 
implement and test different approaches for on-line music 
communication. This paper describe features implemented in the 
latest version of the PSOs system, including the notion of a 
network-music instrument incorporating latency as a software 
function, by dynamically adapting its tempo to the 
communication delay measured in real-time. 
Keywords 
Network Music Instruments; Latency in Real-Time Performance; 
Interface-Decoupled Electronic Mu sical Instruments; Behavioral 
Driven Interfaces; Collaborative Remote Music Performance;  
1. INTRODUCTION  
Research work in the Network-Music field has recently been 
published in surveys from Álvaro Barbosa in 2003 [1], Gill 
Weinberg in 2002 [2] and Dante Tanzi in 2001 [3], which 
describe and categorize several different systems, following 
diverse architectures and topologies.  
 
These systems make use of a long distance communication media 
with specific characteristics which must be dealt with. Network 
latency and Jitter represent the most distinguishable difference 
from presential music collaboration paradigms, since music 
performance is traditionally bounded to the notion of real-time 
synchronism between instruments and performers.   
It can be demonstrated that at a globe level there are physical 
limitations in current network technology, which will always 
introduce higher latency than the minimum acceptable values for 
real-time acoustic collaboration [1] [4] [5]. 
A particular approach to face such scenario is accepting net-delay 
as a natural element when creating music over the internet. The 
thought that net-delay is the particular acoustics of Internet and 
that composers should try to find a musical language that works 
on this time axis  is clearly expressed by the experimental artist 
Atau Tanaka in [6]. The concept of an Internet acoustic space and 
the influence of network conditions in acoustic communication 
has also been addressed by Chris Chafe from the SoundWIRE 
group, at Stanford University’s Center for Research in Music and 
Acoustics (CCRMA) [7]. 
2. TEMPO AND LATENCY 
A number of experiments have b een carried out with the purpose 
of determining the maximum amount of communication latency 
which can be tolerated between musicians in order to keep up 
with a synchronous performance. 
Some of the most significant results regarding the effects of time 
delay on ensemble accuracy were published in 2004 by Chris 
Chafe and Michael Gurevish [8]. From the experiment conducted 
at CCRMA it is clear that by increasing the communication delay 
between pairs of subjects trying to synchronize a clapping steady 
rhythm, the subjects tend to slow down the performance rhythm 
(Tempo). 
Similarly, an experiment carried out by the authors in June 2004 
at the Sound and Image Department  from the Portuguese Catholic 
University aimed, amongst other goals, to study the relationship 
between Tempo and Latency.  
In the experiment, simulated network latency conditions were 
applied to the performance of four different musicians playing 
jazz standard tunes with four different instruments (Bass, 
Percussion, Piano and Guitar).  
Permission to make digital or hard c opies of all or part of this work 
for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that 
copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial 
advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the 
first page. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to 
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
NIME'05, May 26-28, 2005, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
184
In a studio setup, musicians would listen to the feed-back from 
their own instruments trough headphones with delay. Their 
performance was synchronized with a metronome over several 
takes with different tempos (Beats Per Minute – BPMs). For each 
take the feed-back delay was increased until the musician wasn’t 
able to keep up a synchronous performance. 
80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220
50
100
150
200
250
Tempo (BPMs)
Latency (ms)
Musician #1 - Bass
Musician #2 - Percussion
Musician #3 - Piano
Musician #4 - Guitar
 
Figure 1. Self-Test for latency tolerance in individual 
performance of 4 different musicians 
The Graphic on Figure 1 shows that, regardless of the 
instrumental skills or the music instrument, all musicians were 
able to tolerate more feed-back delay for slower Tempos, 
therefore, it is clear that there is an inverse relationship between 
Tempo an Latency. After obtaining these results the authors 
proceeded to implement this concept on the Public Sound Objects 
(PSOs) system, aiming to achie ve a network-music instrument 
which incorporates latency as a software feature, by dynamically 
adapting its tempo to the communication delay measured in real-
time. 
3. THE PUBLIC SOUND OBJECTS  
The Public Sound Objects (PSOs) project is web-based 
Collaborative Virtual Environment focused on music 
performance, developed at the Music Technology Group of the 
Pompeu Fabra University. This project has been an experimental 
framework to implement and test different approaches for on-line 
music communication. A preliminary specification of the system 
was published in [9], and the first prototype was implemented in 
December 20021. 
The overall system architecture was designed along the following 
key aspects: (a) It is based on a Centralized Server Topology 
supporting multiple users connected simultaneously and 
communicating amongst themselves through sound; (b) It is a 
                                                                 
1 The PSOs experimental system is publicly available on-line 
from  the address: http://www.iua.upf.es/~abarbosa/  
permanent public event available both to a “real world” and on-
line virtual audience. 
In this system the raw materials provided to the users for 
manipulation during a performance are Sound Objects, according 
to Pierre Schaeffer’s definition “any sound phenomenon or event 
perceived as a coherent whole (…) regardless of its source or 
meaning” [10].  
These Sound Objects are triggered at the server-side real-time 
sound synthesizer according to the user’s action. Since the Feed-
Back from other user’s performance is strictly auditory, the 
characteristic which makes a Sound Object distinguishable from 
the overall soundscape is the key element that permits the 
awareness of the individual action of a user over his performance. 
4. THE PSOs ARCHITECTURE 
The PSOs system is composed by the PSOs Server and by 
multiple PSOs Clients. Clients handle a visual interactive 
interface and the server handles  all computation regarding the 
sound synthesis and transformation.. 
PSOs
SERVER
(...)
PSOs CLIENTS
STREAMING
AUDIO SERVER
HTTP-SERVER
INTERACTION
SERVER
LOCAL VISUAL
REPRESENTATION
ENGINE
Public Installation Site
INTERNET
Global Audio Performance
(Continuous Streaming Connection)
Performance Commands
(Discrete Connection triggered by client events)
SOUND
OBJECTS
DATA-BASE
WEB BROWSER
Streaming Audio Client
Controller Interface
WEB BROWSER
Streaming Audio Client
Controller Interface
WEB BROWSER
Streaming Audio Client
Controller Interface
Apache + Custom Developed Servlet
ICECAST Streaming Server
Pure-Data
Pure-Data
Pure-Data + GEM
  
Figure 2. The PSOs System Architecture 
Clients communicate with the server through HTTP by sending 
and receiving packets of data. At the server packets are received 
by a Web application that reroutes them to the Interaction Server 
– a module of the PSOs Server that manages clients, instruments 
and the events generated by the PSOs Client. Depending upon the 
type of data packet received, a sound can be generated by the 
Synthesis and Transformation Engine and streamed back to the 
client by the Streaming Audio Serv er, or the visual representation 
of the client can be updated at the installation site by the Local 
Visual Representation Engine, or both. 
Server and Clients are composed by different modules: 
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
185
4.1 HTTP Server 
Clients connect to the PSOs Server through standard HTTP 
connections. Although our initial choice was to implement UDP 
based communications – faster than a TCP based protocol like 
HTTP – the idea had to be abandoned, since most firewalls block 
all unknown UDP traffic which meant that a great number of 
users would not be able to access our server. In order to overcome 
these restrictions a communication system was realized using a 
“firewall ALWAYS ALLOW” protocol: HTTP. For this a server 
application was implemented, using the Java Servlet technology, 
which acts as a proxy between the PSOs Client applet and the 
Interaction Server.  
4.2 Interaction Server 
The Interaction Server is a central piece in the PSOs Server. It’s a 
Pure Data (PD) module that receives data packets in the form of 
UDP datagrams from the clients (through the HTTP Server) and 
acts accordingly to the type of packet received.  
A custom PD object had to be im plemented for the reception of 
the UDP datagrams – which was called Extended Netreceive 
[xnetreceive] – since existing objects for this propose don’t 
allow PD to acquire the IP address and port number of the client 
that initiated the communication.  
4.3 Synthesis and Transformation Engine 
The Synthesis and Transformation Engine is responsible for the 
sound generation in response to the PSOs Clients’ generated 
events. This engine is a PD patch automatically loaded by the 
Interaction Server. The engine has nine synthesis modules that 
correspond to the Sound Object’s instruments available to users. 
The sound generated by these modules is streamed in MP3 
format, using the [shoutcast~] PD object to an audio 
streaming server. Users can choose one of these modules from the 
client entry screen.  
4.4 The Client User Interface 
Once selected the Sound generating engine (instrument), the web-
browser loads a controller interface java applet, which connects to 
the interaction server, registers and initializes a user session. 
 
Figure 3. PSOs Client controller interface 
The graphical user interface presented in Figure 4, follows a 
metaphor of a ball that infinitely bounces on the walls of an 
empty room. When the ball hits  one of the walls a network 
message is sent to the central server where the corresponding 
Sound Object is triggered, played through a specific source 
speaker and simultaneously streamed back to the user in a stereo 
mix of all the sounds being triggered at the moment.  
The ball moves continuously and the user can manipulate its size, 
speed, direction, tail extension and each wall’s acoustic texture. 
Normalized values are then sent to the server and mapped to 
synthesis parameters. The wall’s acoustic texture matches the 
Sound Object’s pitch (individual pitch values can be assigned to 
each wall, allowing the creation of melodic and rhythmic sound 
structures) and the ball’s tail extension corresponds to the number 
of replicas of the delay applied to the Sound Object. 
4.5 Local Visual Representation Engine 
The Local Visual Representation Engine outputs the visual 
representation of the bouncing ball model of all the connected 
PSOs Clients, at the servers physical location. It consists of a PD 
patch that uses the Graphics Environment for Multimedia (GEM) 
external for graphics output, using information from each client to 
update the state information. The visual setup is composed by a 
video wall with nine screens arranged in a 3 by 3 matrix. Each 
screen is assigned to an instrument in the same order as they are 
presented to the user in the PSOs Client interface.  
 
Figure 4. PSOs Installation Site setup 
The clients are represented at the installation site as spheres with 
different colours, sizes and speed. Each client is assigned to a 
screen in the video wall which also limits the movement of the 
corresponding sphere, i.e., the limits of each screen are mapped to 
the limits of the PSOs Client's window. The engine only has 
accurate information when clients send packets to the server. The 
rest of the time, the position of the bouncing ball has to be 
interpolated based on the information from the last packet. 
4.6 Network Latency Adapted Tempo 
The idea of a network music instrument which dynamically 
adapts to internet network-latency was implemented recently by 
Jörg Stelken in the peerSynth Software [11]. PeerSynth is a per-
to-peer sound synthesizer which supports multiple users displaced 
over the internet, measuring the latency between each active 
connection and dynamically lowering the sound volume of each 
user’s contribution in the incoming soundscape, proportionally to 
the amount of delay measured in his connection. Stelkens 
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
186
followed a real world metaphor were, in fact, the sound volume of 
a sound source decreases with the distance to the receiver, which 
also implies increasing acoustical communication latency. A 
similar approach was followed in the AALIVENET System [12]. 
The PSOSs system approaches this same idea, but addressing a 
less immediate, but equally relevant, relation between musical 
characteristics and communication latency. It implements a 
Network Tempo Adaptive Latency feature, which dynamically 
reduces the performance tempo according to the latency measured 
in real-time between the client and the server.  
In the Bouncing Ball user interface the musical tempo correspond 
to the ball speed. The reduction factor applied to the ball speed is 
presented in the user interface and its calculated so that it 
averagely guarantees that the ball will not hit the walls twice 
without the sound triggered by the ti me the first hit arrives to the 
client. The main idea is that the ball will go as fast as your 
connection allows you to go . This way the effect of latency is 
much less confusing, permitting the user to have a much better 
awareness of the relationship between a hit on the wall and the 
corresponding triggered sound. 
5. PSOs USER STUDY AND EVALUATION 
The complete PSOs System, including the physical setup at the 
server site, was installed at the Portuguese Catholic University 
Campus in Porto between 7 and 14 of October 2004. During this 
trial period several client instances were installed on campus and 
109 subjects tested the system and answered questionnaires. Some 
of the average results extracted from this opinion pool are 
presented in Figure 6. 
 Mean (1: very low; 5: very high)
3,68
3,56
3,24
2,77
2,74
2,72
1,00 1,50 2,00 2,50 3,00 3,50 4,00 4,50 5,00
Effect of Interface Manipulation on The sound
Object 
Importance of having visual feed-back from
other user’s performance
Perception of your own sound amongst the
sound produced by other users
Necessity of having musical formation in order
to achieve interesting results
Necessity of having experience with computer
interfaces in order to achieve interesting
results
Amount of influence of other users
performance n your own performance
 
Figure 5. PSOs Preliminary Evaluation Results 
Some of these results meet our expectations: (1) The interface is 
effective establishing a relation between the user action and its 
effect on the correspondent Sound Object; (2) The Sound Objects 
available at the current setup allow acoustic differentiation in the 
global soundscape; (3) It is a system accessible to the general 
public, without requiring previous  music formation or previous 
GUI manipulation skills. On the other hand it seams that in 
general users feel the need to have a visual representation of other 
user’s behavior, and maybe for this reason, the collaborative 
effect amongst performers is relatively low. 
6. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
For over two years the Public Sound Objects project has 
successfully performed as an experimental framework to 
implement and test different approaches for on-line music 
communication. The recent user study and evaluation confirmed 
some of the main system design ideas to be effective, however it 
also suggests further improvements, such as a visual 
representation of other users at the client instance, and possibly 
sound synthesis at the client side using a PD web-browser plug-in.  
The Network Tempo Adaptive Latency, implemented in the PSOs 
latest version, represents a significant improvement in the system 
usability and further developments will be explored in order to 
improve latency tolerance, specifically in the bouncing ball 
interface, using spatialization features. 
7. AKNOWLADGEMENTS 
The Authors would like to thank Martin Kaltenbrunner for his work in 
the early development stage of PSOs and Alexander Carôt for his 
collaboration in the Delay VS Tempo Experiment. This research is 
supported by “Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia” – Portugal. 
8. REFERENCES 
 [1]   A. Barbosa, Displaced Soundscapes: A Survey of Network 
Systems for Music and Sonic Art Creation. Leonardo Music Journal, 
Volume 13, Issue 1, pp. 53-59, MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 2003. 
 [2]  G. Weinberg. The Aesthetics, History, and Future Challenges 
of Interconnected Music Networks.  349-356. 2002. Proceedings of 
the International Computer Music Conference.  
 [3]   D. Tanzi, Observations about Music and Decentralized 
Environments. Leonardo Music Journal, Volume 34, Issue 5, pp. 431-
436, 2001. 
 [4]  N. Schuett. The Effects of Latency on Ensemble Performance.  
2002.  Stanford University.  
 [5]  N. Lago and F. Kon. The Quest for Low latency.  33-36. 2004. 
Proceedings of the International Computer Music Conference 
(ICMC2004).  
 [6]  Atau Tanaka, Musical Implications of Media and Network 
Infrastructures: Perturbations of traditional artistic roles. In 
Hypertextes hypermédias, nouvelles écritures, nouveaux langages. pp. 
241-250, Hermes Science Publications, 2001. 
 [7]  C. Chafe, S. Wilson and D. Walling. Physical Model 
Synthesis with Application to Internet Acoustics.  2002.  IEEE - Signal 
Procesing Society. Proceedings of the International Conference on 
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, Orlando - Florida 
(ICASSP2002).  
 [8]  C. Chafe, M. Gurevich, Grace Leslie and Sean Tyan. Effect of 
Time Delay on Ensemble Accuracy.  2004. Proceedings of the 
International Symposium on Musical Acoustics, Nara - Japan 
(ISMA2004).  
 [9]  A. Barbosa and M. Kaltenbrunner. Public Sound Objects: A 
shared musical space on the web.  2002.  IEEE Computer Society 
Press. Proceedings of International Conference on Web Delivering of 
Music (WEDELMUSIC 2002) - Darmstadt, Germany.  
 [10]  P. Schaeffer,  Traité des Objets Musicaux., 1966. 
 [11]  J. Stelkens. peerSynth: A P2P Multi-User Software with new 
techniques for integrating latency in real time collaboration.  2003. 
Proceedings of the International Computer Music Conference 
(ICMC2003).  
 [12]  M. Spicer. AALIVENET: An agent based distributed 
interactive composition environment.  2004. Proceedings of the 
International Computer Music Conference (ICMC2004).  
 
 
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
187