Expanding the saxophone with different tone generators 
and a foot controller for complementary voices 
 
Jonas Braasch 
School of Architecture, EMPAC, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute  
110 8th Street, Troy, NY 12180, USA  
braasj@rpi.edu
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper focuses on expanding saxophone performance 
practice through exchangeable tone generators and a foot 
controller utilizing fine motor skills. The combination of both 
expansions extends the timbral qualities of  the saxophone into 
new territories. The different tone generators turn the saxophone 
into a flute, a sarrusophone, a modern variation of the 
Renaissance cornett, and a free -reed instrument with each 
instrument class's distinct sonic characters. The foot -controller 
system consists of a trackball operated by the big toe of one foot 
with separate pedals to simulate the mouse buttons with the other 
foot. The system also includes a traditional MIDI bass pedal, an 
expression pedal, and a wide -spaced ASCII keyboa rd. In 
particular, the trackball system enables complex timbre changes 
and a flexible processing flow  needed for freely improvised 
music. It can be use d to control a complete personal computer. 
The learning curve to develop the feet's fine motor skills is 
comparable to learning new embouchures for the different tone 
generators. 
 
Author Keywords 
extended saxophone techniques, foot controller, fine motor skills, free 
improvised music 
 
CCS Concepts 
•Human-centered computing → Human computer interaction (HCI) 
• Human-centered computing → Accessibility 
 
1. OVERVIEW 
 
This project to expand the sonic richness of the saxophone was 
inspired by Pauline Oliveros' (1932-2016) concept of the Expanded 
Instrument System (EIS) [1]. EIS is a live performance system based 
on random event generators that control multiple delay lines, loopers, 
and sound spatialization tools among other features. Oliveros typically 
used it in conjunction with her Roland Accordion Synthesizer, which 
recreated the sound of many musical instruments using a physical 
modeling algorithm. A central part of Oliveros’ EIS system was a foot 
controller with several expression pedals. Over time, the author had 
several opportunities to perform and record with her and felt afterward 
that the saxophone's tonal capabilities wer e too limited  [2, 3]. 
Consequently, he developed several tone generators for the saxophone 
to expand the sonic spectrum of the instrument – see Section 2.  
 
With her EIS system, Oliveros intended to augment the accordion and 
provide the instrument with abilities it naturally does not have, such as 
pitch bends in particular. The EIS system is both an instrument 
expander and a simulated environment with an audio spatializer and 
reverberation. Oliveros controlled the EIS system's numerous 
parameters with foot controllers, so she had both hands free for the 
accordion interface. She was so eager to control as many parameters 
as possible that she dived deeply into assistive technologies to learn 
from the "most marginalized" people, as she put it. The AUMI 
instrument she developed out of this engagement is still in use today 
[4, 5]. 
 
The author's idea of using foot pedals is derived from Oliveros' concept 
but follows an alternative approach that provides more flexibility. 
Inspired by disability studies, the author noticed that we do not use foot 
pedals to the most ergonomic extent. Traditional foot pedals and organ 
pedal keys are typically played with shoes on, which is like playing a 
wind instrument with mittens. Nobody would do this unless it is winter 
and one is playing trombone in a marching band. Our culture neglects 
the development of the feet’s fine motor skills. 
2. MODIFYING THE SAXOPHONE WITH 
DIFFERENT TONE GENERATORS 
 
The idea of exchanging tone generators of wind instruments has been 
frequently discussed but not thoroughly followed through, most likely 
because it requires several years of practice to master different tone 
generators. Stuart Dempster, for example, writes on Page 12 in his 
classic trombone book: “Composers would be wise not to ask for 
specific pitches or chords from these assemblages [oboe, bassoon 
reeds, and saxophone mouthpieces], since in the hands (or in the 
mouths) of trombonists, they normally lack contr ol.” [6]. This 
challenge, however, can be overcome with a careful adapter design 
and practice. The best early example of tone-generator substitution in 
wind instruments is probably Eddie Harris’ reed trumpet, a trumpet 
modified with a saxophone mouthpiece so it can be played with less 
embouchure fatigue [7]. The practice described here goes well beyond 
Harris' approach by using a collection of eight different tone generators 
to expand the timbral qualities of a soprano saxophone, as shown in 
Figure 1 and thoroughly described in [8]. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Different tone generators adapted for the soprano 
saxophone (from left to right): bawu-reed adapter, bassoon reed 
with adapter, regular saxophone mouthpiece (Otto Link, 13*), 
and an adapter for the cornett mouthpiece (C. Monk mouthpiece 
by Jeremy West). 

 
 
Figure 2. Frequency spectra for four different saxophone tone 
generators (right column, from top to bottom): Saxophone played 
as rim flute, saxophone with modified cornett mouthpiece (Boehm 
cornett), saxophone with bassoon reed (Sarrusophone), and 
saxophone with bawu reed. The left graphs show the frequency 
spectra for the prototype instruments (from top to bottom): 
Turkish ney, Renaissance cornett (modern copy by Moeck with a 
mouthpiece by Jeremy West), orchestral oboe (Yamaha), Chinese 
bawu. 
 
All saxophone variations can be played in tune over the range of the 
prototypical instruments (not shown): flute (2 octaves), cornett (2 1/2 
octaves), bassoon-reed (2 octaves), bawu-reed (1 octave plus a whole 
note and two additional under-blown notes, which is basically the 
range as the original bawu). It should be noted that the characteristic 
tone generators can be heard out for all instruments. These sonic 
features are observeable in the spectra, as shown in Figure 2, but could 
be depicted in an onset analysis that would go beyond the scope of this 
paper.  
 
For example, the saxophone with a cornett mouthpiece can be 
perceptually identified as a brass instrument, and it no longer sounds 
like a woodwind instrument. The expanded saxophone incorporates 
traits of the whole wind instrument corpus rather than just imitating 
their sounds. It can no longer be classified into one distinct category 
because the commonly used classification system after von Hornbostel 
and Sachs [9] primarily classifies musical instruments according to 
their tone generators -- see Figure 3. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Influences of the expanded saxophone as functions of 
instrument category (x-axis) and time (y-axis). Filled circles show 
predecessors and filled squared depict current orchestral 
instruments. Lines depict evolutionary linkages between these 
wind instruments. 
 
3. A FOOT CONTROLLER CAPABLE OF 
FINE MOTOR CONTROL 
Foot pedals are often used to augment a musician’s performance 
ability because her hands are too busy to operate additional functions 
by hand [10–14]. Based on the demands of the author’s music practice, 
which is largely timbre and texture-oriented, the author decided to 
develop a foot controller that allows for fine motor control. The device 
was inspired by artists with disabilities who use their feet to play music 
and have demonstrated that one can gain similar fine motor control 
with the foot compared to our fingers' control. Felix Klieser is a  
virtuoso classical horn player who, being born without arms, operates 
the valves using his foot [15].  
 
The center of the assembled controller is a regular trackball interface 
that is used as a mouse substitute – see Figure 4. The trackball is rolled 
with the left big toe, and since it is difficult to press the “mouse“ 
buttons at the same time, the left and right buttons are substituted from 
a transcription foot pedal system used by stenographers (Grundig, 
Stenorette 526A). The pedal’s electronics were hacked by soldering 
the analog controller to a spare circuit board of a mouse interface, 
which was glued inside the pedal. This system’s advantage is that no 
software application is required to map the pedal output into mouse 
button commands, as is sometimes the case with commercial USB 
foot pedals. 
 
After some training, the trackball interface can be used intuitively, for 
example, to write “foot”-written notes – see accompanying video 
https://vimeo.com/943877077]. With additional training, one can 
probably avoid writing like a first grader, but for the control of music 
parameters, this skill is not necessary. An ASCII computer keyboard 
with wide inter-key spacing is located in between both controllers 
(Grandtec, Virtually Indestructible Keyboard). The foot-controller 
system also includes a velocity -sensitive MIDI bass pedalboard 
(Ketron K8) and an expression pedal (Behringer FCV100). The 
virtually indestructible ASCII keyboard is even exhausting to operate 
by hand, but it is easy to clean and good enough to type small texts 
such as URLs using the big toes. 
 
The foot -controller system shown in Figure 4 
allows great flexibility, and it can be used  to control the entire 
computer. The author's improvised music practice draws on long 
notes and passages with circular breathing over several minutes, 
and the controller allows the author to assign new parameters and 
develop new concepts on the fly. Example scenarios include: 

1. Controlling a virtual analog synthesizer where cords 
can be patched by  foot as needed, and the virtual 
controllers can be operated using the trackball. 
2. DAW operation. 
3. Virtual Orchestra using a sampling library. 
4. Controlling Pauline Oliveros' Expanded Instrument 
System (EIS).  
 
 
Figure 4. The proposed foot-controller system consists of a 
trackball (enabling fine motor control), mouse buttons, an 
expression pedal, and a MIDI bass keyboard pedal. 
 
In general, the author is more interested in augmenting the natural tone 
of the saxophone rather than processing it, as is the case in Oliveros’ 
EIS system. (S)he often treats his/her expanded saxophone system as 
a combination of saxophone, foot controller-enabled counter-voice, 
and joint sonic environment. 
 
4. DISCUSSION 
 
Using the foot-controller requires two different training types, one 
regarding the operation of the foot controller itself, and the other one 
to learn to coordinate between hand and foot movement. Learning to 
operate the controller itself is a question of training and time. In the 
beginning, this can be very fatiguing, and it was important to design a 
footrest for the heel to improve the ergonomics. For those who have a 
good memory in  their elementary-school childhood, learning to 
develop fine motor skills in the toe is similar to learning to write by 
hand. The results that were shown in Image 5 support this comparison. 
Training will require time, and it is usually better to train often and 
continuously rather than in overly long sessions. The author had 
similar experiences when lea rning to perform the different 
mouthpieces for the saxophone. Like hand-writing, once the motor 
skills have been developed in the foot, regular training is not necessary 
to retain the motor memory. 
 
Learning to coordinate between the hand and foot movement can be 
the more challenging part [16]. Fortunately, much literature exists on 
this topic one can draw from pipe organ [17, 18] and piano literature 
[19]. Performing the pipe organ might be the most challenging task 
because it requires the coordination/independence of the left and right 
hand as well as the feet. Bach’s pieces are known to be compelling 
because they often incorporate three independent voices. In contrast, 
the piano requires the independence of the left and right hands, 
and no additional voices are played using the feet. 
 
Like the piano, the music practice described here basically requires the 
coordination of two independent sections: (i) the saxophone and (ii) 
voices played by the foot controller, and studying the piano literature 
can be helpful, especially when learning to play counter melodies 
using both instruments. Non -traditional use cases for the foot 
controller, such as operating a DAW or live coding, can have lesser 
requirements concerning timing as these operations are often not as 
timing-sensitive as playing notes. This can be leveraged against the 
additional training requirements for the feet’s fine motor skills. 
 
 
Figure 5. Example of using the trackball as a foot controller 
to write. 
 
5. CONCLUSION & OUTLOOK 
 
The paper described a fundamentally new foot-controller concept 
utilizing the feet’s capabilities of fine motor control. The interface was 
inspired by assistive technologies and experts who developed fine 
motor skills using their feet to compensate for disabilities. By applying 
their insight outside of disability studies, an adequate foot controller 
was developed to augment the author’s largely texture and timbre-
based wind instrument practice. Combining the new foot controller 
with a unique saxophone practice that draws from exchangeable tone 
generators provides new dimensions in tonal flexibility for wind 
instrument practice. The concept can be easily applied to other (wind) 
instruments and music practices. 
 
6. ETHICAL STANDARDS 
 
The research presented here followed the guidelines of the NIME 
Principles & Code of Practice on Ethical Research (1.1) [20]. 
  
7. REFERENCES 
 
[1] Gamper, D., & Oliveros, P. (1998). A Performer-Controlled Live 
Sound-Processing System: New Developments and Implementations 
of the Expanded Instrument System. Leonardo Music Journal, 8, 33–
38. 
 
[2] Triple Point (2014) Phase/Transition, Jonas Braasch, 
soprano saxophone; Pauline Oliv eros, V-accordion; Doug Van 
Nort, granular-feedback expanded instrument system (GREIS) 
electronics, audio compact disk 3 CDs, Pogus Records 21078-2. 
 
[3] Deep Listening Band (2014) Dunrobin Sonic Gems, Pauline 
Oliveros (V -Accordion, Conch Shell), Stuart Dempst er 
(Trombone, Didjeridu), Jonas Braasch (Saxophone), IONE 
(Opening Invocation), Jesse Stewart (Percussion), Johannes 
Welsch (Gongs), recorded live on October 5, 2013 at the 
Dunrobin Sonic Gym, Deep Listening Records. 
 

[4] Oliveros, P., Miller, L., Heyen, J., Siddall, G., & Hazard, S. (2011). 
A musical improvisation interface for people with severe physical 
disabilities. Music and Medicine, 3(3), 172–181. 
 
[5] Braasch, J. (2024) Pauline's World of Virtuosos: Expanded 
Instruments, Deep Listening, and Stretched Boundaries. In: 
Improvising across Abilities: Pauline Oliveros and the Adaptive 
Use Musical Instrument (AUMI consortium, ed.), University of 
Michigan Press. 
     
[6] Dempster, S. (1979). The Modern Trombone: A Definition of its 
Idioms. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 
   
[7] Voce, S. (1996). Obituary: Eddie Harris. Independent, November 
12, 1996. 
 
[8] Braasch, J. (2019) Hyper -specializing on the saxophone 
using acoustical insight and deep listening skills, Springer, 
Cham, Switzerland (ISBN 978-3-030-15045-7, 205 pages). 
   
[9] von Hornbostel, E. M., & Sachs, C. (1914). Systematik der 
Musikinstrumente. Ein Versuch [Classification of musical 
instruments. An attempt]. Zeitschrift Für Ethnologie, 46(H. 4/5), 553–
590. 
    
[10] Barbosa, J., Wanderley, M. M., & Huot, S. (2017). Exploring 
playfulness in NIME design: The case of live looping tools. In 
NIME’17: Proceedings of the 2012 Conference on New Interfaces for 
Musical Expression (pp. 87–92). Aalborg University Copenhagen, 
Denmark. 
    
[11] Konovalovs, K., Zovnercuka, J., Adjorlu, A., & Overholt, D. 
(2017). A wea rable foot -mounted/instrument-mounted effect 
controller: Design and evaluation. In NIME’17: Proceedings of the 
2012 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (pp. 354–
357). Aalborg University Copenhagen, Denmark. 
   
[12] Harrison, J., & McPherson, A. P. (2017). An adapted bass guitar 
for one-handed playing. In NIME’17: Proceedings of the 2012 
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (pp. 507–508). 
Aalborg University Copenhagen, Denmark. 
   
[13] Larsen, J. V., Knoche, H., & Overholt, D. (2018). A longitudinal 
field trial with a hemiplegic guitarist using the actuated guitar. In 
NIME’18: Proceedings of the 2012 Conference on New Interfaces for 
Musical Expression (pp. 305–310). Blacksburg, Virginia, USA. 
    
[14] Leib, S., & Çamci, A. (2018). Triplexer: An Expression Pedal 
with New Degrees of Freedom. In NIME’18: Proceedings of the 2012 
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (pp. 263–268). 
Blacksburg, Virginia, USA. 
 
[15]  Tracey, E. (n.d.). The man who plays French horn with his 
toes. BBC News, Ouch, 30 July 2014. Retrieved from 
https://www.bbc.com/news/blogs-ouch-28541455 [last retrieved 
January 15, 2020] 
    
[16] Bobbio, T., Gabbard, C., & Ca çola, P. (2009). Interlimb 
coordination: an important facet of gross -motor ability. Early 
Childhood Research & Practice, 11(2), 1–9. 
  
[17]  Yearsley, D. (2012). Bach’s feet: The organ pedals in European 
culture. Cambridge University Press. 
    
[18] Carvalho, A. R. (2016). Learning strategies in organ practice: A 
preliminary investigation as a potential tool in the preparation of a 
contrapuntal work. Música Em Perspectiva, 8(2). 
    
[19] Gärtner, H., Minnerop, M., Pieperhoff, P., Schleicher, A., Zilles, 
K., Altenmüller, E., & Amunts, K. (2013). Brain morphometry shows 
effects of long-term musical practice in middle-aged keyboard players. 
Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 636. 
 
[20] Morreale, F., Gold, N ., Chevalier, C., & Masu, R . (2023). 
NIME Principles & Code of Practice on Ethical Research (1.1). 
Zenodo.  
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7545682 
 
 
 
 