NIME, Musicality and Practice-led Methods
Owen Green
Edinburgh College of Art
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, UK
owen.green@ed.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
To engage with questions of musicality is to invite into con-
sideration a complex network of topics beyond the mechan-
ics of soundful interaction with our interfaces. Drawing on
the work of Born, I sketch an outline of the reach of these
topics. I suggest that practice-led methods, by dint of fo-
cussing on the lived experience where many of these topics
converge, may be able to serve as a useful methodologi-
cal ‘glue’ for NIME by helping stimulate useful agonistic
discussion on our objects of study, and map the untidy con-
tours of contemporary practices. I contextualise this dis-
cussion by presenting two recently developed improvisation
systems and drawing from these some starting suggestions
for how attention to the grain of lived practice could use-
fully contribute to considerations for designers in terms of
the pursuit of musicality and the care required in consider-
ing performances in evaluation.
Keywords
NIME, musicality, practice-led research, interdisciplinarity
1. INTRODUCTION
“If our goal is musical expression we have to
move beyond designing technical systems.” [25]1
So stated Michel Waisvisz in the guiding text for a panel
discussion at NIME 2006. My purpose in this paper is to
outline a way in which I think practice-led methods can
be helpful to NIME in moving beyond technical concerns
and developing a ﬁrmer, more nuanced grasp on complex,
vexatious questions of musicality.
The proposal is neither a call for wholesale revision of
NIME’s outlook or methods, nor is it a prescription for the
only appropriate manner in which to approach practice-led
research in this area. Rather, this is suggested as a useful
way of complementing NIME’s already impressive achieve-
ments and of strengthening the kind of contribution that
practice-led researchers are able to make.
In live electronics, in particular, NIME has become some-
thing of a centre of gravity, as its proceedings represent the
closest thing to a specialist literature of technique that we
1Many thanks to Marco Donnarumma for drawing my at-
tention to this quotation
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’14,June 30 – July 03, 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
have. However, as such it also exerts a kind of gravita-
tional pull because there is relatively little from within the
sub-disicpline that reﬂects on how the goals of, say, inter-
action designers and practice researchers may well diﬀer,
despite their obvious overlap. The danger here is that prac-
tice researchers bring amateur interaction designs, rather
than capitalising on the distinct perspectives and insights
aﬀorded by their mode of investigation.
This paper will make a particular argument for how knowl-
edge claims can be situated for practice-led research, and
position this in interdisciplinary relation to the activities of
NIME. I will contextualise this by presenting two pieces of
work and suggesting how insights and experiences from the
lived texture of practice may usefully enrich the kinds of
discussion NIME is able to have about musicality.
2. THE EV ALUATIVE HORIZON
To confront questions of musicality is to move beyond a fo-
cus on technical systems and bring into consideration ques-
tions of context. Whilst the evaluative focus of many NIME
contributions has concentrated on these technical systems,
there is evidence of a willingness to expand the analyti-
cal frame. Stowellet al [23] consider the relative strength
of quantitive and qualitative methods, and develop use-
fully sensitive guidelines for when each may be appropriate.
O’Modhrain [17] retainins a focus on the technical artefact
but recognises the range of involved parties and the diversity
of perspectives that follow from this. She proposes that per-
formance is the most appropriate focus for evaluation. Lai
and Boverman [15] draw on this to develop an approach to
evaluating audience experience.
Meanwhile, Gelineck and Seraﬁn [11] develop another im-
portant extension to considering artefacts in isolation by ac-
knowledging the diachronic nature of musical practice and
the shortcomings of evaluation through ﬁrst impressions
(something anticipated also in [17]). They develop a lon-
gitudinal study with a focus on evaluating a system when
integrated into ‘real world scenarios’. Johnston [14] devel-
ops a diﬀerent perspective on what the goals of evaluation
studies might be in the context of his practice-led research
and tries to assess the extent to which interfaces act as
provocations to creative action.
Each of these studies widens the analytical frame but re-
tains the technical artefact at the centre, which is perfectly
appropriate if this is the primary outcome of research. But
to consider musicality is to invite an greater broadening
of focus. This breadth has been systemically mapped by
Born’s [5] outline of a programme for an interdisciplinary
musicology that encompasses four topics:
sociality Born divides social aspects of music into four ir-
reducible planes: the micro-social aspects of musical
action (1st) and associated ’imagined communities’
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
1
(2nd), through to larger formations, such as the ways
in which music mediates relations of race, gender and
class (3rd) and is bound up in political and historical
currents (4th).
temporality is likewise given four aspects. The ﬁrst ad-
dressing the most immediate temporalities of musical
experience, through to the ways in which music refers
back to or anticipates other music (2nd), the currents
of genre formation and change (3rd) and the broader
epochs of musical history such as classicism, avant-
gardism and so forth (4th).
technology Born’s discussion focuses primarily on record-
ing, but can comfortably incorporate the concerns with
instrumentality, interaction and so forth that serve as
focal points for NIME.
ontology Here Born incorporates a productively pluralist
stance on the diversity of conceptions of what mu-
sic (or indeed musicality)is, and underscores the im-
portant point that ontologies have a formative role in
structuring the direction and priorities of researchers.
Born’s motivation here is to allow for the development of
perspectives that aﬀord richer discussion of cultural activ-
ity than can be achieved by oppositional dualisms between
music as a social formation or music as a sensuous experi-
ence. One reduces music to games of social positioning, the
other to texts, sounds or technologies. Considering musical
expression, then, entails admitting in to the discussion some
consideration of aesthetics that avoids reduction or deter-
minism. This is noted by Gurevich and Trevi˜ no [12], who
are critical of a tendency within NIME to reduce musical
expression to a framework of text and act, instead proposing
a more ecological understanding (see also [26]).
The reach of the questions raised by such broad consid-
erations exceeds the scope of NIME and, indeed, of any
single discipline. What I wish to discuss here is whether,
and how, practice-led methods might bring to NIME’s dis-
course insights and perspectives that help to develop further
an approach to musicality that is responsive to the manifest
complexities of the topic.
3. PRACTICE-LED RESEARCH
Practice-led methodologies have received a deal of atten-
tion in recent decades as an eﬀort has been undertaken to
formalise the nature and protocols of artistic research in
the academy [22, 1]. However, there has been less discus-
sion of this with reference to musical scholarship, despite
the longstanding academic presence of musical practitioner-
researchers, and even less within the electronic music sub-
disciplines2.
One exception comes from Brown and Sorensen [8] who
cast the relationship between their live-coding practice and
research activities in iterative terms: periods of research
activity produce ﬁndings and artefacts that can then be
mobilised in episodes of musical practice and subjected to
evaluation that then inﬂuences the direction of further re-
search. This account raises a number of good points. Like
O’Modhrain, the authors usefully acknowledge that any eval-
uation of the results of musical practice-led research speaks
to a range of audiences with distinct evaluative criteria.
They also go into detail about the approaches they take
to assessing the aesthetic value of their work. The degree
2Which may well be due, in part, to the somewhat dis-
tinct relationship with academia that music has had vis-a-
vis other artistic practices
of compartmentalisation they achieve between what is re-
search and what is practice also aﬀords clarity about the
types of knowledge claim they are respectively concerned
with during each iteration.
However, such clean separation of concerns is not a given
for all practitioners. Barbara Bolt [4, 3] proposes a dif-
ferent approach, where the knowledge claims of practice-
led research can lie inembracing the extent to which the
complexities of practice confound repeatability. By this ac-
count, supplementing our technological or musical outcomes
with reﬂections on how these complexities interacted with
the development of our work (Born’s framework may be a
useful mapping device here), allows us to develop a discourse
of shared observations about our conventions and practices
that may otherwise go unnoticed.
This describes a mechanism for valuable contribution to
NIME from scholars whose primary research focus is the
doing of music but that are otherwise engaged in a simi-
lar palette of activities to those engaged in more artefact-
centred projects. The potential of this type of contribution,
as I see it, is the possibility for a productively agonistic
type of interdisciplinary engagement [2] which allows to se-
riously and frankly, but convivially, ask questions of each
other’s conceptions about foundational aspects of NIME’s
areas of interest, such as musicality. This is borne from my
experience that interdisciplinary borrowings, such as signal
processing in the pursuit of music, can not necessarily be
characterised as the simple addition of one body of tech-
niques to another (though sometimes they can), but can
be more like aconvolutive mixture: elements of each could
be highlighted or suppressed. Consequently, the respective
‘handlings’ of the same materials by diﬀerent researchers
with diﬀerent questions in mind could generate wholly, pro-
ductively distinct ways of understanding the same phenom-
ena.
A paradigmatic example of work in this vein is John
Bowers’ ‘Improvising Machines’ [6]. Bowers impressively
manages to trace the textures of his practice such that the
various contingencies of social and technological forces are
accounted for in the way that they aﬀected design and mu-
sical activity and gave rise to a set of practical priorities
that made clear the extent to which making and musicking
can be productively and performatively intertwined. In do-
ing so, he brings forth a distinctive illustration of how he
has come to know his various technologies and is able to
articulate how this informs and is informed by the qualities
of his musicking.
4. TWO EXAMPLES
In order to provide some context and make this discussion
more concrete, I wish brieﬂy to present two examples of my
work. I shall give an overview of their operational details
before drawing out some strands that illustrate the sorts of
issue that these sorts of observation of practice can aﬀord.
4.1 And Now For Some Music
And Now For Some Music is a piece for a single improvis-
ing player with miniature microphone andinfra-instruments
[7]. The software is implemented in Max and ‘listens’ to the
microphone on the basis of a very simple musical model that
divides sound in to two classes: pitched and noisy, using a
PSOLA [27] scheme from IRCAM’s FTM framework [20].
One layer of the electronics is an immediate extension of
the player’s gestures, and can therefore be thought of in
quasi-instrumental terms. The player’s sounds are decon-
structed into atoms of pitched and noisy material and re-
assembled, but in an errant way. Pitched material is drawn
out beyond its original duration, and quantised in frequency,
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
2
Segmentation and Analysis
Errant-
Resynthesis
Feedback buffers
Speaker Distribution
Audio in
Audio in / out of computer
Audio classiﬁed as pitched
Audio classiﬁed as noisy
Individual pitched / noisy grains
Modulation
Figure 1: And Now For Some Music signal ﬂow
overview
to give it the character of an auto-tune process that pushes
back. At the same time, the threshold between pitched-
ness and noisiness is subject to continual adaptation, not
on the basis of trying to establish more ’truthful’ estimates
but simply of maintaining a longish-term equality between
the relative quantity of pitched and noisy segments. This
endows the system with a kind of resistance from a player’s
perspective: the production of particular eﬀects is no longer
a matter just of the action at hand but is made deliberately
contingent on the qualities of what has gone before.
Meanwhile, the electronics contribute two further layers
that are more gesturally removed. Two recirculating tex-
tures are constructed from the noisy and pitched materials
respectively. New material is transformed and overdubbed
into the current texture, whilst short, looping snatches of
the textures are periodically written on top at arbitrary
points, so that we are left with constantly shifting and mu-
tating recapitulations of prior moments. The articulation of
these textures in the ﬁnal mix is derived from various con-
trol signals constructed, again, from the microphone input.
Rather than trying to infer speciﬁc qualities of the player’s
action through sophisticated feature extraction, these con-
trol signals tend to be based on cruder measures subjected
to some degree of transformation.
Amplitude envelopes of various speeds are generated, but
then interfered with in a variety of ways: buﬀered and rad-
ically resampled, or treated to pronounced non-linearities
like fold-over with low thresholds. The eﬀect of these is
to interrupt continuity and a sense of conspicuous gestu-
ral legibility without disrupting entirely the possibility of
there being a phenomenological connection between what
the player and computer do.
Pulse tracks are generated that eschew the orthodox ap-
proach of using some measure of inter-onset intervals to de-
Small Mixer
Small loudspeaker
Computer
Corrugated tubing
Music box
Miniature microphone
Mic 
from desk
2 track to desk
Desk mono out
Figure 2: And Now For Some Musictypical perfor-
mance ecology
rive an underlying tactus. Instead, irregular trains are pro-
duced by subjecting the incoming signal to extreme down-
sampling (a factor of hundreds or thousands, which dictates
the general time-scale of emerging sequence) and using a
long-term autocorrelation measure of the resulting signal to
produce a pulse-rate. These trains are by no means metri-
cal, but do (generally / sometimes) have a musical timeli-
ness about them appropriate to my improvised preferences.
The trains then control the articulation of the patch in var-
ious ways, most notably in controlling moments at which
certain variables are subject to change. Again, this disrupts
at tendency towards continual variation in the electronics in
an attempt to imbue a sense of rhythmicity and punctuation
at once linked, yet not bound, to my playing.
A further pitch tracker is employed, additional to the one
controlling the initial segmentation of the microphone input.
However, all it is used for is determining the quantity of
disagreement between the two feature extraction processes.
This measure of disagreement then controls various aspects
of the signal processes that may result in lesser or greater
senses of roughness or timbral disruption of the recirculated
material.
Although the software could be considered in isolation,
it is worth stressing that it was neither developed, nor ever
played in that way, not least because the sound world of the
resulting music is highly dependent on the materiality of
what goes into the microphone. Rather, it has always been
conceived as a component in what Bowers terms a ‘perfor-
mance ecology’ [6]: some more heterogeneous coalition of
materials and circumstances.
Elements of this ecosystem have taken root over time.
Most particularly, in addition to an array of limited-interaction
sounding objects, I have take to having available a small
loudspeaker that reproduces the computer output additional
to any front-of-house reinforcement: the input to the system
can optionally be its own output, mediated by the speaker
cabinet and surrounding air (playing the bass port of a
speaker can be rewarding in this context). Furthermore,
the use of a small mixer has also become integral. Being
able to actively play the microphone gain, for instance, has
established itself as a key component of being musical with
system. Likewise, having a means of modulating the level
and composition of what emerges from the feedback speaker
aﬀords a further dimension for play. As such, the piece is
conceived of as a terrain of possibilities that are, in naked
homage to Bowers, available for playful disruption.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
3
4.2 Exchange. Value
Exchange. Value (2012) is a piece for three laptoppists us-
ing the Ableton Live software. It was written for a laptop
trio with who I have been playing for some years. We gen-
erally use commercial controllers, with a cultivated lack of
attention to concerns of bodiliness, performativity or sig-
nal processing athleticism, preferring to use this a forum
for making music with the means immediately to hand. We
tend to share audio with each other over ADAT connections,
in the interests of stealing each other’s sounds and confus-
ing ourselves and our audiences about who is doing what.
The impulse for what I developed here was to build upon
this interconnectedness and to indulge my own tendencies
towards despotism, whilst imposing as little restriction as
possible on the ﬂexibility of controllers and musical process
available to the players.
The most noteworthy feature is that the electronics for
this piece don’t produce sound, but take it away. The pri-
mary signal processing at work is the targeted muting of
players, based on analyses of their sounds and actions (by
proxy, via MIDI events), and their relation to the other play-
ers. Each participant runs a Max For Live patch in their
Ableton session that performs these analyses, and will peri-
odically mute the outputs of that player. This muting can
happen at diﬀerent rates, with diﬀerent musical eﬀects: fast
chopping, slower articulations, and prolonged withdrawals,
or combinations of all three, as there is no attempt to ex-
plicitly synchronise the interventions of each player’s patch.
The primary metaphor for controlling when this muting
happens is that of a bucket ﬁlling. Each patch has an accu-
mulator, and the rate at which this is ﬁlled is driven by the
analyses described above, which also determines the amount
of time the patch spends in mute-mode. Two factors aﬀect
how quickly a bucket ﬁlls, all else being equal. One of these
is the player’s level relative to the overall level of the trio,
taken as a fraction of the overall maximum level in the pre-
ceding 5 second window. The other factor is based on anal-
ysis of audio and MIDI onsets. The ratio of these onsets
is subject to further analysis by measurement of its stan-
dard deviation over a sliding 25 second window. This tracks
the amount of variety the player is bringing to proceedings.
If this falls below a threshold, then the ﬁlling rate of the
bucket is aﬀected proportionally. Players are able to also
manually adjust the sensitivity of their bucket or, of course,
opt-out entirely by disabling the object at any time. The
relative certainty of detecting MIDI onsets, it is worthwhile
to note, is counterbalanced by a purposely lightweight and
crude approach to detecting onsets that uses a simpliﬁed
version of the scheme presented in [13] to estimate signal
ﬂux.
What happens when a muting cycle takes place is based
on an assessment of the relationship between a player’s lev-
els of physical activity relative to the amount of audio ac-
tivity. This is taken in terms of a ratio of audio to MIDI
onsets accumulated over a time window. This ratio, taken
at the time a bucket ﬁlls, determines which of three possible
rates muting takes place at: fast (semi-quaver-ish), medium
(crotchet-ish), slow (whole-bars). The mapping is not linear
with respect to the audio midi ratio, as this would encourage
gaming the patch. Rather, lots of relative MIDI activity3
will yield medium muting, so that short bursts of rapidly
changing textures might emerge. Little MIDI activity will
yield fast muting, so the computer takes over the role of ar-
ticulator, in a sense. The slow mutes happen when there is
3MIDI activity is derived from Note On events, and CC
changes. De-bouncing is used to ﬁlter out rapid repetitions
of CCs within a single gesture.
Audio from Ableton Live
Audio out
muting
Audio from co-players
audio analysis
*
audio analysis
MIDI Events
Control signal
Stereo audio signal
Figure 3: Sceheme for each player’s patch in Ex-
change. Value
a middle of the road audio-MIDI relationship on the—quite
groundless—assumption that this is the most boring kind
of material. A future embellishment will be to make this
more sophisticated by nesting time scales within a cycle in
more complex ways.
The muting is also subject to a rhythmic patterning, so
as to make it less monotonic. These patterns are gener-
ated on the basis of the patterning of the detected onsets
from the other two players by using a Schillinger-inspired
method to generate a new rhythm from these two seeds.
This can, contingent upon a variety of factors, produce
rhythmic behaviours that feel musically congruent with the
overall sound, but is equally apt to produce surprising re-
sults.
The measured MIDI activity is also used to set the tempo
of Live’s clock, using a simple scheme from [18]. This is
done as an alternative to having all clocks synced to one
master clock, which can bring a lack of ﬂexibility, or just
having all players running free. By linking the tempo to
inferred physical activity, the possibility (but by no means
certainty) exists that the resulting sonic ﬂow could tie itself
to the physical rhythmicity of the player and that a com-
mon groove could emerge between each sequencer. This is
implemented in such a way that the player is still able to
manually intervene and set the clock themselves, so that,
again, opt-out is possible.
5. DISCUSSION
5.1 Designing and Wayﬁnding
In both pieces, the process of development was guided by an
exploratory attitude where the endpoint was not something
established in advance of commencing work, but emerged
through the process of making, and remains somewhat con-
tingent insofar as the systems are liable to further modi-
ﬁcation and development if that seems attractive. In this
sense they depart somewhat with the notion of design being
geared towards the implementation of a set of known, pre-
existing requirements and have more in common with what
Tim Ingold calls ’wayﬁnding’, whereby a terrain is explored
intuitively and attentively. Similarly, it chimes with Bolt’s
characterisation of practice as something proceeding from
the unknown to the known. As an outlook and orientation,
it also owes a good deal towards the improvisatory nature
of the musicking that I seek to do with these systems; these
are not names for works in any strong sense so much as
labels for territories.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
4
Particular technical decisions, then, were guided less by
a process of modular, cleanly decoupled development and
more by a processes of looking for (more) musicality. One
way of characterising this might be by analogy to the way
David Sudnow [24] describes ‘grabbing’ for music in his ac-
count of developing a skilled be-bop practice with the piano.
This pertains, in particular, to teasing out the musicality of
longer-term dynamic interactions with these systems: one
thing that characterised my working process when I started
trying to design these things was to not to leave suﬃcient
time for programmatic changes to bed-in to my playing
based, I believe, on an unquestioned assumption that the
musicality (or not) of the results rested on the strength of
the algorithm. This always gave development something of
a ﬁdgety character of too-quick cycles between playing and
tweaking.
However, what distinguishes the current forms of And
Now For Some Music and Exchange. Value has been a
gradual assumption of greater responsibility for my playing
in the musicality (or not) of the results. Besides helping me
develop less haste in development, I ﬁnd I have also become
less anxiously goal driven in the kinds of processing, for
instance, that I design and err increasingly often towards
Bowers’ dictum of ‘crude but generally useable’ solutions
[6]. Furthermore, I have found that less and less of what I
do is orientated towardsmodelling. Whilst it was one thing
to derive interesting short-term signal features from some
reasonably informed model of the mechanics at work, when
it came to longer musical time-scales the corollary seemed
to be to modelmusicality, which seemed not only like a
tall order, but also generated such constrains as to militate
against musicality rather than encourage it, as I left myself
nowhere to go in play. This tallies with recent warnings by
both Linson [16] and Poepel [19] about the perils of over-
formalising or constraining one’s musical interface.
So it is that the various mechanisms described above, such
as that for deriving pulse in And Now For Some Music , are
based on schemes that might work as imagined, some of the
time, but are notbrittle with respect to unexpected input
and tend, in their own ways, to bestow on the software its
own wayﬁnding-like behaviour, in favour of predictable or
repeatable contributions.
Beyond the details of my own experiences and proclivi-
ties, however, a more general question is raised about the
transition or relationship between designing and practising
(in the conventional musical sense). How do people man-
age the business of discovering and cultivating musicality
on systems that are available to perpetual modiﬁcation and
tweaking? Is it just a matter of self-discipline? Are we even
sure what skills it is that we’re practising at any given mo-
ment? Very little seems to have been written about how
this process is navigated speciﬁcally by maker-musicians,
although the subject is broached in eﬀect by Collins [9]
who considers possible practising techniques for live coders,
who of course integrate the making into the musicking.
However, a broader discussion of the breadth of practi-
tioners approaches to this developed from situated accounts
of practice—many of which will have much to recommend
them over my own sometimes neurotic working patterns—
seem like a worthwhile thing to bring into NIME’s purview
in the interests of developing newcoping strategies to ac-
company new interfaces.
5.2 Livedness
Navigating such folds, such as those between designing and
practising, emphasises the extent to which the concerns of
practice are diachronic and, as such, lived. To do music in
any capacity is to integrate a set of habits and proclivities
into the texture of one’s various activities and relationships.
Co-dwelling with my instruments and systems invites a
slightly diﬀerent perspective on the central role of perfor-
mance as a site of evaluation that we saw in section 2,
insofar as performances are not singular, focal points but
rather periodic, albeit critical moments in the texture of
one’s practice. Introducing consideration of this sense of
livednesscan, I believe, usefully supplement a concern with
liveness by attracting our collective attention to formative
aspects of musicality that may otherwise fall between the
cracks of focussing on works, instruments or performances
as discrete outcomes.
In particular, I see this as a way of usefully correcting a
temptation to treat ‘performance’ in the abstract, without
due attention to the many social and material contingencies
that can have a profound impact not just on the way that
music is made but also on the way it is received. There
are many types of gathering and ritual that we are happy
to group together as ‘performance’, and the various con-
ventions that give these their character are by no means
coincidental to the way that musicality is perceived and as-
sessed.
There are two principal risks that arise from not taking
this variety into account. First is a tendency to homogenise
conceptions of what performance consists of or what may
be desirable. To the extent that these conceptions can feed
into design assumptions for makers of interfaces, this could
interfere with making interfaces that are sensitively targeted
to particular types of performance context, or for being able
to communicate clearly and eﬀectively with the community
about the worth of specialist approaches. In other words:
an assessment of musical suitability necessarily entails a de-
tailed engagement with the aesthetic priorities at work in
context. Second, to insist on performance as a preferable
site of evaluation without considering the enormous range
of things that this can mean, particularly given perspec-
tives like those of Small [21] and Frith [10], can result in
over-idealising some notion of performance in relation to,
say, recordings (as Born is critical of Auslander for doing
[5]) which in turn blocks oﬀ ranges of perfectly legitimate
practice from consideration.
In this sense, the addition of situated, practice-led dis-
courses to NIME can help by more accurately mapping the
contemporary performance-scape, albeit at the cost of some
certainty of operating assumptions. At a minimum, we need
a considerably more developed vocabulary for describing the
range and grain of current practices. More desirable would
be to be able to meaningfully communicate about the ways
in which particular approaches to technology, and particu-
lar types of social gathering relate to and inﬂect the conduct
of particular ways of being musical.
6. CONCLUSION
These are opening thoughts on an approach to practice-led
methods may contribute helpfully to NIME by aﬀording
richer and more sophisticated understandings of musicality
in context. Nevertheless, I believe that they have a degree
of promise. I have suggested that practice-led researchers—
who I take to form part of the NIME community—can bring
valuable insights, complementary to the technical focus of
interaction designers. I focused in particular on how such
insights might relate to the grain of lived experience with
respect to technological work and to performing.
Obviously, there is much to be developed. Priorities for
immediate future research in this area involve considering
speciﬁc methodologies geared at co-practice and at ways of
eroding the residual cultural barrier to wider participation
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
5
presented by the institutional boundary. My aim here is
to facilitate richer exchange between musical practice-led
researchers and allied colleagues by promoting discussion
around the development of richer methodologies within the
sub-discipline.
A guiding idea is that much of this hinges on communica-
tion and that there may be value in reﬂecting on the com-
municative tactics employed by musicians more generally
as possible blueprints for more formally developed meth-
ods. For instance, if musicians play together as a means
of communication—to learn about each other—then can
this be formalised as a practice-research method? Simi-
larly, what might we learn about each other by engaging
in the kinds of exchanges of musical material that charac-
terise interactions between practitioners more generally, or
by drawing more explicitly on the broad range of cultural
contexts outwith the university that our work takes us to?
References
[1] E. Barrett and B. Bolt, eds. Practice as research: ap-
proaches to creative arts enquiry. I.B. Tauris, London;
New York, 2007.
[2] A. Barry, G. Born, and G. Weszkalnys. Logics of inter-
disciplinarity.Economy and society, 37:20–49, 1, 2008.
[3] B. Bolt. A performative paradigm for the creative
arts? Working papers in art and design , 5, 2008.
[4] B. Bolt. The magic is in handling. In. Practice as re-
search: approaches to creative arts enquiry . B. Bolt
and E. Barrett, editors. I.B. Tauris, London and New
York, 2007, pp. 27–34.
[5] G. Born. For a relational musicology: music and in-
terdisciplinarity, beyond the practice turn. Journal of
the royal musical association , 135:205–243, 2, 2010.
[6] J. Bowers. Improvising machines: ethnographically in-
formed design for improvised electro-acoustic music.
ARiADATexts, 4, 2003.
[7] J. Bowers and P. Archer. Not hyper, not meta, not cy-
ber but infra-instruments. In Proceedings of the 2005
international conference on New Interfaces for Musi-
cal Expression (NIME05), 2005, pp. 5–10.
[8] A. R. Brown and A. C. Sorensen. Integrating cre-
ative practice and research in the digital media arts.
Practice-led research, research-led practice in the cre-
ative arts :153–165, 2009.
[9] N. Collins. Live coding practice. In Proceedings of the
2007 international conference on New Interfaces for
Musical Expression (NIME07), 2007, pp. 112–116.
[10] S. Frith. Performing rites: evaluating popular music .
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1996.
[11] S. Gelineck and S. Seraﬁn. Longitudinal evaluation
of the integration of digital musical instruments into
existing compositional work processes.Journal of new
music research, 41(3):259–276, 2012.
[12] M. Gurevich and J. Trevi˜ no. Expression and its dis-
contents: toward an ecology of musical creation. In
Proceedings of the 7th international conference on new
interfaces for musical expression. In NIME ’07. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 2007, pp. 106–111.
[13] R. Holopainen. The constant-Q IIR ﬁlterbank approach
to spectral ﬂux. In Proceedings of the 9th Sound and
Music Computing conference. Copenhagen, Denmark,
2012, pp. 419–425.
[14] A. Johnston. Beyond evaluation: linking practice and
theory in new musical interface design. Proceedings
of the international conference on new interfaces for
musical expression, (30):280–283, 2011.
[15] C.-H. Lai and T. Bovermann. Audience experience in
sound performance, 2013.
[16] A. Linson. Unnecessary constraints: a challenge to
some assumptions of digital musical instrument de-
sign, 2011.
[17] S. O’Modhrain. A framework for the evaluation of
digital musical instruments. Computer music journal ,
35(1):28–42, 2011.
[18] B. Pardo. Tempo tracking with a single oscillator.
In Proceedings of the 5th international conference on
Music Information Retrieval, Barcelona , 2005.
[19] C. Poepel. Formalized and non-formalized expression
in musical interfaces. In. Transdisciplinary digital art.
sound, vision and the new screen . R. Adams, S. Gib-
son, and S. M. Arisona, editors. (7) in Communica-
tions in Computer and Information Science. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 358–373.
[20] N. Schnell et al. FTM—Complex data structures for
max. In In proc. ICMC, 2005.
[21] C. Small. Musicking: the meanings of performances
and listening. Wesleyan University Press, Hanover,
NH, 1998.
[22] H. Smith and R. T. Dean, eds. Practice-led research,
research-led practice in the creative arts . Edinburgh
University Press, Edinburgh, 2009.
[23] D. Stowell et al. Evaluation of live human–computer
music-making: quantitative and qualitative approaches.
International journal of human-computer studies, 67(11):960–
975, 2009.
[24] D. Sudnow. Ways of the hand: the organization of im-
provised conduct. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London
and Henley, 1978.
[25] M. Waisvisz. Manager or musician? - about virtuosity
in live electronic music. In. NIME, 2006, p. 415.
[26] S. Waters. Performance ecosystems: ecological approaches
to musical interaction. In Proceedings of Electroacous-
tic Music Studies Network conference 2007, 2007.
[27] U. Z ¨olzer. DAFX : digital audio eﬀects . Wiley, Chich-
ester, 2002.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
6