Towards a Voltage-Controlled Computer
Control and Interaction Beyond an Embedded System
André Gonçalves
Research Center for Science and Technology of the Arts (CITAR)
Portuguese Catholic University - School of the Arts
Rua Diogo Botelho 1327, 4169-005 Porto, Portugal
+351 916312148
hello@andregoncalves.info
January, 2011
ABSTRACT
The importance of embedded devices as new devices to the
ﬁeld of Voltage-Controlled Synthesizers is realized. Empha-
sis is directed towards understanding the importance of such
devices in Voltage-Controlled Synthesizers. Introducing the
Voltage-Controlled Computer as a new paradigm. Speciﬁca-
tions for hardware interfacing and programming techniques
are described based on real prototypes. Implementations
and successful results are reported.
Keywords
Voltage-controlled synthesizer, embedded systems, voltage-
controlled computer, computer driven control voltage gen-
eration
1. INTRODUCTION
In this paper I intend to share my realizations in develop-
ing an extended embedded system for Voltage-Controlled
Synthesizers (VCS)[6] - the ADDAC system - which is an
instance of what could be called a Voltage-Controlled Com-
puter (VCC). One of the main objectives is to provide a
platform that allows an easy integration of computer driven
operations in a VCS.
This project started in 2008 as a concept and has been un-
der research and development since then motivated by the
nonexistence of such a system. It underlines and stresses
the idea of the Voltage-Controlled Synthesizer as a unique
instrument with its speciﬁc characteristics, as described by
Chadabe, the voltage-controlled synthesizer is not a simple
object. It is a hardware system that is diﬀerent in many
ways from computers and from many other devices or sys-
tems that are also referred to as synthesizers[1].
2. BACKGROUND
Analog synthesizers continue to be used by many musicians
because of their distinctive timbres, intuitive real-time con-
trol and ﬂexible patching[2].
Beyond what would be expected, voltage-controlled syn-
thesizers are stronger today than they ever were, this is
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’11,30 May–1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
reﬂected on the amount of brands on today’s market 1[8][7].
This tendency overcomes predictions that after the 1980’s
such analogue devices would fell under the appearance of
the digital synthesizers. In fact conversely to what was ex-
pected, nowadays we witness an inverted trend, as these
(analogue) devices are only getting stonger. By the end of
the 80’s a few new companies started to emerge and new
users were captivated to the analog world of modular syn-
thesizers. This tendency seems to cross all musical forms,
not being speciﬁc of any particular genre.
New manufacturer’s, following the pioneer’s tradition (Hugh
Le Caine, Harry Olsen, Raymond Scott, Bob Moog or Don
Buchla), are also musicians or enthusiasts with musical back-
ground and/or interests. They are the ones who are re-
sponsible for bringing a renewed popularity as well as new
paradigms into the VCS ﬁeld. One denotes easily that each
of these brands’ have a genuine and devoted interest in cre-
ating such systems, an interest that goes way beyond busi-
ness revenues expectations.
2.1 "Hello World"
Throughout the last 20 years, but specially in the last ten,
the use of digital components in analog synthesizers became
more common and there’s now a fair amount of digitally
driven voltage-controlled modules that integrate microcon-
trollers or digital signal processors in its circuitry. Still,
none of these oﬀer any I/O communication protocol to an
external digital platform, they are closed in their software
and controlled only by their analog inputs and panel con-
trols, e.g. knobs and switches.
3. THE PARADIGM SHIFT
The historical evolution focusing on the methods used for
the integration of external digital devices (MIDI devices and
personal computers) with the VCS.
3.1 Control Voltage
Control Voltage (CV) is the standard name adopted to refer
to the voltage source signals that are used to operate a VCS.
CV generation is made by speciﬁc synthesizer modules, e.g.
LFO’s, envelopes (ADSR’s), sequencers and noise sources.
3.2 MIDI
Since the 80’s diﬀerent MIDI to CV modules have been de-
veloped to allow the new digital world to interact with ana-
log systems. These modules were designed in order to open
the possibility of connecting the new digital synthesizers
1http://wiki.muffwiggler.com/wiki/List_of_Modular_
Synth_Equipment_Manufacturers
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
92
with MIDI output to the VCS, converting MIDI messages
(Note and Velocity) to a relative constant voltage source.
This voltage source could then be used to control diﬀerent
modules fuctions, for ex. to drive the frequency of a voltage-
controlled oscillator (VCO) at quantized notes. These inter-
faces are still today’s standards. Most of them are installed
in the synthesizer cabinet, side by side with other modules,
and powered from the VCS power supply.
The MIDI to CV and, later on, the CV to MIDI interfaces,
act like a bridge (Figure 1) between any MIDI device and
the VCS, this implementation also allows any computer to
be connected through a standard MIDI interface and MIDI
capable software. There’s no processing done in these inter-
faces, their circuitry allows a linear conversion from a midi
note to its relative constant voltage source at a standardized
1 volt per octave range. This analog to digital conversion
uses 8 bit messages, where only 7 bits are used for note
resolution, allowing a maximum range of 128 values. These
interfaces are mostly monophonic, meaning that they only
allows one note to be played at a time.
Figure 1: MIDI Diagram, an integrated system
3.3 VOLTA
In early 2009 MOTU released VOLTA, a virtual audio in-
strument, compatible with most audio software, that uses
the outputs of an external sound card2 to generate voltages.
The voltages generated are deﬁned by the track automation
settings deﬁned in the software. This only allow one way
communication: from the computer into the VCS.
Likewise in MIDI communication, the sound card hard-
ware acts like a bridge between the computer and the VCS,
there’s no processing done in the interface. The paradigm
shift resides in the fact that the system does not intend
to replicate the standard MIDI use, and not limit itself to
solely translate notes to their relative frequencies, it goes
beyond it. Using the sound card’s, 16 bit resolution digital
to analog converters, it allows a new range of possibilities,
sweeps can now be eﬀectively made and consequently the
creation of LFO’s, ADSR’s, etc.
The aforementioned system requires that a computer node
is present at all times, furthermore the necessary sound card
is not integrated in the VCS cabinet which, besides aﬀecting
the ease of use, aﬀects portability. Also regarding cabling,
special cables are needed in order to connect both sides:
mono jacks 1/4 inch to 1/8 inch.
(Figure 2)
Figure 2: VOLTA to CV Diagram, a non-integrated
system
2Not compatible with all soundcards, soundcard’s outputs
need to be DC coupled.
3.4 Conclusions
In my point of view, there’s an underlining principle that
can, in a ﬁrst instance, eﬀectively separate both approaches:
integrated and non-integrated systems. Integrated systems
like most MIDI to CV modules are installed in the VCS
cabinet nad powered from its power supply. Non-integrated
systems are peripheral devices not installed in the VCS cab-
inet and powered from their own power supply. This separa-
tion also highlights another distinction: the ﬁrst approach is
idealized from the synthesizer point of view, and the second
from the computer point of view.
4. TOW ARDS A VOLTAGE-CONTROLLED
COMPUTER
By the end of 2009 I prototyped my ﬁrst module (AD-
DAC001 Brain Unit). The system was designed with very
important features in mind:
1. For convenient usage, it was important that it was
an integrated system, mounted in the synthesizer
cabinet, side to side with all the other modules.
2. It would not be computer dependent.
3. If a computer is used, then thecommunication would
happen in two ways, from the synthesizer to the
computer and vice-versa.
4. Analog to digital and digital to analog conversions
would have at least 16 bit resolution.
5. It could be used in two ways:
As a ”master” / standalone device
Or as ”slave device”connected through one sin-
gle usb cable straight to a computer
4.1 Deﬁnition
The Voltage-Controlled Computer (VCC) is an hardware
based Embedded System locating itself in a speciﬁc spec-
trum of Embedded Computing (Figure 3) that also complies
to the standards and tradition of the Voltage-Control Syn-
thesizer as in [6][1][3].
Figure 3: Positioning diagram
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
93
The VCC is not computer dependent.
The VCC creates a new paradigm in computer to VCS
communication and interface. It no longer acts as a bridge
between the digital world (computer or midi device) and the
VCS, its microcontroller provide the autonomy and compu-
tational power to run complex algorithms that establish new
interactions between analog and digital sources. (Figure 4)
Being a digital device, the VCC can be programmed to
communicate to most digital platforms. These are regarded
as peripherals that have speciﬁc functions that augment the
possibilities and complexity of the system, e.g. a computer,
MIDI device, mobile device, router, gamepad.
Figure 4: VCC Diagram, an integrated system
4.2 Standards
◦ The VCC complies with both Voltage-Controlled Syn-
thesizer and Embedded Systems Design standards.
◦ The VCC analog inputs and outputs are converted
to and from digital signal levels at standardized CV
voltage sources. These Control Voltages operate at
standardized VCS bipolar ranges.
◦ The VCC is comprised of one main module that hosts
the microcontroller and optional expansion modules
that expands both the system’s possibilities and po-
tential.
◦ The VCC connects to a standard VCS Bus Board and
powers itself from standard bipolar power supplies.
◦ The VCC follows VCS standardized front panel di-
mensions.
◦ The VCC can communicate with the digital world
through diﬀerent standard communication protocols.
◦ The VCC trusts on its reentrant[5] software safety and
reliability.
Figure 5: ADDAC001Brain Unit Prototype I & II,
2010
5. ADDAC SYSTEM
The VCC concept lead to the research and development of
the ADDAC System 3. This system has been developed in
the last year and, due to public request, became a commer-
cially available product.
5.1 Ground work
Most of the initial work was divided into two sections: the
analog circuitry required to operate on bipolar voltages and
the creation of dedicated software to run in the microcon-
troller.
The ﬁrst Brain Unit prototype (Figure 5) resolved most of
VCC’s previously deﬁned electronics speciﬁcations becom-
ing a developer’s platform for software programming and
debugging.
5.2 The 00X System
The 00X System (Figure 6) is comprised of a Brain Unit and
seven diﬀerent expansion modules with speciﬁc functions
that connect to the Brain Unit augmenting the interaction
between the analog and digital worlds.
ADDAC00X System modules:
◦ ADDAC001 Brain Unit
◦ ADDAC002 CV / Manual inputs
◦ ADDAC003 Manual inputs
◦ ADDAC004 Gate inputs
◦ ADDAC005 Gate outputs
◦ ADDAC005W ”Well tuned”[4]. gate outputs
◦ ADDAC006 Nunchuck input
◦ ADDAC007 Ethernet Input
◦ ADDAC008 Midi Input
Figure 6: The ADDAC System, March 2010
5.3 Technical Speciﬁcations
The overall system architecture is developed around the Ar-
duino4 open-source hardware and software platform. The
Arduino C++ code framework is stripped to its core devel-
oper’s environment, the heart of the Brain Unit operating
system is integrated in the Arduino software as an external
library.
The adopted microcontroller is an ATMEL ATMEGA1280
running at 16 Mhz. The analog circuitry is designed to allow
inputs and outputs at bipolar -10/+10 volts range (standard
CV voltage range). Instead of using the microcontroller’s
3http://www.addacsystem.org
4Arduino is an open-source physical computing platform
based on a simple i/o board, and a development environ-
ment for writing Arduino software
http://www.arduino.cc
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
94
dedicated analog and PWM pins, external, 16 bits resolu-
tion, Analog Devices converters (ADC’s and DAC’s) where
also integrated in the schematic to maximize precision.
For USB communication an FTDI Serial to USB con-
verter is used.
The system conforms to Eurorack 5 size format and use
standard 3.5mm mono jacks for its physical inputs and out-
puts connections.
It also conforms to standard 8x2 pin Bus Board power
connectors and -12 / +12 volts bipolar power supplies.
5.4 Front panel
ADDAC001 VS2. front panel features:
◦ 8 analog CV outputs
◦ 1 oﬀset knob per output
◦ 1 led per output to monitor voltage state
◦ 2 Hex switch encoders to select pre-programmed pre-
sets
◦ 1 on-board knob to be assigned to any speciﬁc code
function
◦ Reset Switch
◦ Midi input
◦ Nunchuck6 remote input
◦ USB connector
◦ 2 led’s to monitor Serial communication activity
5.5 Open-source C++ Framework
The C++ open-source framework deﬁnes most of the nec-
essary setup for the software to operate properly, resolving
most low level operations such as:
◦ Deﬁning all speciﬁc pin I/O assignments, these are
physical connections of the microcontroller’s IC pins
and were deﬁned during the schematic development in
order to have a clean pcb design.
◦ Facilitating classes to resolve most standard commu-
nication protocols, serial, MIDI, open sound control
(OSC)[9].
◦ The integration of several algorithms like complex LFO’s,
linear and logarithmic ADSR’s, Lissajous curves and
complex randoms functions to mention just a few.
5.6 Software
There’s four diﬀerent possible ways for the system to com-
municate with a computer, these have diﬀerent levels of
technical know how required:
1. An open-source C++ library for advanced developers
allows full access to the system’s core software.
2. A set of open-source Max-Msp patches allows direct
implementation, of pre-programmed classes, in Max-
Msp
3. A standalone application with a dedicated GUI that
integrates diferent protocols to interact, OSC, MIDI,
Serial.
4. An Ableton Live audio instrument
6. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE
DEVELOPMENTS
The system described brings new powerful tools to the use
of the Voltage-Controlled Synthesizer, and follows its stan-
dards in voltage and operation method. It facilitates an in-
tegration with today’s state of the art musical softwares, de-
vices, controllers and programming frameworks be it through
5Eurorack is one of today’s most used VCS standard size
format and follows the standard 19” Rack unit system mea-
sured in U’s.
6Standard Nintendo Nunchuck Remote game controller.
Serial, USB, OSC or MIDI. It provides a diﬀerent and to-
tally new method from the traditional MIDI to CV inter-
faces allowing new ideas to be developed due to its greater
16 bit precision range in converting digital to analog sig-
nals and vice-versa. It allows the user to rethink the com-
puter interaction within an analog system facilitating new
approaches, functions and integrations in an easy and user
friendly way, not possible before with any commercially
available module.
The system deﬁnitely ﬁlls a necessity I had in my ana-
log modular system and has been the main control voltage
source, putting aside most control voltage generators i had
prior to this. It has also been used in most of my live per-
formances proving to be one of the most important modules
in my VCS. I’ve also been in close contact with the users
who are already using it either discussing ideas and im-
provements, developing new functions or rethinking future
hardware versions.
Future developments will mainly focus on two aspects
that I ﬁnd very important: Upgrading the CPU to a faster
one, I realized that speed is the next issue that needs to
be resolved, most probably to an ARM Cortex TM Proces-
sor7, leave the Arduino environment aside and re-program
the whole platform in C; Develop a dedicated software ap-
plication for computers and mobile devices that, through
a Graphic User’s Interface, will allow users to program the
microcontroller without needing to know any code language.
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Arduino Foundation, for the ground breaking work in open-
source physical computing.
http://www.arduino.cc
Robin Price, for the ground breaking work interfacing an
Arduino with an AD5668 16 bit DAC.
http://registeringdomainnamesismorefunthandoingrealwork.
com
Jean-Philippe Lambert, for the initial help on parsing Se-
rial communication in Max-Msp.
8. REFERENCES
[1] J. Chadabe. The Development And Practice of
Electronic music, chapter The Voltage-Controlled
Synthesizer. Prentice-Hall, Inc., Eaglewood Cliﬀs, New
Jersey, 1975.
[2] A. Chaudhary. Band-limited simulation of analog
synthesizer modules by additive synthesis. Center for
New Music and Audio Technologies University of
California, Berkeley, 2001.
[3] N. H. Crowhurst. Electronic Musical Instruments. TAB
Books, 1971.
[4] K. Gann. La monte young’s well-tuned piano, 1997.
[5] J. G. Ganssle. The Art of Programming Embedded
Systems. Academic Press, Inc., Orlando, FL, USA, 1st
edition, 1991.
[6] R. A. Moog. Voltage-controlled electronic music
modules. Journal of the Audio Eengineering Society ,
13(3), July 1965.
[7] G. Robair. Something old, something new , pages 46–62.
Electronic Musician, 2001.
[8] G. Robair. Analogue Renaissance, pages 46–62.
Electronic Musician, 2006.
[9] A. Schmeder, A. Freed, and D. Wessel. Best practices
for open sound control. In Linux Audio Conference,
Utrecht, NL, 01/05/2010 2010.
7ARM CortexTM is a popular processor used in devices like
the iPad
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
95