The XT Synth: A New Controller for String Players  
  
Gustavo Oliveira da Silveira 
Music Technology Department 
Georgia Southern University 
Statesboro, Georgia - 30458 
silveira.go@gmail.com 
  
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper describes the concept, design, and realization of two 
iterations of a new controller called the XT Synth. The development 
of the instrument came from the desire to maintain the expressivity 
and familiarity of string instruments, while adding the flexibility and 
power usually found in keyboard controllers. There are different 
examples of instruments that bring the physicality and expressiveness 
of acoustic instruments into electronic music, from “Do it yourself” 
(DIY) products to commercially available ones. This paper discusses 
the process and the challenges faced when creating a DIY musical 
instrument and then subsequently transforming the instrument into a 
product suitable for commercialization. 
 
Author Keywords 
NIME, Human Computer Interaction, MIDI Controller 
 
CCS Concepts 
• Human-centered computing → Human computer interaction 
(HCI); Interaction devices; 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The XT Synth is a new controller with continuous polyphonic pitch 
control using soft potentiometers, augmented with force sensitive 
resistors, potentiometers and rotary encoders. It has a 3D printed 
body and LED lighting on a transparent top acrylic layer. It began as 
a synthesizer, but is now a MIDI controller. The instrument features 
familiar fingerboard techniques translatable from string instruments, 
specifically the guitar and violin family. Its visual component adds 
another level of expressivity, where light patterns are created in 
addition to the sonic elements. While some of its technique can be 
translated from string instruments like guitar and violin, it adds novel 
features with their own techniques for expressive control.  The XT 
Synth is an ongoing project, currently in the design stage of its third 
iteration. 
 
 
Figure 1. The XT Synth, the second prototype. 
In recent years, novel instruments with continuous pitch control have 
been found great success, such as the Continuum [8] and the ROLI 
Seaboard [11] Additionally, augmented guitars like the Sensus [12], 
from Mind Music Labs, are in production. Such augmented guitars 
feature a variety of sensors to affect onboard audio processors, but 
don’t attempt to provide MIDI control over synthesizers. The XT 
Synth seeks to fill the gap between these two ideas. That is, the XT 
Synth is a continuous pitch controller for string players, augmented 
with sensors. While most closely aligned with augmented guitars, the 
focus on continuous pitch control intends to make the XT Synth a 
familiar instrument to other fretless instruments as well. 
 
2. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION 
The main motivation in designing the XT Synth was to create an 
instrument that could feature a fingerboard performance technique 
that is easily translatable from string instruments, like guitar, 
mandolin and violin; that could have the expressiveness of non-
fretted instruments, like a violin, or theremin; and that could be a 
synthesizer1 and a MIDI controller.  
The XT Synth was designed to be an instrument with MIDI 
Polyphonic Expression (MPE) [9] capabilities and with continuous 
control for pitch and other parameters. It uses hardware and software 
technologies to enable the translation of fingerboard performance 
techniques of string instruments into an electronic instrument, with 
all the possibilities it holds.  There are several MIDI instruments on 
the commercial market that feature the continuous control of pitch. 
These include the Continuum and the ROLI Seaboard, in a form 
factor that is familiar to keyboard players. There are also instruments 
like the Linnstrument, which is played in a similar manner to a 
keyboard, but with the form factor of a guitar. These instruments 
allow full MIDI Polyphonic Expression for continuous control of 
pitch, pressure, etc., allowing great expressiveness over vibrato, 
glissandos, volume, and any other control that can be MIDI mapped. 
However, these instruments are designed with a keyboard technique 
in mind, making it hard for string players to adapt quickly to it. 
Closely related instruments to the XT Synth, employing violin 
techniques or violin-inspired techniques, include Dan Overholt’s 
Overtone Violin [3], Suguru Goto’s Super Pal [10], and Charles 
Nichols’ vBow [2] and the Dan Trueman’s BoSSA [4]. Those 
instruments have a known technique, like the violin’s, but also have a 
variety of augmenting sensors. This allows for violinists to perform 
with electronic sounds, but still using a f amiliar performance 
technique.  
There are also a variety of MIDI guitars, which feature performance 
techniques that are closely related to electric guitars. One of the first 
MIDI guitars to find great commercial success was the Bill Aitken’s 
SynthAxe [7]. The SynthAxe could be played like guitar using fret 
and picking techniques, but also featured pressure sensors, adding 
another level of expressivity that guitars don’t have. Starr Labs [7] 
has a variety of MIDI guitars models that are commercially available 
                                                                 
1 After the first prototype, the synthesis engine was abandoned. 
While the name XT Synth is still temporarily in use, it is now 
solely a MIDI controller.  
43
today. They feature models with strings, or buttons instead of strings, 
pressure sensors, whammy bars and other augmenting sensors. 
Two of the closest examples to the XT Synth’s implementation of 
continuous pitch control are David Vorhaus’ Kaleidophone [6], 
invented in the 1970’s, and the Artiphon’s Instrument 1 [5], launched 
in 2015. The Kaleidophone has four ribbons, mounted on a 
drainpipe. These four ribbons are played using the left hand 
technique of a guitarist. This instrument controls an analog 
synthesizer by sending voltages associated with the position of the 
fingers upon the ribbons. The Kaleidophone never became a 
commercial product. The Artiphon’s Instrument 1, however, became 
a successful example of a commercial MIDI controller that combines 
the playability of string instruments with continuous controllers and 
MIDI Polyphonic Expression. The Artiphon has sensors that act like 
strings, and actuators that can be used to “pluck” the strings, plus 
other features. It is an instrument that was made to be functional, with 
a simple design. While the Artiphon and the XT Synth share several 
characteristics, the Artiphon looks to be more of a music production 
tool, while the XT Synth is a performance tool, although both can do 
both.  
Non-fretted instruments are known for being difficult to play and not 
providing instant gratification. This steep learning curve can cause a 
great deal of frustration for beginners. However, instruments that are 
hard to play can offer a high ceiling for virtuosity, given time.  
Instruments that are simple to play, on the other hand, often sacrifice 
flexibility for certainty. The XT Synth leans to the side of flexibility, 
giving room for expressivity and virtuosity [7]. 
3. THE INSTRUMENT 
The XT Synth uses soft potentiometers to sense the left hand position 
on the neck. While has no frets, in its software it has a quantization 
method that allows the performer to hit the right notes the first time 
the finger touches the neck, while still allowing vibratos and slides. 
This way, playing in tune is easier than with fretless instruments, 
easing the learning curve. The quantization can be switched on and 
off, leaving to the player to decide.   
With the adjustments mentioned above, the instrument proved to be 
harder to be played in tune than a fretted instrument, but easier than a 
fretless one. The physicality of performing vibratos, glissandos, and 
playing the strings in general, felt surprisingly similar to an acoustic 
instrument. While sharing similarities with acoustic instruments, the 
XT Synth presented some different possibilities, which could be only 
possible with an electronic instrument. Each string can control a 
different instrument, and, thus, be played with different expressions 
at the same time. This allowed some interesting experimentations 
with two hands techniques.  
The XT Synth has four RGB rotary encoders, which can send MIDI 
CC. The values of these encoders can be stored in different banks. It 
also features four Force Sensitive Resistors (FSRs), which can be 
used to send MIDI CC, aftertouch, or to trigger the strings, like one 
plucks a string, with velocity sensitivity. Additionally, there is one 
slide and one rotary potentiometer. These controllers enabled 
different possibilities with the right hand technique. One can use the 
slide potentiometer similar to a guitar pick and control a filter cutoff, 
and use the FSRs for continuous multidimensional control, for 
example.  
The XT Synth was designed to not only be functional tool, but also a 
visually interesting instrument. An interest in the visual aspect of the 
instrument is not uncommon. Electric guitars, for example, come in a 
wide variety of shapes and have their own “personality”. While 
MIDI controllers tend to be neutral, being visually similar to each 
other. It was decided that the XT Synth should have its own visual 
“personality”. It should have its own unique form factor. The visual 
design of the instrument is created with stage performance in mind 
[1]. 
The first prototype of the XT Synth was built rapidly. The prototype 
featured the typical weaknesses of prototypes, such as: components 
soldered with wires on solderable breadboards; a fragile enclosure; 
various elements were not structurally secure. The second prototype 
featured a 3D printed model for the enclosure; custom Printed Circuit 
Boards (PCBs), and a reimagining of its sensors and features.  
At the time of writing this paper, the XT Synth had three public 
performances. The first performance was made at the Root Signals 
Festival, at Georgia Southern University, on February 22nd of 2018, 
with its first prototype. The second prototype had its first 
performance at the finals of the Guthman New Musical Instrument 
Competition, at Georgia Tech, on March 8th of 2018.  
The XT Synth has not yet been fully tested by any other musician 
besides its creator; however, some considerations regarding its 
playability can be made. Taking into account that the performer has 
played the electric guitar professionally, and the violin as a hobby, it 
took no more than a couple weeks so the XT Synth could be 
performed comfortably in a concert situation.  
However, some issues are present. The main issues were due to the 
physical aspects of the soft potentiometers, used for the continuous 
control of pitch. The soft potentiometers don’t have a linear response; 
the performer can’t touch two places at the same time on the same 
sensor soft pot; there’s alack of tactile feel between the strings [11], 
etc. Some of these issues were already solved and some are to be 
solved in the next prototype.  
A much more in depth analysis of the XT Synth will soon be 
available as a Master’s thesis. Videos and more information about the 
XT Synth can be found at the followi ng webpage: 
www.musiconerd.com/xtsynth 
4. REFERENCES 
[1] C. Dobrian. Aesthetic considerations in the use of ‘virtual’ 
music instruments. In Proceedings of the Workshop on 
Current Research Directions in Computer Music, Institut 
Universitari de l’Audiovisual, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 
20(1), Barcelona, Spain, April, 2001,  
[2] C. Nichols. The Vbow: An Expressive Musical Controller 
Haptic Human-Computer Interface. PhD. Dissertation, 
Stanford University, 2003.   
[3] D. Overholt. The overtone violin. In Proceedings of the 
international conference on new interfaces for musical 
expression, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2005, 34-37.   
[4] D. Trueman and P. Cook. BoSSA: The Deconstructed 
Violin Reconstructed. In Journal Of New Music Research, 
2000, 121-130. 
[5] Instrument 1. Retrieved from Artiphon: 
https://artiphon.com. 
[6] J. Berg. David Vorhaus’ Kaleidophon, an early electronic 
Unfretted instrument. Retrieved from Unfretted: 
http://www.unfretted.com/fretless-guitars/david-vorhaus-
kaleidophon-an-early-electronic-unfretted-instrument/  
[7] J. Paradiso. Electronic Music Surfaces. MIT Media 
Laboratory, MA, 1998. 
[8] L. Haken, E. Tellman, and P. Wolfe. An indiscrete 
keyboard. Computer Music Journal, 22(1):30–48, 1998. 
[9] Midi Polyphonic Expression (Mpe) Specification Adopted. 
(2018, Jan. 28). Retrieved from MIDI Association: 
https://www.midi.org/articles/midi-polyphonic-
expression-mpe 
[10] P. Pierrot and A. Terrier. Le violon midi. Technical report, 
IRCAM, 1997.   
[11] R. Lamb and A. Robertson. Seaboard: a new piano 
keyboard-related interface combining discrete and 
continuous control. In Proceedings of the international 
conference on new interfaces for musical expression, Oslo, 
Norway, 2011, 503-506 
[12] Sensus. Retrieved from Mind Music Labs: 
https://www.mindmusiclabs.com/sensus/
44