Interaction with tonal pitch spaces 
Gabriel Gatzsche 
Fraunhofer IDMT Ilmenau 
Ernst-Abbe-Zentrum 
D-98693 Ilmenau, Germany 
gze@idmt.fraunhofer.de 
Markus Mehnert 
Technische Universität Ilmenau   
Institut für Medientechnik                    
D-98693 Ilmenau, Germany 
markus.mehnert@tu-ilmenau.de 
Christian Stöcklmeier 
Fraunhofer IDMT Ilmenau            
Ernst-Abbe-Zentrum                           
D-98693 Ilmenau, Germany  
stoecn@idmt.fraunhofer.de 
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we present a pitch space based musical interface 
approach. A pitch space arranges tones in a way that meaningful 
tone combinations can be easily generated. Using a touch 
sensitive surface or a 3D-Joystick a player can move through the 
pitch space and create the desired sound by selecting tones. The 
more optimal the tones are geometrically arranged, the less 
control parameters are required to move through the space and to 
select the desired pitches. For this the quality of pitch space based 
musical interfaces depends on two factors: 1. the way how the 
tones are organized within the pitch space and 2. the way how the 
parameters of a given controller are used to move through the 
space and to select pitches. This paper presents a musical 
interface based on a tonal pitch space derived from a four 
dimensional model found by the music psychologists [11], [2]. 
The proposed pitch space particularly eases the creation of tonal 
harmonic music. Simultaneously it outlines music psychological 
and theoretical principles of music.  
Keywords
Pitch space, musical interface, Carol L. Krumhansl, music 
psychology, music theory, western tonal music, 3D tonality 
model, spiral of thirds, 3D, Hardware controller, Symmetry model 
1. INTRODUCTION 
To make the process of music creation more intuitive it is 
necessary to find interfaces that are easy to understand and 
intuitive to play. The interfaces should provide many musical 
possibilities that can be accessed by a small and expressive 
parameter set. They also should represent music psychological, 
physical and theoretical principles. The goal of the musical 
interface presented here is to bring together results of the pitch 
space research on the one side and the possibilities of recent 
developments in the area of controllers on the other side. For this 
we will first give an overview of the state of the art in pitch space 
research and then we will show how such pitch spaces can be 
combined with hardware controllers to form new musical 
interfaces.   
2. TONAL PITCH SPACE 
The description of musical tonality with geometrical models has a 
long tradition. Early approaches are for example Heinichen’s 
(1728) or Kellner’s (1737) regional circles, the harmonic network 
proposed by Leonhard Euler (1739), and Weber’s (1767) regional 
chart [3]. Known as circle of fifths (Kellner’s regional circle), 
Riemann’s “Tonnetz” (Euler’s harmonic network) or Schönberg’s 
chart of key regions (Webers regional chart), these models are of 
great interest till this day. In the meantime, advanced geometric 
tonality models have been developed. Roger Shepard [4] proposes 
several helix models, which primarily describe aspects of octave 
equivalence or fifths and chroma proximity. Elaine Chew [1] 
proposes a so called Spiral Array. The model’s core is the, 
harmonic network inspired, geometric arrangement of pitches on 
a spiral. The great breakthrough of Chew’s model is a unified 
description of the relationship between tones, chords and keys 
within one model and the observation of functional relationships 
that build a tonal center. Fred Lerdahl‘s [3] “diatonic space” 
consists of “basic space”, “chordal space” and regional space”. 
These spaces help to model different aspects of tonality. There are 
many other ideas for representing musical aspects geometrically, 
e.g. Dmitri Tymoczko “orbifold space” [5], Aline Honingh’s idea 
to describe and visualize the principle of shapeliness of tonal 
pitch structures. 
F a C
b eG
D
f A c
B Eg
d
f
AC c
BC ECg
d
dC
gze@IDMT001209
bC DC f AC
g cBC
d
F a C
b eG
D
f A c E
d gBF
EC
b)a)
Figure 1. The spiral of thirds: a) The direct derivation from 
Krumhansl’s 4D MDS Sapce [6]; b) An adapted version as 
basis of the proposed musical interface approach 
3. THE APPLIED PITCH SPACE  
3.1 Derivation 
The musical interface approach presented here uses a geometric 
pitch space which has been derived from Carol L. Krumhansl and 
E. J. Kessler’s four dimensional multidimensional scaling solution 
[6]. The pitch space is part of a larger framework of pitch spaces 
called symmetry model [12][13]. The space used here is a three 
dimensional spiral which’s ends close in the fourth dimension 
(Figure 1a). Cutting out one spiral winding results in a subspace 
which contains 8 tones that form a diatonic set (Figure 2a+b). The 
Permission to make digital or hard copi es of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on se rvers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME08, June 5-7, 2008, Genova, Italy 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
325
start and the end of the spiral winding are formed by the same 
tone. If the pitch space is modified  s u c h  t h a t  t h e s e  t w o  p i t c h  
classes occupy the same XY-location (see Figure 2c, Figure 1b) it 
is possible to represent many basic tonal relationships by simple 
geometric structures or in simple geometric ratios ( Table 1). That 
simplification again makes it much easier to navigate and find 
desired tonal structures within the pitch space.  
a
d
F
C e
b
G
D
d F a C
b eG
D
gze@IDMT000600
a) b) d~
Figure 2. The extraction of one spiral winding results in a 2D 
subspace that represents a diatonic key. This 2D space is the 
basis of the proposed interface [6]  
Representing one extracted and modified spiral winding in a 2D 
plane – like shown in Figure 2 – results in a new geometric sub 
pitch space which particularly expresses key related tonal 
structures like functional relationships, aspects of tension and 
resolution as well relationships between tones, intervals and 
chords [6]. This expressivity led to the decision to develop a 
musical interface based on the adapted Krumhansl space.  
Table 1. Often used tone combinations and its position  
Diatonic Key One complete spiral winding 
Maj/min. chord Three neighbored tones 
Relative minor  Direct neighbor counter clockwise of major 
Relative major Direct neighbor clockwise of the minor chord 
Parallel major The cord located directly one spiral winding 
above a given minor chord 
Parallel minor The chord located directly one spiral winding 
below a given major chord 
Diminished The tones forming the start and the end of the 
selected spiral winding 
Major/minor
sevens chord 
Four neighbored tones (G-b-D-F) 
Subdominant
chords 
All tones to the left of the symmetry axis (e.g. 
d-F-a, F-a-C [8] 
Tonic chords Tones centered around the geometric center 
of the selected spiral (e.g. a-C-e, C-e-G) [8] 
Dominant
chords 
All tones to the right of the symmetry axis 
(e.g. e-G-b, G-b-D) [8] 
3.2 Geometric versus cognitive center 
It is important to distinguish between the geometric center and the 
cognitive center of a key. The geometric center is located exactly 
in the middle of the selected spiral winding (Figure 2, represented 
by the tilted d). The geometric center is the same for all diatonic 
keys (major, minor, …). To be aware about the geometric center 
helps to recognize redundancies in western tonal music. An 
example: The chord progression C-f-C has exactly the same 
geometric structure like the chord progression a-E-a. But both 
structures are mirrored around the geometric center of the key. 
There are much more of such major/minor mirror relationships 
which become apparent when the pitch space is aligned to the 
geometric center.  But from a music psychological point of view 
the geometric center is not the tonic of a key. The tonic of a key is 
represented by the root of the given key which we denote with 
cognitive center. The most resting tone in a given key is that root 
note. While the geometric center of a key is mode independent the 
cognitive center of a key changes if the mode changes. For this it 
could be better to align the pitch space not to the geometric center 
but to the appropriate root note. This is shown in Figure 3: Figure 
3a shows the system aligned to the geometric center. It can be 
seen that major and minor chords together form a perfect 
symmetric structure. It should be noted, that the geometric 
distances along the spiral correspond to the tones distances on a 
semitone scale. Figure 3b shows the system aligned to the 
cognitive center of a-Minor. The root note “a” is represented on 
the circle’s top. The root of the subdominant (“d”) and the root of 
the dominant (“g”) are now symmetrically arranged around the 
tonic. Figure 3c shows this for C-Major: The root “C” is aligned 
to the circle’s top, the subdominant (“F”) and the dominant (“G”) 
are symmetrically arranged around the tonic (“C”). To make a 
musical interface intuitive it should allow switching between the 
two alignment types. It should be possible to change the 
alignment between the major tonic, the minor tonic and key’s 
geometric center.
gze@IDMT001136
C
d e
F
G
a
h
C e
F
Ga
h
a) c)C
d
e
F G
a
h
b)
d
Figure 3. The difference between a key’s geometric center and 
a key’s cognitive center: a) The geometric center, b) the major 
root and c) the minor root are represented on the top 
4. NAVIGATION IN PITCH SPACE 
Now we will derive an interface that makes it possible to select 
parts of the pitch space like the one described in Table 1. Firstly a 
simple set of parameters will be chosen in order to define the 
desired sound. The interface proposed here has to support the 
following movements and tasks in pitch space:  
a) Moving within one spiral winding to play tones and 
chords of one key. If the selected spiral winding is 
projected onto a 2D plane like shown in figure 2 this 
results in a 2D navigation.  
b) Define what pitches are selected if a certain spatial 
position has been reached. This requires parameters that 
define the dimensions of the selected part in the space. 
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
326
c) Change the current spiral winding to change the key or 
to temporarily play chords from other keys. This results 
in a movement within the 3rd dimension.  
d) According to Figure 3 it must be possible to align the 
pitch space to the major tonic or to the minor tonic or to 
the geometric center of a given key. The alignment 
should be a task which is executed conscious.  
4.1 Playing Tones and Chords - Navigating 
within one spiral winding 
The most basic task to create music is to navigate within one 
spiral winding and to select tones of one key. In Figure 4 it is 
shown that concrete pitch classes are represented at discrete 
angles. But to make pitch classes audible we also have to assign a 
pitch height to every pitch class. For this the authors propose to 
use the radial dimension to assign different root positions to every 
pitch class. According to Figure 4 this results in four control 
parameters for playing tones, intervals and chords: 1.) A start 
angle, 2.) an apex angle 3.) a start radius and 4.) an apex radius. 
The start angle defines the root of the chord that is to be played 
(Figure 5). The apex angle  d e f i n e s  h o w  m a n y  p i t c h  c l a s s e s  
neighboured to the root are played (Figure 6). The start radius it 
used to define the pitch height of the played pitch class such that 
the pitch height increases continuously with the radial position. 
So the higher a tone’s pitch the greater is the tone’s radial 
position. Because chords can also be composed of tones of more 
then one octave the apex radius  c a n  b e  u s e d  t o  i n c r e a s e  o r  
decrease the number of octaves that are used to generate the tone 
combination. 
C
d
e
F
Ga
h
Start angle D
Apex radius r2
Apex angle E
gze@IDMT000404
Start radius r1
r1 r2
Figure 4. The selection of tones in the pitch space is done 
using only 4 parameters 
In order to fade between tones, intervals and chords as well as to 
fade chords continuously from one into another, a spatial tone 
distribution function is added to every tone. This distribution 
function describes what happens if a spatial part between two 
tones is selected. So by moving the pitch selection in radial 
direction the pitch height of the chord can be transformed (Figure 
7). This again allows to create inversions of a given chord. By
moving the selection in tangential direction  n e i g h b o r e d  c h o r d s  
can be crossfaded. Continuous increase of the apex radius results 
in brighter chords, continuous increase of the apex angle results in 
a continuous fading between single tones, third intervals, major 
and minor chords or major or minor seven chords.  
4.2 Changing the key - Changing the spiral 
winding 
It has to be distinguished between two modes of spiral winding 
change: 1.) the permanent key change , which is used, if the key 
shall be modified permanently. This permanent modification is 
used for example, if another song shall be accompanied or the 
current musical piece is to be transposed. In that case it is 
necessary to switch to another spiral winding and also to rotate 
the spiral winding such that the geometric or cognitive center 
(Section 3.2) is represented at the same position where the former 
key’s center was represented. In Figure 3 this position is the 
circle’s top. 
2.) The second change is the temporary key change : In many 
cases there is a fixed key, but we need to play chords that belong 
to another diatonic set. E.g. often it is required to play the 
dominant major chord in harmonic minor. In that case it is 
necessary to jump to another spiral winding, but the tonal center 
shall remain at the same spatial location.  
Table 2. Several key respectively spiral winding changes:  
Key change Spiral winding change 
1 Jump to the parallel major 
key 
Select the spiral winding 
directly above the current one 
2 Jump to the parallel minor 
key 
Select the spiral winding 
directly below the current one 
3 Shift the key by one 
semitone
Shift the spiral by fife fifths 
4 Jump to the next key in the 
circle of fifths 
Shift the spiral by one fifths to 
the left or to the right 
Table 2 shows characteristic key changes. The two most 
important spiral winding changes are the parallel major/minor 
ones (Table 2: 1, 2). These changes convert a given major chord 
to a minor chord and convert a given minor chord to a major 
chord (See also Figure 1). It can be seen that these changes are 
simple operations. Other operations like the transformation of a 
given major chord into the dominant 7 th c h o r d  a r e  m o r e  
complicated and have to be regarded in more detail. 
Figure 5. Example 1: The change of the start angle allows to 
play different chords. From left to right: The chords F-major, 
C-major and G-Major. Note: To identify the correct pitch 
class labels look to Figure 2c. 
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
327
Figure 6. Example 2: A continues increase of the apex angle 
makes it possible to fade between single tones, third intervals 
and major or minor chords 
Figure 7.  Example 
3: A continuous 
movement of the 
selected area allows 
the genera-tion of 
mixed chords like 
the dominant 7th.
5. THE HARDWARE CONTROLLER 
To execute the tasks described before, several hardware 
controllers have been subject of experiment. The subsequent 
chapter describes the use of a 3DConnexion SpaceNavigator. The 
3DConnexion Space Navigator is a 3D Joystick that provides 6 
degrees-of-freedom: a) Move left/right, b) push/pull, c) tilt 
forward/ backwards, d) rotate, e) tilt left/right, f) move forwards/ 
backwards (Figure 8). 
Figure 8. The six degrees of freedom of the 3DConnexion 
SpaceNavigator [9].  
The question is now, how to assign these degrees-of-freedom to 
the spiral navigation tasks described before. Table 3 proposes a 
mapping of different tasks to the parameter of the controller. 
Table 3. Navigating within the pitch space using the 
3DConnexion SpaceNavigator 
 T a s k  S p a c e  N a v i g a t o r  
1 Select the start angle Move cap towards the 
appropriate angle 
2 Select the start radius Move the cap to the 
appropriate radius 
3 Start playing the selected tones Stop the movement  
4 Define the velocity of the tones Acceleration of the stop 
5 Jump to spiral winding 
above/below
Push/Pull cap 
6 Shift the spiral winding by one 
fifth to the left or to the right 
Twist cap left/right 
7 Shift the spiral winding by fife 
fifths (pm 1 Semitone) 
Tilt cap 
8 Align the pitch space to a given 
root note (psychological center) 
Physically rotate the 
whole space navigator 
9 Change to a selected key 
permanently 
Select Key (Task 5-8) 
and press Button B 
10 Define apex radius Button A  + Twist cap 
11 Define apex angle Button A + Rotate cap 
Tasks 1-4 of Table 3 describe how tones are activated: The start 
radius and the start angle are defined by moving the 
SpaceNavigator towards the appropriate point. Stopping this 
movement triggers the play of the tones, whereas the velocity of 
the played tones depends on the (negative) acceleration when the 
movement is stopped. Tasks 5-9 of Table 3 show the realization 
of key changes that are changes of the selected spiral winding. In 
western tonal music the most frequently used spiral winding 
change will be to jump to the spiral winding directly above or 
directly below the currently selected. According to Table 1 this 
spiral winding change transforms a given minor chord to its major 
chord and a given major chord to its minor chord.  Analogue to 
the geometrical movement within the spiral the pull and push 
function of the SpaceNavigator is proposed to perform this task. 
For this it is possible to transform e.g. the e-Minor chord to E-
Major or the F-Major chord to an f-Minor chord by pulling and 
pushing the cap. Tasks 6 and 7 propose a mapping of 
SpaceNavigator functions to other types of key changes. Other 
key changes than the one described in Table 3 can be generated 
through combinations of the presented movements e.g. a key 
change of one whole tone e.g. from C to D can easily be 
performed by a double tilt or a double twist. With the assignment 
of spiral movement operations as shown in Table 1 it is possible 
to execute all of the key changes described in Table 2.  It has to 
be denoted that all key changes performed by Task 5 to 8 are 
temporary key changes ( 4.2), i.e. if the cap is pushed and then the 
parallel minor key is immediately selected. If the cap is released 
after that, the selection returns to the previous key. This makes it 
possible to “borrow” chords from other keys easily. To switch to 
a key permanently the appropriate task of (Task 5 to 8) has to be 
performed and after that Button B has to be pressed. Task 9 shows 
that it is easily possible to align the system to the root of a given 
major or minor key: This can be simply done by rotating the 
whole SpaceNavigator, so that the desired root note shifts to the 
SpaceNavigator’s top. The required visual feedback can easily 
realized by positioning the controller on a printout of the pitch 
space (Figure 9).   
Figure 9. By rotating the whole SpaceNavigator the user can 
align the system to major or minor: a) C-Major, b) a-Minor  
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
328
6.  SOFTWARE ARCHITECTURE 
Figure 10 shows the software architecture that realizes the 
presented musical interface approach. The core module is the 
module “Geometric Pitch Distribution”. This module defines 
where the tones are geometrically positioned within the pitch 
space. In our case this module realizes the spiral of thirds and can 
be replaced by other geometric pitch distributions, e.g. the circle 
of fifths or a Riemann network. The module “Pitch Selection” 
defines in what way pitches can be selected for playout. The Pitch 
Selection depends on the geometric pitch distribution and 
provides a high level interface to change e.g. the start- and apex 
angle or the start- and apex radius (Figure 4) or the velocity of the 
tones to be played. The control parameters provided by the pitch 
selection module must be mapped to the parameters of a given 
hardware controller e.g. the SpaceNavigator. This is done by the 
“Parameter Mapper”. This module receives the events from the 
hardware controller (SpaceNavigator), transforms those events if 
required and maps these parameters to the control parameters 
provided by the module “Pitch Selection”.  
Geometric
Pitch Distribution
Pitch 
Selection
Pitch 
Weighting
Synthesizer
gze@IDMT001137
Parameter
Mapper
Midi Note
Generator
Figure 10. The software architecture of the presented 
interface approach 
The module “Pitch Weighting” takes the current Pitch Selection 
and the given Geometric Pitch Distribution and derives the 
weights of the currently selected pitches. The weighted pitches 
again are forwarded to the “Midi Note Generator” which 
generates a midi signal which is fed to a synthesizer.  
7. EVALUATION 
To evaluate the parameter mapping proposed in Table 3 several 
informal tests, a focus group and a usability test have been 
conducted. The focus group consisted of five participants of 
varying musical background. The usability test featured 20 
participants (10 musicians, 10 non-musicians). Task 1 (as 
proposed in Table 3) has been perceived as according to the 
model in the software, and generally accepted. Due to the self-
centering property of the SpaceNavigator, Tasks 2-4 have been 
evaluated as difficult and only suitable for experimental musical 
settings. Thus the start radius has preliminarily been set to a fixed 
position. This led to an alteration of the controller assignment of 
Tasks 3 and 4 in a way that now a note is being played when a 
certain radius-margin is being crossed. The velocity of the played 
note is now derived from the velocity of the movement during the 
crossing of that margin. Tasks 5-7 have been perceived as very 
problematic and unusable, due to physical limitations of the 
SpaceNavigator. It has been found that the 6 degrees of freedom 
of the SpaceNavigator cannot always be handled simultaneously. 
For example a full rotation locks the controller cap and prevents 
movement to the desired angle (as in Task 1, Table 3) etc. Also 
handling two independent parameters on two different axes led to 
problems. The reason for this was that manipulating a parameter 
A involuntarily led to change in another parameter B also. In 
addition, the simultaneous manipulation of two or more 
independent parameters has been perceived as very complicated. 
The manipulation of the apex angle (Table 3, Task 11) has been 
perceived as totally unusable by more than half of the test 
persons. This was due to the high sensibility of the 
SpaceNavigator. Also the time it takes to set the angle has been 
rated to be too long for real musical applications. Some people 
stated that they liked the perceptional link to the pitch space and 
the way that notes are being selected and played (parameter 1, 
Table 3). 
8. APPLICATIONS 
The proposed pitch space based musical interface is interesting 
for different target groups. Children often have extensive skills in 
computer games and the usage of new hardware controllers. Such 
an interface could help them to learn tonal western music step by 
step. Combined with an appropriate visualization they can quickly 
learn many theoretical relationships like the composition of 
chords, functional relationships between chords (subdominant, 
tonic, dominant) or relationships between different keys, but also 
more psychophysical relationships like the distinction between 
pitch chroma (assigned to angle) and pitch height (assigned to 
radius) which have been shown to be processed in different brain 
regions [10].  
Music students often have to learn many music theoretical terms. 
For them it is important to keep the overview. The challenge 
within this relationship is to bridge the gap between theoretical 
knowledge and its practical application. Using a pitch space based 
instrument could help them to organize many theoretical terms by 
linking them to a spatial model. The possibility to interact directly 
with such geometric representation of tones and to hear the result 
immediately will additionally help them to improve their learning 
progress. For this the proposed musical interface could become 
part of the standard scholar education. 
Older people  a r e  o f t e n  w i l l i n g  t o  l e a r n  a  n e w  i n s t r u m e n t ,  b u t  
classical instruments like piano or violin are too complicated and 
require the development of extensive motor functions. A musical 
instrument with a simple set of parameters could motivate them to 
start a new challenge i.e. to start to learn a new instrument.  
Musicians, DJs, Composers: Combined with an advanced sound 
synthesis (Figure 10) the pitch space based instrument can 
become a creative tool that supports the finding of new chord 
progressions throughout all keys and to develop advanced sound 
textures.  
9. SUMMARY AND RESULT 
A new musical interface approach based on tonal pitch spaces was 
presented. The approach targets both musicians as well non 
musicians. The combination of tonal pitch spaces with 3D-
Navigation tasks and a real-time auralisation provides many new 
musical possibilities. The used model was derived from a music 
psychological model which guarantees a strong relationship 
between the used model of tonality and cognitive principals. With 
the extraction of one spiral winding and the projection onto a XY-
plane a strong simplification of the tonal space and the 
complexity of navigation tasks could be reached (Figure 2). The 
alignment of that diatonic subspace to the symmetry axis 
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
329
respectively the geometric center of the extracted key helped to 
encounter structural redundancies between major and minor 
which again leads to a reduction of the learning matter.  
A simple set of parameters to navigate within the pitch space and 
to interact with pitches has been provided. This interface allows 
fading continuously between tones, intervals, chords and 
inversions of chords as well as defining chord progressions 
throughout all keys, modulations, etc. The spiral of thirds portions 
the 12 major and the 12 minor keys in easy understandable 
diatonic subspaces which can be easily accessed. The spiral has 
been designed such that important tonal relationships like parallel 
and relative major and minor chords are in neighborhood.  
To create music out of the pitch space several navigation tasks 
have been defined and mapped to the control parameters of the 
3DConnextion SpaceNavigator. A subsequent usability test 
consisting of a focus group and 20 individual tested participants 
brought the result that it is required to have an controller which 
allows anindependent control of different parameters (push/pull, 
rotate, …) simultaneously.  The tested controller didn’t meet this 
requirement.  
Next steps in the development of the interface will be 1.) to 
evaluate controller alternatives that meet the requirements 
denoted before, 2.) to add the possibility for navigation within 
different parts of the space independently, 3.) to introduce other 
pitch spaces to play other and more complex chords and scales 
and 4.) to develop an advanced visualization. 
10. REFERENCES 
[1] Chew, Elaine: Towards a Mathematical Model of Tonality,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Diss., 2000 
[2]  Krumhansl, Carol L.: Cognitive foundations of musical 
pitch. Oxford psychology series; no.17. Oxford University 
Press, 1990. – ISBN 0–19–505475–X 
[3] Lerdahl, Fred: Tonal pitch space. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2001. – ISBN 0–1950–5834–8. 
[4] Shepard, Roger N.: Geometrical approximations to the 
structure of musical pitch. In: Psychological Review (1982), 
Nr. 89, S. 305–333 
[5] Tymoczko, Dmitri: The Geometry of Musical Chords. In: 
Science (2006), Nr. 313, S. 72–74 
[6] Gatzsche, G.; Mehnert, M.; Gatzsche D.; Brandenburg, K.: A
symmetry based approach for musical tonality analysis,
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Music 
Information Retrieval, ISMIR2007, Vienna, 2007 
[7] Gatzsche, G; Mehnert, M.; Gatzsche, D.; Brandenburg, K.: 
Mathematical optimization of a toroidal tonality model, 8th 
Conference of The Society for Music Perception and 
Cognition, Concordia University Montreal QC Canada, 2007 
[8] Mehnert, M.; Gatzsche, G.; Gatzsche, K. Brandenburg, K.: 
The analysis of tonal symmetries in musical audio signals.
International Symposium on Musical Acoustics ISMA 2007, 
Institut d'Estudis Catalans, Barcelona, 2007  
[9] 3DConnextion, A Logitech company, SpaceNavigator,
http://www.3dconnexion.com/, January 2008 
[10] Warren, J. D., et al.: Separating pitch chroma and pitch 
height in the human brain. www.pnas.org, 100(17):10038–
10042, 2003. 
[11] Krumhansl, C.; Kessler, E.: Tracing the Dynamic Changes in 
Perceived Tonal Organization in a Spatial Representation of 
Musical Keys. In: Psychological Review (1982), Nr. 89, S. 
334-368 
[12] G. Gatzsche, M. Mehnert, D. Arndt, K. Brandenburg: 
Circular pitch space based musical tonality analysis, 124th 
AES Convention, 2008, Amsterdam, Netherlands 
[13] Mehnert, Markus ; Gatzsche, Gabriel ; Brandenburg, 
Karlheinz ; Arndt, Daniel; Circular Pitch Space based 
Harmonic Change Detection, In: 124th AES Convention 
(2008)
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
330