Thermoscore:
A New-type Musical Score with Temperature Sensation
Homei MIYASHITA Kazushi NISHIMOTO
Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Hokuriku
1-1, Asahidai, Tatsunokuchi, Nomi, Ishikawa 923-1292, Japan
+81 761 51 1812
homei@homei.com knishi@jaist.ac.jp
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we propose Thermoscore, a musical score form
-that dynamically alters the temperature of the instrument/play
er interface. We developed the first version of the
Thermoscore display by liningPeltier devices on piano keys.
The system is controlled by MIDI notes-on messages from an
MIDI sequencer, so that a composer can design songs that are
sequences of temperature for each piano key. We also discuss
methodologies for composing with this system, and suggest
two approaches. The first is to make desirable keys (or other
keys) hot. The second one uses chroma-profile, that is, a radar
chart representation of the frequency of pitch notations in the
-piece. By making keys of the same chroma hot in reverse pro
portion to the value of the chroma-profile, it is possible to
-constrain the performer's improvisation and to bring the tonal
ity space close to a certain piece.
Keywords
musical score, improvisation, peltier device, chroma profile
1. INTRODUCTION
In a very real sense, the written score does not present the full
picture of a musical piece. Whatis written in the score is only
the minimum information needed to re-create the music. For
instance, the time resolution of note-on timing is at most in
64th notes, and moreover, note-off timing is completely at the
-discretion of the performer. Instructions for tempo are de
scribed with just a few simple words; those for key touch are
expressed even more simply, and not for individual notes. In
the process of playing music, a musical performer interprets
them and compensates for the lacking information. Therefore,
music performance differs from performer to performer. Also,
if the performer plays something slightly different from what
-is written, it can be considered permissible as an ad lib ar
rangement that comes from his/h er individual character. In
-this sense, we can define the score as a set of minimum in
structions from a composer to a performer.
If we refer to graphic scores and text scores, several pieces
are open to a great variety of interpretations. For example, the
graphic score of "Concert for Piano and Orchestra" by John
-Cage Figure 1 allows many more interpretations than tradi()
tional musical scores, especially in the sequence of the notes.
The text score of "RIGHT DURATIONS" by Karlheinz
Stockhausen Figure 2 never sp ecifies the pitches of any()
notes, but provides more descriptions of duration instead. In
such cases, we can say that such scores set fewer constraints
on a performer's improvisation.
-Figure 1. Graphic score of "Concert for Piano and Orches
tra" (John Cage)
RIGHT DURATIONS
play a sound
play it for so long
until you feel
that you should stop
a g a i np l a yas o u n d
play it for so long
until you feel
that you should stop
a n ds oo n
stop
when you feel
that you should stop
but whether you play or stop
keep listening to the others
At the best play
when people are listening
do not rehearse
Figure 2. Text score of "RIGHT DURATIONS"
(Karlheinz Stockhausen)
However, without regard to graphic or text, such scores are
still visual images laid down on flat paper. Today we can
make many choices from among a variety of media. We do
not need to cling to static media, or even stick to visual
-media. With Thermoscore, we may succeed in conveying in
formation that is impossible t o express with static visual
media.
2. EXPANSION OF SCORE
2.1 Dynamic Scores
Generally, it is hard to describe time on a planar surface, for
-spatial representation does not necessarily correspond to indi
vidual time sensation. Acco rdingly, accelerations or
-decelerations in velocity cannot be described precisely by mu
sical characters, and the rhythms or grooves that the composer
intended cannot be expressed faithfully by musical notes. To
convey these types of information, it would be more effective
to animate the score. The movements of notes in the score
would more intuitively displa y accelerations, rhythms, and
grooves.
In 2003, the first author of this paper crystallized this concept
in "Graphic Score Animation for Two Pianos." In this work,
-the graphic score animation, divided right and left, was proj
ected onto a screen. Each part presented a non-traditional
score for one of the two pianists Figure 3 . The system also()
-functioned as a conductor that synchronized the two perform
ances by visual motion. This score described time information
with clockwork precision. Inthis case, the composer did not
write a static score, but instead created an animated score
with Macromedia Flash.
Figure 3. Performance of "Graphic Score Animation for
Two Pianos" [4] (Homei Miyashita)
At first glance, this system seems to be similar to some media
art that converts music to images through the medium of the
computer like "MUSIC PLAYS IMAGES X IMAGES(
PLAY MUSIC" by Iwai et al. 5 . However, this "Graphic[] )
Score Animation" is completely different; it converts images
to music through the medium of the performers.
There is another type of dynamic score that is not sequenced
but interactive. For example, the performance of Yolande
-Harris et al. 1 used a moving graphic score created from sig[]
nals from the audience's chairs. Introducing interactivity into a
-dynamic score is easy, and it must lead to new musical ex
pressions.
2.2 Scores for Non-Visual Sensation
Musical performers frequently plays music on stage from
-memory. The main reason for memorizing the score is be
cause s/he can then concentrate on the actual performance.
-Processing a flood of visual information might have a nega
tive effect on centered music performance. Therefore, it
-would be ideal if the player has only to concentrate on inter
action with musical instrument.
-Accordingly, there have been some attempts to convey musi
cal information via non-visual and non-auditory senses. A()
-bio-feedback system developed by Nagashima 6 uses elec[]
tric pulses as the feedback signal. Using this system,
Akamatsu et. al. created a live performance, "Flesh Protocol,"
in which those signals are sent to a dancer. This system can
be related to a musical score that uses non-visual senses.
()Moreover, this can be regarded as a dynamic score.
On the other hand, vibrotactile suits developed by Gunther et
-al. can transfer musical information by vibrations on the sur
-face of the body 2 , though they were made to enable audi[]
ences to listen to music using the sense of touch. This system
is controlled via general audio sequencing software, so it also
can be called a dynamic score.
Both systems were designed as wearable devices. Therefore
-when they are used as a score, to some degree they will be
-come hindrances to the performer's movement. When design
ing a new system, we must create an environment in which
the performer can concentrate on playing. Consequently, to
-display the composer's requirements or constraints more effec
-tively without disturbing theactual playing, we chose temper
-ature as a sensation to convey information. With a few excep
tions like the Theremin, the performer touches the instrument
-during a musical performance. Music arises from interface be
tween performer and instrument. As a result, the more s/he
-concentrates on playing, the more of the senses in the finger
tips become acute. We focused attention on that contact point,
and considered developing some sort of 'score display' there.
-Musical instrument must be an input device for a music per
former, but it could be an output device at the same time. By
changing temperature at the interface with the instrument, we
may be able to communicate which note the composer wants
or does not want to be played, or how fast or how loud it()
should be played.
3 SYSTEM DESIGN
3.1 Thermoscore Display
To control the temperature of the interface between performer
and instrument, we adopted Peltier devices for the
Thermoscore display. A Peltier device is a thermoelectric
cooler that works as a heat pump. It is a sandwich formed by
two ceramic plates; when an electrical current is applied, it
transfers heat from one side of the device to the other Peltier(
effect . By reversing the current, we can interchange functions,)
cooling and heating. As we started designing the first version
-of the Thermoscore display, we chose the piano keyboard be
-cause the piano is one of the most common and versatile in
struments. Also, the size and shape of Peltier devices fit in
()well on piano keys. Figure 4
Figure 4. Peltier devices on displayThermoscore
(piano version)
MIDI OUT
MIDI - to - Temperature Converter
MIDI Sequencer
Display(Composer)
(Performer)
3.2 MIDI Control
As shown in Figure 5, the Thermoscore system is controlled
by Musical Instrument Digital Interface MIDI signals. The()
-MIDI-to-Temperature converter receives a MIDI note-on mes
sages from the MIDI sequencer, and sends electricity to the
Peltier devices of the corresponding keys on the Thermoscore
display.
Figure 5. The MIDI Control System of Thermoscore
With MIDI, we can compose songs for this system by trial
and error, using general MIDI sequence software. It is easy to
apply existing MIDI files in a piece or to synchronize the
thermoscore with another MIDI system, and moreover, it is
possible to build a progressive system using MIDI input from
the instrument used for the Thermoscore display. Note that in
-principle, this system is not a feedback system from an instru
ment. Signals flow only in one direction, i.e., from composer
-()or his/her song to performer, and the instrument serves sim
ply as an output device. In other words, the instrument sends
messages to the performer by means of temperature, receives
his/her action as 'feedback', and then transforms the action
into sound.
4. SONG DESIGN (COMPOSITION)
4.1 Displaying Keys
In this section, we discuss methodologies for composing
songs for the Thermoscore system. As previously described, a
score is a set of minimum requirements from a composer to a
-performer, or, a set of constraints on the performer's improvi
-sation. The first method we suggest is to display key and har
mony constraints in terms of pitch.
Nobody can touch a very hot object for a long time. When
objects are much hotter than body temperature, a person may
pull his/her hand away immediately by reflex action. In this
manner, if we control Thermoscore to make some keys so hot
that the performer cannot hold it as tenuto, the sound tends to
be short, or, a passing note toward some note that is not as
hot. Of course, we don't need to make the keys so hot that
they burn the performer's fingers. What is important is to send
the message. In this way, allwe have to do is to make every
key hot, except the notes indicated by the composer. First, the
composer describes chord progressions and available notes on
the piano-roll window in a MIDI sequencer. To apply them to
-Thermoscore, the piano-roll image is 'reversed,' like a nega
()tive film. Figure 6
Needless to say, it is possible to instruct the performer to
'Strike the key while it is hot,' and in that case we don't need
to 'reverse' the piano-roll image.
C
C#
D
D#
E
F
F#
G
G#
A
A#
B
temperature
time
pitch
desirable notes
(a) (b)
Figure 6. Example of (a) music image in composer's mind
and (b) corresponding thermoscore image
In this system, chords proceed with time, but by utilizing a
MIDI triggering system, like the touchtracks function in Logic
Audio Software, it becomes possible to trigger the progression
-in real-time, This also allows a composer to control the per
former's playing from a seat in the audience!
-The latency time from the beginning of heating to the per
former's recognition depends on the performer, but it takes a
few seconds. When composing songs for this system, the
composer must account for that latency. Also, the performer
does not need to hesitate to hit the keys. S/he can play freely,
and the hot keys will be reflected in the duration of the notes.
4.2 Stochastic Control from Chroma-Profile
Constraining improvisation is a kind of stochastic control.
Therefore, we developed chroma-profile, which is a radar
chart representation of the frequency of pitch notation in the
piece, computed from MIDI data 2 . With this representation,[]
()we could visualize not only the music's tonality or modality
space but also the characteristics of the composer and the era
when it was composed.
For example, Fig 7 a is a chroma-profile from the 3rd()
movement of Beethoven's "Moonlight Sonata," Op.27 No.2.
This piece was written in C sharp minor, so frequencies in the
tonic C# and dominant G# are higher than in the others.() ()
Figure 7 b is a chroma-profile from Chopin's "Minute()
Waltz," Op.64-1; it was written in C# major, so frequencies in
-the tonic and dominant are high, but not as high as in the pre
vious composition. Finally, Figure 7 c is a chroma-profile()
from Schoenberg's "Six littlepieces for piano," Op. 19, which
was composed with a backdrop of atonalism. Every note
tends to be used at more equable frequency.
(a) "Moonligh Sonata" Op.27 No.2 (L.v. Beethoven)
C
C#
D
D#
E
F
F#
G
G#
A
A#
B
C
C#
D
D#
E
F
F#
G
G#
A
A#
B
(b) "Minute Waltz" Op.64-1 (F. Chopin)
(c) "Six little pieces for piano" Op. 19 (A. Schoenberg)
Figure 7. Examples of Chroma-Profiles
(Normalized to the maximum frequency)
To constrain improvisation and to bring the performance close
to a certain piece, an approach using chroma-profile will work.
Let us suppose that a performer is not inclined to hit hot keys.
Under this supposition, we have only to make keys with the
same letter names same chrom as hot in reverse proportion()
to the value of the chroma-profile. For example, the
thermoscore to achieve the performance of the "Moonlight
Sonata," is shown in Figure 8. The form is duplicated-shaped,
-for a chroma is a cycle of notes within the octave. Tempera
tures of the tonic C# and dominant G# keys are set to be() ()
cooler here.
Figure. 8 Thermoscore that is expected to lead to the per-
formance of the "Moonlight Sonata" Op.27 No.2
5. CONCLUDING REMARKS
Needless to say, results will vary depending on the performer.
Note that, however, that our original purpose was not to get
-the music precisely as expected. If a composer wants to con
-trol the music exactly, s/he should control the instrument di
-rectly via MIDI. As mentioned previously, a musical perform
er interprets, adds, and sometimes ignores information from
the composer, but that process makes music even more vital,
and that is exactly the talent of the performer. This is why
many composers use the traditional medium called a 'score'
-even today. A score is not an order from a composer to a per
former, but a sort of communication medium that enables
them to create music together.
We believe that the best advantage of Thermoscore is that it
conveys the feels existence, emotion, and 'body warmth' of
-the composer to the performer. All music is product of a col
laboration between composers and performers. Usually they
-do not or can not meet each other, but at any rate, perform()
ers should get a sense of communion with the composers,
whatever kind of score is used.
6. FUTURE WORKS
Next we plan to conduct a few evaluation experiments of the
Thermoscore system, and design avisualisation system so that
the audience can perceive the effect.
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
-This project has been supported by Hayao Nakayama Founda
tion for Science and Technology and Culture.
8. REFERENCES
[1] Bert Bongers. Exploring Novel Ways of Interaction in
Proceedings of the third confer-Musical Performance,
(1999), pp. 76-81ence on Creativity & cognition
Eric Gunther, Glorianna Davenport, Sile O’Modhrain.[2]
Cutaneous Grooves:Composing for the Sense of Touch.
Proceedings of the 2002 Conference on New Instru-In
pp. 01-06.ments for Musical Expression (NIME-02),
Homei MIYASHITA, Kazushi NISHIMOTO. Extraction[3]
IPSJand Analysis of Chroma-Profile from MIDI Data. In
，, 2003-MUS-51 pp. 97-101.SIG Technical Reports
[4] Homei Miyashita. Graphi c Score Animation for Two
Pianos, February 28th, 2003. Toyama shimin plaza,
Toyama, Japan.
-[5] Toshio Iwai, Ryuichi Sakamoto. MUSIC PLAYS IM
AGES X IMAGES PLAY MUSIC, December 16th, 1996.
ACM Theater, Art Tower Mito, Japan.
[6] Yoichi Nagashima. Bio-Sensing Systems and
Bio-Feedback Systems for Interactive Media Arts. In
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces
pp. 48-53.for Musical Expression (NIME-03),