Rule-based performative synthesis of sung syllables
Lionel Feugère
LIMSI-CNRS, BP 133, F-91403 Orsay, France
UPMC Univ Paris 06, F-75005 Paris, France
lionel.feugere@limsi.fr
Christophe d’Alessandro
LIMSI-CNRS, BP 133, F-91403 Orsay, France
cda@limsi.fr
ABSTRACT
In this demonstration, the mapping and the gestural control
strategy developed in the Digitartic are presented. Digi-
tartic is a musical instrument able to control sung sylla-
bles. Performative rule-based synthesis allows for control-
ling semi-consonants, plosive, fricative and nasal consonants
with a same gesture, despite the structural diﬀerences in
natural production of such vocal segments. A graphic pen
tablet is used for capturing the gesture with a high sampling
rate and resolution. This system allows for both perform-
ing various manners of articulation and having continuous
control over the articulation.
Keywords
Singing voice, gestural control, phoneme articulation, per-
formative synthesis
1. CONTEXT
Phoneme articulation in speech and singing involves syn-
chronization of many vocal tract and glottal organs. When
simulating voice synthesis and attempting to control it in
real time, it becomes very diﬃcult to control so many pa-
rameters, and above all with the temporal constraints of a
music band performance.
In some works, articulation is controlled by only trigger-
ing the transition between vowel (V) and consonant (C) or
between C and V. Simple triggering is used together with
formant synthesis by rules in projects such as Glove-Talk [6],
or with corpus-based concatenation synthesis such as in the
Luna Park performance [2].
Other works address the more complex question of con-
tinuous transition control. Using ﬁxed syllable sequences,
one can apply time-streching techniques like PSOLA-based
voice modiﬁcation [8] or pre-synthesized phonemes lists,
as in the voice physical model SPASM [3]. Continuous
phoneme control is possible as well with HMM-based syn-
thesis, but this results in at least one phoneme delay, like
in the MAGE system [1].
In the present demonstration, all the temporal phases of
Vowel-Consonant-Vowel sequences are accurately controlled
by hand gestures. In phonetics, Vowel-Consonant-Vowel
dissyllables (VCV dissyllables) can be classiﬁed according
to the manner of articulation of the consonant. Conso-
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’14,June 30 – July 03, 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
nants which obstruct completely and temporally the vocal
tract are called oral plosives (e.g. /p,b,t,d,k,g/) while the
ones which obstruct completely and temporally only the
oral tract are called nasal plosives (e.g. /m,n,N/). Con-
sonants which partially obstruct the vocal tract, resulting
in a turbulent noise at the constriction are called fricatives
(e.g. /f,v,s,z, S,Z), while the ones which let the air ﬂow free
without friction (or very little) are called semi-consonants
(e.g. /w, 4,j/).
2. STYLUS CONTROLLED ARTICULATION
2.1 Digitartic
Digitartic (DIGIT(al) ARTIC(ulation synthesizer)) is a rule-
based formant singing synthesizer [7]. With the help of two
graphic tablets (e.g. Wacom Intuos5), the user can control
pitch, voicing, vocal eﬀort, vocalic color, articulation phas-
ing, manners and places of articulation, through a source-
ﬁlter model using the RT-CALM glottal wave model [5]
(Figure 1 gives a picture of the Digitartic control). In this
demonstration, the focus is put on the synthesizer control,
particularly on the detailed and accurate control of all ar-
ticulation phases between vowel and consonant.
RT-CALM Source
Formantic filters
Intonation,
Voice strength Vocalic color
Manner & place of articulation,
 Articulation phase,
Consonant voicing
Articulation rules
Consonantal 
noise source
Non preferred hand Preferred hand
Synthetic voice
Figure 1: Principles of Digitartic control.
2.2 Continuous control of articulation phas-
ing
Articulation is continuously controlled by a stylus in the
tablet plane. The tablet is divided in several areas, corre-
sponding to manner of articulation. After the selection of
a given consonant (and then a speciﬁc area) the user can
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
86
control acoustic phases in phonemic transition with a con-
tinuous motion. As soon as the gesture begins, the articu-
lation is modiﬁed until the end of the movement. The main
advantage is that timing is fully under control: the player
can synchronize accurately with other musical events. Note
that this is not possible in triggered systems (e.g. the Luna
Park system in the case of semi-consonants and fricatives)
for which the musical attack is located at the end of the
articulatory transition.
A printed layer attached to the tablet gives visual refer-
ences of the transition phases. The pen must slide along the
transition path without losing contact. The printed layer is
divided in 3 areas as shown in Figure 2:
• A vowel area (at the bottom of the tablet) which cor-
responds to the vowel target (in terms of formants).
No sound modiﬁcation occurs when moving the pen
inside this area;
• A consonant zone (at the top of the tablet) which
corresponds to the sustained targeted consonant (in
terms of formants, and friction noise if any). No sound
modiﬁcation occurs when moving the pen inside this
area, except the vocal eﬀort depending on the pres-
sure;
• A transition area (in the middle of the tablet, between
the vowel and consonant areas). If one moves from the
bottom to the top areas, the articulation goes from
the vowel to the consonant. If one moves from the
top to the bottom areas, the articulation goes from
the sustained consonant to the vowel. If a forward
and downward movement is performed, then a VCV
disyllable is produced. Formants evolve depending on
the stylus position in this zone, as well as burst noise
for plosives for the CV transition (no burst for the VC
transition).
The passage from one to another adjacent area is contin-
uous in terms of articulation. Duration of the consonan-
tal transition is determined by the stylus velocity. In this
way, it is possible to simulate any degree of hypo- or hyper-
articulation.
Sustained
consonant
Consonant 
formants
Evoluting 
formants
Vowel 
formants
Consonant-Vowel  
transition
Silence / 
voicing bar
Consonant 
formants
Burst noise
-----------------
Evoluting 
formants
Vowel 
formants
Fricative 
Noise 
+
Consonant 
formants
Evoluting 
formants
Vowel 
formants
Vowel-Consonant
transition
Vowel
Phonem production 
depending on Stylus 
direction movement
Figure 2: Articulation zones on the tablet
The same type of movement is used for each manner and
place of articulation. The only diﬀerence lies in the required
stylus velocity:
• A fast movement is required for plosives. More specif-
ically, velocity is important for producing an eﬀective
burst noise. If the gesture is too slow, the burst noise
will be perceived rather as a friction noise.
• A medium velocity is required for fricatives, nasals
and semi-consonants
Digitartic has been eﬀectively used for performing music
at several occasions e.g. NIME 2013 in Korea and JDEV
2013 in France. A video extract of this last performance is
available online 1 as well as some VCV sounds recorded all
at once2 (/apa/, /apa/, /ata/, /aka/, /ava/, /aza/, /a Za/,
/awa/, /a4a/, /aja/, /ama/, /ana/).
3. PERSPECTIVES
Digitartic proved successful at performing intelligible syl-
lables with accurate timing control. However, it is more
diﬃcult to articulate multi-syllabic words. As a perspec-
tive, we plan to implement a playing mode where the user
can chain pre-deﬁned syllables (with about 3 diﬀerent con-
sonants) using the same gestures as above.
Finally, comparing the voice apparatus gestures and hand
gestures would be interesting to study further how the hand
manages to imitate the voice. Gesture controlled vocal in-
struments could be compared to voice articulation in the
same way as vocal prosody has been compared to chiro-
nomic prosody [4].
4. REFERENCES
[1] M. Astrinaki, N. d’Alessandro, B. Picart, T. Drugman,
and t. Dutoit. Reactive and continuous control of
hmm-based speech synthesis. In IEEE Workshop on
Spoken Language Technology (SLT 2012), Miami,
Florida, USA, December, 2-5 2012.
[2] G. Beller. Gestural control of real-time concatenative
synthesis in luna park. In P3S (Performative Speech
and Singing Synthesis), 2011.
[3] P. R. Cook. Spasm, a real-time vocal tract physical
model controller; and singer, the companion software
synthesis system.Computer Music Journal,
17(1):30–44, 1993.
[4] C. d’Alessandro, A. Rilliard, and S. Le Beux.
Chironomic stylization of intonation. J. Acoust. Soc.
Am., 129(3):1594–1604, March 2011.
[5] N. d’Alessandro, C. d’Alessandro, S. Le Beux, and
B. Doval. Real-time calm synthesizer : new approaches
in hands-controlled voice synthesis. InProceedings of
the 6th International Conference on New Interfaces for
Musical Expression (NIME’06), pages 266–271, Paris,
France, June 2006.
[6] S. S. Fels and G. E. Hinton. Glove-talk: A neural
network interface between a data-glove and a speech
synthesizer. IEEE Transactions on neural networks,
3(6):1–7, November 1992.
[7] L. Feug` ere and C. d’Alessandro. Digitartic: bi-manual
gestural control of articulation in performative singing
synthesis. In Proceedings of the 13th Conference on
New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME’13),
pages 331–336, Daejeon, Korea Republic, May 2013.
[8] E. Moulines and F. Charpentier. Pitch-synchronous
waveform processing techniques for text-to-speech
synthesis using diphones.Speech Communication,
9:453–467, 1990.
1http://youtu.be/d4TV-IcK8c8?t=6m40s
2http://groupeaa.limsi.fr/_media/membres:feugere:
these_apatakavazajawauayamana.wav
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
87