1
Haptic Music Exercises
William Verplank
CCRMA, Stanford University, USA
e-mail address  verplank@ccrma.stanford.edu
ABSTRACT
Pluck, ring, rub, bang, strike, and squeeze are all simple
gestures used in controlling music.  A single motor/encoder
plus a force-sensor has proved to be a useful platform for
experimenting with haptic feedback in controlling computer
music.   The surprise is that the “best” haptics (precise,
stable) may not be the most “musical”.
Author Keywords
Music control, haptic feedback, physical interaction design.
ACM  Keywords
Input/output devices, interactive systems,  haptic I/O.
HAPTICS IN MUSIC
Since 1978, Claude Cadoz [1]  has used an active force-
feedback keyboard to explore the “ instumentality” of
dynamics in computer music. At Stanford’s Center for
Computer Research in Music and Acoustics (CCRMA),
Brent Gillespie [2] , built a piano-like keyboard and solved
some of the control problems.  Chris Chafe and Sile
O’Modhrain have shown the value of haptic feedback in
faster response and more accurate modulation [3,4 ] .
Charles Nichols [6 ]  has built a force-feedback violin bow
using friction models from Vincent Hayward [5 ] .
Mathews and Verplank have developed a “controllers
course” for inventing new devices for computer music. [7 ]
This year we built a new teaching device: the “FORCE-
STICK” to introduce some simple haptic effects.
HARDWARE
A force-sensitive resistor (FSR) is on top of a short stick
attached directly to the shaft of a motor.  It measures the
radial force applied by the user.  This is the same principle
used in The Plank [8 ] .   We use a surplus Reliance Electric
ES364 with a peak-torque spec of 65 oz-in and encoder
resolution of 1000 pulses/rev (4000 counts).  See Figure 1.
Pascal Stang [9] designed a board for Atmel AVR mega16
microcontroller and an H-bridge motor amplifier.  With the
AVR, we read the encoder A/B signals and output PWM to
the H-bridge.  We use Pascal’s library of AVR programs
and compile with AVR-GCC.
LOCAL HAPTICS – REMOTE SYNTHESIS
The microcontroller computes the forces based on simple
dynamic models running locally on the AVR.  Complex
synthesis or sample play-back is done remotely on a PC
with Pd [10].  In some simple cases, the sound comes from
the local vibrations in the FORCE-STICK.
Figure 1 . The FORCE-STICK with FSR under index finger.
EXERCISES
The exercises start with working dynamics and music
synthesis.  Then the students explore the range of effects
achievable with simple parameter adjustments (e.g. mass,
damping, spring).  At the same time we try different sounds
that may or may not match the feel.
Wall
A simple spring (without damping) acts as an effective
drum head or percussive instrument allowing bouncing or
drum-rolls.  Stiffer walls and a looser grip make for faster
and extended bouncing.  A softer wall feels like a big gong.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
NIME'05, May 26-28, 2005, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
256
2
Bumps
A triangle wave of tangential force proportional to the
radial force provides good scrapers or rub-boards.  When
stick position is mapped to pitch, the “valleys” or detents
between shallow bumps work as note anchors.
For simple, static shapes like Wall and Bump, a set of
diagrams has proved useful.  The tangential force (F T ) from
the motor is proportional to the radial force (F R ) measured
by the FSR.  This “slope of a frictionless surface” is a
function of position (x).  The “slope” plot is not easy to
understand; more understandable is the “profile” that it
feels like.
Figure 2. Slope (F T /F R ) and profile for Wall.
Figure 3 . Slope (F T /F R ) and profile for Bumps .
Figure 4 . Slope (F T /F R ) and profile for Pluck .
Pluck
A pluck  is simulated with a simple spring that releases at a
maximum force to start a string simulation.  Light forces
and multiple plucks allow strumming.
Friction
Simple stick-slip friction simulates bowing or rubbing.
Think of stick-slip as just a very fine series of plucks.  We
either couple to a string model in Pd or use a simple version
of the Karplus-Strong model on the microcontroller.
Ring
A simulated pendulum is swung against a bell.  The swing
of the pendulum is easier to control with force feedback
than without it.  The collision of clapper and bell can be felt
(and heard!) from the motor. A simple spring-mass-damper
behaves like a pendulum swinging.  By varying the spring,
mass and damper, we control the natural frequency and
damping
Spin
A virtual wheel or turn-table is spun by pressing the FSR
against its BUMP or STICK-SLIP surface.  Scratching a
recorded sound file is quite satisfying when you can feel the
turn-table torque and slip of the virtual platter against the
turn-table.
EXPERIENCE
Mapping physical effects to music is fun and surprising.  It
is easy to show that more precise control is possible with
active force feedback than without it; in fact, some sounds
are impossible without the active force interaction.  Effects
like stick-slip friction are the direct source of rich,
expressive musical sounds on instruments as diverse as
violins and Tibetan bowls, Indian tabla and wine glasses.
Vibrations and chaotic turbulence make control difficult but
they also make music.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks go to Chris Chafe for encouraging haptics research
and controller design at CCRMA.  Thanks go to Charles
Nichols for organizing the first workshop teaching haptics
for music.
REFERENCES
1.  Cadoz, C., et. al. “The Cordis System, Computer Music
Journal,  Vol 9, No. 3, Fall 1984..
2.  Gillespie, B. The Touchback Keyboard, Internaional
Computer Music Conference, 1992.
3.  Chafe, C. and O’Modhrain, S.  “Musical muscle
memory and the haptic display of musical nuance.”
Proc . Int. Computer Music Conference, 1996.
4.  O’Modhrain, S. Playing by Feel . PhD Dissertation,
Stanford University, 2000.
5.  Hayward, V. Armstrong, B. “A New Computational
Model of Friction Applied to Haptic Rendering.”
Experimental Robotics VI, PP. Corke and J. Trevelyan
(Eds.), Springer, New York, 2000, pp.404-412.
6.  Nichols, C. “The V-Bow” . Proc. Int. Computer Music
Conference, 2002 .
7.  Verplank, B., Gurevich, M., Mathews, M., “THE
PLANK: Designing a simple haptic controller.” NIME
Workshop  Proceedings  2002, Dublin Ireland.
8.  Verplank, W., Mathews, M., Sapp, C. A Controllers
Course, NIME Workshop Proceedings, ACM/CHI 2001.
9.  Stang, P., “ Atmel application/development boards”,
<http://www procyonengineering.com/avr/avrmini >
10. Puckette, M. “Pd: real-time music and multi-media
environment . ” <http://www-crca.ucsd.edu/~msp>
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
257