ABSTRACT
An installation to perform Ballet mécanique, one of the most
notorious works of the early 20th century, using acoustic
instruments entirely under computer control, was constructed
at the National Gallery of Art in Washington, DC to accompany
a major exhibit on Dadaist art.
Keywords
Robotics, computer control, MIDI, player pianos, mechanical
music, percussion, sound effects, Dadaism.
1 INTRODUCTION
George Antheil’s 1924 Ballet mécanique  for percussion
orchestra, sound effects, a nd multiple player pianos, a
composition which was never heard in its original orchestration
until 75 years after its creation, is considered one of the major
“lost” works of the early 20th century. The National Gallery of
Art presented an opportunity to bring Ballet mécanique into
the 21st century by inviting the authors to install a completely
computer-driven orchestra to perform the piece, as part of a
major exhibit on Dadaist art.
2 HISTORY OF BALLET MÉCANIQUE
Ballet mécanique was composed in 1924 by George Antheil, a
young American composer and pianist living among the literary
and artistic elite of Paris. His most outrageous work, Ballet
mécanique, called for an orchestra of three xylophones, four
bass drums, two pianists, a tam-tam, a set of electric bells, a
siren, and three airplane propellors, as well as 16 synchronized
player pianos.1
But the technology to perform the piece, and to link it to the
film, actually didn’t exist at the time, and so when it was
performed, it was in a reduced version.
In the early 1990s, New York music publisher G. Schirmer,
enlisted the aid of current author Lehrman to convert the player-
piano parts in Antheil’s score to a multitrack MIDI file, which
could be played from a standard sequencer on MIDI-compatible
player pianos.2 In this form, the piece had its premiere in 1999,
and has since been performed over 20 times in North America
and Europe. It was published by Schirmer, with the MIDI files
on CD-ROM, in 2003.3
3 DADA AT THE NATIONAL GALLERY
From 19 February to 14 May 2006 the National Gallery of Art
was host to “the most comprehensive museum exhibition of
Dada art ever mounted in the United States,.”4 Prior to coming
to Washington, the exhibit appeared at the Musée national d’art
moderne, Centre Pompidou, Paris, and after Washington it was
scheduled to go to the Museum of Modern Art in New York
City.
Stephen Ackert, head of the music department at the National
Gallery, originated the idea of incorporating Ballet mécanique
into the exhibit in Washington. His initial concept was for both
an automated installation and a performance of the piece with
a live orchestra. Unfortunately, it became apparent that the
logistics of doing a live performance would be too complex,
and so efforts were concentrated on the installation.5
4 CREATING THE INSTALLATION
Ackert and his design team scheduled the Ballet mécanique
installation to be on view March 12-29. The location was the
mezzanine lobby of the East Wing building, one flight above
street level, directly outside the gallery hall in which the Dada
exhibition took place (Figures 1 and 2).
4.1 Pianos
The score for Ballet mécanique has four separate player-piano
parts, each of which is desi gnated to be played on four
instruments, for a total of 16. However, the piece can be (and
has been) played on fewer instruments, as long as the number
is a multiple of four.
Most previous performances utilized Yamaha Disklaviers, but
Yamaha Corporation elected not to participate in the installation.
Instead, QRS Music Technologies loaned 16 Gulbransen baby-
grand pianos equipped with their Pianomation  MIDI-
controllable player system. The company also sent an identical
A “Ballet mécanique” for the 21st Century: Performing
George Antheil’s Dadaist Masterpiece with Robots
Paul D. Lehrman
Department of Music, Tufts University
Medford, MA, USA
+1 781 393 4888
paul.lehrman@tufts.edu
Eric Singer
League of Electronic Musical
Urban Robots (LEMUR)
Brooklyn, NY, USA
apps@ericsinger.com
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work
for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that
copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial
advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on
the first page. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or
to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee.
Nime’06, 5-7 June 2006, Paris, France.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Fig. 1—End view of the Ballet mécanique installation at
the National Gallery of Art.
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
300
instrument to Lehrman’s home for for six weeks prior to the
exhibition, to allow him to test and modify the sequence file,
since the Pianomation system responds to MIDI slightly
differently from the Disklaviers.
The two human pianists’ parts were performed using two
Kurzweil MicroPiano MIDI-controlled modules, amplified
through JBL powered speakers. In order to blend the tone of
the electronic and acoustic pianos as well as possible, Lehrman
copied some of the human pianists’ parts to the player piano
tracks, taking care not to allow the parts to overlap (i.e., doubling
notes) on a single instrument.
4.2 Other instruments
The Gallery’s original concept was for the percussion and sound
effects parts in Ballet mécanique to be provided by recordings,
or by MIDI synthesizers or samplers, synchronized with the
player pianos. But when Lehrman met with Ackert and the
Gallery staff in Washington for the first time in October, 2005,
he recalled seeing the work of current author Singer at NIME05,6
and proposed that those parts be performed on real percussion
instruments and mechanical noisemakers, played by MIDI-
controlled robots.
Lehrman contacted Singer, who enthusiastically agreed to enlist
his group LEMUR (League of Electronic Musical Urban
Robots) to design and build the robotic players, installing them
on rented percussion instruments.
4.2.1 Percussion
Most of the instrument mechanisms LEMUR  constructed for
this installation were based on the “BeaterBot” mechanism
developed for LEMUR’s ModBots. This is a microprocessor-
controlled solenoid and lever mechanism used to move a beater
at high velocity to strike a drum surface. The mechanism was
used more or less directly for the bass drums and tam-tam, and
adapted for use with the xylophones and propellors.
For the bass drums, they devised a cross-bar bracket to span
one side of each drum. A BeaterBot mechanism was mounted
on the bracket and fitted with a steel ball for a striker; steel was
chosen because it produced a better attack transient than other
materials tested, improving the audibility of the drums (Figure
3). Similarly for the tam-tam, a bracket arm fitted with a
BeaterBot mechanism was mounted to the tam-tam  stand, and
a steel cylinder wrapped in suede was used as a striker. These
materials produced the best combination of transient response
and a sustained “blooming” of sound (produced by multiple
strikes) that is an important part of a tam-tam’s timbre.
LEMUR designed and constructed new robotic mechanisms to
play the xylophones. They first considered a design using a
small number of beaters which could move around to play
different keys on each instrument. However, to achieve the
Fig. 4—Schematic drawing of XyloBot mechanisms.
Fig. 2—Schematic diagram of installation. The entryway to the
right of the pianos leads into the Dadaist art exhibition hall.
playing speeds required by the score, they decided to use a
separate beater for each key. This required 44 beaters per
instrument (Figures 4 and 5).
To simplify construction of a large number of beater
mechanisms, beaters were divided into sets. Each instrument
had four sets of beaters, with two sets of 13 beaters each on the
diatonic side and two sets of 9 beaters on the chromatic side.
Each beater within the set had an individual solenoid, pivot
mechanism, and beater rod, with the pivot bars in the set
mounted on a common shaft. The solenoids pull down on the
pivot on the same side as the beater. This is in contrast to the
original BeaterBot mechanism, in which the solenoid pulls from
the opposite side in a standard lever fashion. This design
modification was done for aesthetic reasons, so that the solenoids
would hang below the keys, not stick up above.
Fig. 3—Bass drum with BeaterBot.
The beaters are fitted with 3/4" Delrin® balls. This was found to
produce the best tone out of several materials tested (e.g., other
plastics, hard rubber), without damaging the wooden bars.
Fig. 5—XyloBot mechanisms on a concert xylophone.
Propellor mechanism is in the background.
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
301
Each set of beaters is controlled from a custom PIC
microcontroller-based circuit which receives MIDI note
commands, maps them and converts them to timed signals to
fire the solenoids. Velocity control is effected by controlling
the gate time of the solenoids: within a certain set range of gate
times, the shortest time will yield the minimum achievable strike
velocity and the longest will yield the maximum. This range of
gate times is determined experimentally. Firmware parameters
are then stored in EEPROM which map note velocities 1-127
to this time range.
4.2.2 Propellors
As they were in Antheil’s original performances, propellors are
simulated using industrial fans. To create an appropriate sound,
a piece of flexible material was inserted into the spinning fan
blades—the “baseball card in the bicycle wheel” effect—at
specific points in the score. Since the propellor sounds need to
start and stop quite quickly, this was deemed more practical
than  using a fixed piece of material and turning the fans on and
off.
To accomplish this, the team used a push-type solenoid
mechanism fitted with a crossbar holding four .04” thick, 1-
inch-wide strips of MDS-filled nylon (chosen for flexibility,
durability and sound quality). When energized, the solenoid
pushes the bar down, moving the nylon strips into the spinning
blades. Again, several materials in various thicknesses were
auditioned, with the final choice based on maximum volume of
the mechanism and longevity of the strips.
The propellor parts call for notes to be held for long periods.
Therefore, the intermittent-duty solenoid normally used in the
mechanism was replaced with a continuous-duty model. A
continuous-duty solenoid operates with a lower force (which is
not an issue in this case) but may be energized for long periods
of time without heat build-up and consequential damage to the
solenoid.
4.2.3 Siren
The siren is an electric fire-engine-type wailing siren, running
on 117 volts AC. It is controlled using a Mediamation LM-4
MIDI-controlled light dimmer. The three remaining outlets on
the LM-4 are used to switch the propellor-fan motors, so they
run only when called for in the score.
4.2.4 Bells
The score for Ballet mécanique is ambiguous about how many
electric bells are required, but when Lehrman was preparing
the files for Schirmer, they decided to make the number seven.
For the Lowell premiere, with the help of engineer Coleman
Rogers, Lehrman built a plywood “Bell Box” (Figure 6).
It is equipped with bells from 2" to 10" in diameter, obtained
from various sources, with the largest being an old Radio Shack
alarm bell, similar in appearance and tone to that found in
schools and other public buildings.
Originally Lehrman intended to mount all of the bells on the
front surface of the Bell Box, but he found when he did that all
of the bells (except the largest, which has its own shock mount)
sounded more like buzzers, as the plywood resonated louder
than the bell gongs. The solution was to suspend the bells in
free air: each bell was attached to a small piece of dense butcher-
block wood, which was in turn hung using short chains from a
pair of hooks at the bottom of the Bell Box.
Since the Lowell premiere, the Bell Box has been used for
several other performances of Ballet mécanique, and there was
no question it would be used in the Washington installation.
Gallery personnel suspended it from the mezzanine ceiling with
Fig. 6—MIDI-controlled Bell Box
aircraft cable. It was noted that the ringing bell mechanisms
produced very large transient voltages, which were damaging
the DC power supplies originally used. Singer therefore rewired
the unit, driving the bells with individual AC transfomers to
improve reliability.
4.3 MIDI  Control and Networking
Ballet mécanique was performed by a Macintosh G5 computer
running Mark of the Unicorn’s Digital Performer software. The
MIDI streams were generated by a Mark of the Unicorn MIDI
Time Piece USB. Because of the density of the MIDI data, each
group of pianos was assigned a separate MIDI cable, and the
signal was daisy-chained within each group. The XyloBots all
shared a single MIDI output from the MIDI Time Piece, with
the MIDI signal being distributed via custom MIDI splitters
and MIDI thru chains and each XyloBot responding to a
different MIDI channel. Similarly, signals were distributed from
other outputs to the other MIDI robotics, with each instrument
responding to a specific MIDI note (Figure 7).
A Mark of the Unicorn 828 Mk II audio interface (see below)
supplied one extra MIDI output, which was used to drive the
Kurzweil MicroPiano modules.
MIDI control of the Bell Box is effected by a MIDI Solutions
R8 MIDI-controlled Relay Array. The low-current relays in the
R8 are not sturdy enough to withstand the heavy currents drawn
by the bells, so a secondary tier of relays was necessary.
Fig. 7—MIDI network for the Ballet mécanique
(Apple AudioMIDI Setup)
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
302
4.4 Testing and Modifying the Files
A complete performance of Ballet mécanique is 25-30 minutes
long (depending on the tempo), but the National Gallery
requested that each performance there be no more than ten
minutes, so as not to frighten too many patrons. As Lehrman
had edited the piece a number of times for several applications
with the full cooperation of the publisher and the composer’s
estate, he was given a free hand to decide where the score would
be trimmed.
Before any editing was done, it was necessary to determine
how fast the piece was going to be played. Antheil’s tempo
markings are ambiguous, but the best interpretation says that
he intended it to be played at about 150 beats per minute (bpm).
However, this tempo is far beyond the capabilities of any live
performers, and the fastest performance to date has been at  120
bpm. Absent the human beings, on the other hand, the limiting
factor becomes the mechanical instruments, specifically the
player pianos, which have the most complex mechanisms.
In empirical testing when he was preparing the original MIDI
sequence for the Lowell performance, Lehrman determined that
Yamaha Disklaviers could play the pi ece at 133 bpm, but at
any faster tempo repeated notes would start to be skipped. Even
to get the instruments to play at this tempo, the MIDI data had
to be carefully massaged, with certain counterintuitive changes
made to velocities and durations in order to get the desired
response.
Lehrman’s tests on the Gulbransen piano in his home showed
that it could play the piece slightly faster—138 bpm—without
a great deal of customization of the sequences, and so that was
the tempo chosen. Note velocities in the sequence were set to a
constant value of 100, and an initial Controller 7 (volume)
command with a value of 127 was sent on each track.  Lehrman
then edited the score to the requested length, while attempting
to preserve all of the thematic and orchestral elements that make
the piece unique. Similar to the Disklaviers, the Gulbransen
pianos have a built-in delay of 500 ms after receiving a MIDI
command, so those tracks needed to be advanced by 500 ms.
After editing the sequence, Lehrman sent it to Singer, who tested
the appropriate tracks on his instruments, He found that the
solenoid instruments responded the best within a small range
of velocity values, and although each instrument had its own
optimum range, the best velocity for fast, repeated strokes was
consistently 30% lower than for individual strokes. Lehrman
modified the tracks to accomodate this. Singer also determined
that the latencies in his instruments were insignificant and so
no track offsets were required.
4.5 Amplification
As the installation was being completed on site, it became
apparent that the airplane propellors and xylophones could not
compete in terms of volume with the 16 grand pianos—
especially with the latter’s lids fully open, which is how the
Gallery preferred to set them up. The Gallery was able to supply
amplification, in the form of Shure SM57 microphones and
JBL EON powered speakers, for these instruments. We were
able to take advantage of the built-in mixing capabilities of the
EONs, accomodating all of the necessary inputs while using
only five speakers.
One unanticipated problem was that the noise from the fans
when they were spinning would now be amplified even when
they were not making the propellor sounds. Since the fans
required a spin-up time of at least five seconds before each
cue, amplifying their sound prematurely would significantly
lessen their dramatic effect. This problem was solved using a
Mark of the Unicorn 828 Mark II audio interface and a Shure
mic preamp. The signals from those microphones were sent to
the 828’s inputs, and in turn routed into audio channels within
Digital Performer. Those channels were record-enabled with
“full-time” monitoring, thus allowing the software to control
the level of the signals passing through the 828. Three audio
tracks were added to the sequence which contained nothing but
fader moves, timed to the start and end of each of the propellor
cues. The signals from these tracks were sent to three outputs
on the 828, and from there to the JBL speakers.
6 CONCLUSIONS
The Ballet mécanique installation at the National Gallery of
Art proved to be one of the most popular exhibits in that
institution’s history. Hundreds of listeners gathered for the twice-
daily performances, and the Washington Post , in a highly
laudatory review, deemed it “the best ten minutes of free fun in
Washington.”7 Although the life of the installation was originally
supposed to be 17 days, soon after the opening, the Gallery
extended its run an extra six weeks, through May 7th.
We were delighted to have been asked to participate in this
monumental undertaking. We believe that the spirit of the
installation was faithful to the composer’s intentions, extending
and modernizing them in a way he would have been most
approving of. Charles Amirkhanian, executor of the Antheil
estate, flew in from San Francisco just to hear the opening-day
performance, and pronounced it “Perfect.” In addition, we were
pleased to be able to bring this unsung composer’s music to
thousands of people who would otherwise have never
experienced his unique vision.
7 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to acknowledge the invaluable assistance of
Stephen Ackert and the audio-visual, design, and electrical staff
of the National Gallery of Art; Tom Dolan and the employees
of QRS Music Technologies; William Holab; Charles
Amirkhanian; Julian Pellicano; and Ron Frank.
8 REFERENCES
[1] Antheil, G. Bad Boy of Music, Garden City, NY ,
Doubleday, 1945.
[2] Lehrman,  P., The Revival of George Antheil’ s 1924 Ballet
mécanique, unpublished Master’s thesis, Cambridge, MA,
Lesley University, 2000.
[3] Antheil, G., Ballet mécanique, New York, G. Schirmer,
2003.
[4] “National Gallery of Art—Current Exhibitions,”  http://
www.nga.gov/exhibitions/index.shtm (11 April 2006).
[5] “National Gallery of Art to Premiere Unique Version of
Film Score,” http://www.nga.gov /press/exh/202/
filmscore.shtm.
[6] Singer, E., “A Large-Scale Networked Robotic Musical
Instrument Installation,” Vancouver, BC, Proceedings of the
conference on New Interfaces For Musical Expression, 2005.
[7] Kennicott, P., “‘Ballet Mecanique’: Dada’s Siren Song-A
Bravura Staging of George Antheil’s Classic Brims With
Mirth and Meaning,” Washington, DC, Washington Post,
March 20, 2006, Page C1.
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
303