Evolving Tooka: from Experiment to Instrument
Sidney Fels
Dept. of ECE
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, Canada
+1 604-822-8990
ssfels@ece.ubc.ca
Linda Kaastra
School of Music
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, Canada
+1 604-827-5468
lkaastra@interchange.ubc.ca
Sachiyo Takahashi
MAGIC
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, Canada
+1 604-822-4583
sachiyot@ece.ubc.ca
Graeme McCaig
Dept. of ECE
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, Canada
+1 604-822-5338
 rgmccaig@ece.ubc.ca
ABSTRACT
The Tooka was created as an exploration of two person
instruments. We have worked with two Tooka performers to
enhance the original experimental device to make a musical
instrument played and enjoyed by them. The main additions to
the device include: an additional button that behaves as a
music capture button, a bend sensor, an additional thumb-
actuated pressure sensor for vibrato, additional musical
mapping strategies, and new interfacing hardware. These
developments arose through experiences and
recommendations from the musicians playing it. In addition to
the changes to the Tooka, this paper describes the learning
process and experiences of the musicians performing with the
Tooka.
Keywords
Musician-centred design, two-person musical instrument.
1 INTRODUCTION
The Tooka was created as an exploration of two-person musical
instruments. The original Tooka [3] was a hollow tube with a
pressure sensor and three buttons for each player. Players
placed opposite ends in their mouths and modulated the
pressure in the tube with their tongues, cheeks and lungs,
controlling the sound. Coordinated button presses controlled
the pitch selection. The first Tooka was played by amateurs
who could play simple music but did not have time or
expertise to explore the expressive capabilities of the Tooka.
Based on recent experiences of two trained musicians playing
with the Tooka, we have evolved the design. This paper
describes the experiences these two musicians had with
learning to play the Tooka and the expressive capabilities they
feel when playing. Figure 1 shows two people playing Tooka
and Figure 2 illustrates the new Tooka.
Tooka continues some of the pioneering work in multi-person
musical instruments. Some early explorations in this direction
are found in works such as Mikrophonie I and II  [10],
Laboratorium [4], and groups such as the League of Automatic
Music Composers [1] and the Hub, experimental computer
network bands [5]. In Mikrophonie I, expert percussionists
play a collective instrumented Tam-Tam that has controls for
augmenting the sound intended for 2 sets of three players. In
Mikrophonie II, a four-person chorus along with music from an
organ is fed through a ring modulator played simultaneously.
The League of Automatic Music Composer s was the first
computer network trio. The Hub connected six electronic
musicians in a computer network that made each player’s
activity accessible to other players thus enabling the group to
engage in collective musical improvisation. The tradition of
collaborative instruments for expert play and performance
where a second player modulates, either mechanically or
electronically, the live performance of another expert player
continues in works such as Contacts Turbulants  using the
“catch and throw” metaphor [11] and, in one of the impromptu
demonstrations at NIME02 using the Photosonic instrument
where one player controlled the optical filters and the other
controlled the light source [2].
Based on an understanding of the relationship between control
and musical output, several hypotheses were made about how
musicians would respond to the Tooka [3]. The main
hypotheses were:
1. intimacy between two people would grow as they learned
to use the Tooka and that this intimacy would provide
continually increasing levels of expressive capabilities;
1.  tongue movements would lead to the most control over
the pressure sensor;
1.  a fourth button would be required for a larger control
space.
In addition, we created the musical mapping with the intent
that musicians would have to coordinate their button presses
to fully explore the musical range of the instrument.
Two musicians, Linda Kaastra, a trained bassoon player, and
Sachiyo Takahashi, a trained Noh flute and recorder player,
practiced for 15 hours with the instrument making
recommendations as they progressed. Within this time, they
were able to learn the basic techniques of the instrument and
Figure1: Two musicians (authors) playing Tooka.
develop sufficient skill to perform as well as to be part of an
improvisational group using traditional instruments. They
have begun to explore many of the expressive capabilities of
the instrument. Section 3 describes their experiences with the
instrument.
Based on their experiences we validated our first and third
hypothesis and invalidated our second one. As a result, we
improved the interface. Additionally, the choice of button
mapping resulted in some unanticipated and interesting
results. Specifically, it was possible for players to coordinate
button presses in the creation of a melodic line, but it was also
possible to play solo (independent) parts within a limited
range. The interplay of the musicians became important in the
development of methods for allowing turn-taking and
coordinated actions for expressive effect.
This paper first describes the new system including the
changes from the original Tooka. The focus shifts then to the
experiences of the two musicians. These experiences add to the
body of knowledge about how intimacy forms between a
player and a new instrument for musical expression. What is
particularly interesting when it comes to two-person musical
instruments, is how the dynamics of the two people influence
the development of intimacy between them as well as with the
instruments. Finally, new developments and enhancements of
the system will result as musicians continue to practice and
refine their abilities. These are discussed as future directions
for the Tooka.
2 HOW TOOKA WORKS
The current version of the Tooka uses two identical sections of
hollow flexible tube connected together with a plastic
connector to form one continuous tube. At each end is a
mouth-piece made from a connector, four buttons and a
pressure sensor. The tube’s outside and inside diameters are
1.25” and 1”, respectively, providing a fairly high compliance.
When assembled, the Tooka measures 86cm long. Attached to
one side is a bend sensor, which responds to flexing of the
tube. An air pressure sensor in the center measures the air
pressure inside the tube. Blue velvet coverings and black tape
on all the wires were added by one of the musicians to improve
the visual and tactile aesthetics for the performers. The normal
Tooka does not have any membrane in the tube so that air is
shared between the players. A barrier could be added, but that
would reduce the intimacy between the players.  Two people
demonstrating how to play the instrument is shown in Figure
1. To play the Tooka, each player puts their mouth over
opposite ends forming a sealed tube. The players collectively
modulate the tube pressure to control sound. Each player has
four buttons that may be used to control mode changes, such
as pitch as described in section 2.1. Players can modulate the
pressure in the tube using either their tongue, cheeks, pharynx,
or diaphragm.
The Tooka's air pressure sensor is a NovaSensor 410-015G3L
that detects medium range pressures. The air pressure sensor is
connected to an instrumentation amplifier and the signal is
passed to an I-Cube from Infusion Systems. Both hardware and
software calibration are used for this sensor. The buttons are
also connected to the analog inputs of the I-Cube but they are
thresholded to behave as digital inputs. The bend sensor and
two thumb-pressure sensors feed into the analog inputs of the
I-Cube. The I-Cube feeds data from the sensors into a Pd patch
[7]. All the music code for mapping sensor data to MIDI
control codes is performed within Pd. The Yamaha sound
generator receives the MIDI commands and plays the sounds
according to how it is programmed.
2.1 Control Mapping with the Tooka
Based on the feedback from the musicians playing the Tooka
we made several modifications to the instrument. The changes
included adding a fourth button, adding a bend sensor, adding
thumb pressure sensors, and adjusting the musical mapping.
2.1.1  Button to Note Mapping
The Tooka button mapping remains the same as in the original
Tooka [3] except that we arrange them with the white button at
the top, followed by the new red and black buttons. The four
black buttons (two per player) are used together for a range of
16 pitches. The octave is set with the two white buttons. In
total, the musicians can control up to 64 button combinations
with the four black and two white buttons. These combinations
are mapped to MIDI note numbers. Refer to [3] for the precise
note mapping tables.
We chose to map each player's white button to shift the pitch
by one octave (in our current implementation, the four
combinations correspond to a base note of C2, C3, C4 and C5).
We use the other two black buttons that a player has for
semitone offsets from the current octave. There are 16 different
positions mapped to 14 semitones above the base note and
two notes below allowing multiple fingering for the same note.
Button order was selected in consultation with one of the
musicians. This mapping was easily learned by the musicians
and has many implications for how the musicians and
audience perceive the effort towards playing music as
described in section 3.5.
The fourth button (red), called the capture/sustain button, was
added to provide texture. Specifically, the fourth button
captures the currently playing sound and sustains it as long as
the button is held. The musicians can build up a range of notes
to make a chord or drone against which to play melodic
passages, or simply to build up a wall of sound. This is done
by first, playing a note together. While the note is sounding,
one player presses the red button to capture the sound. Then, a
new sound may be added and the pair can be captured by the
second player.
Figure 2: Block diagram of the Tooka.
Figure 3: Tooka's Bend Sensor
The capture/sustain algorithm is state sensitive, in that the
player who most recently pressed a sustain button has sole
control over the entire buffer of stored notes, and can end all
sustained notes at once (by releasing the button). A single
player cannot capture more than one note in a row, but must
take turns with the other player to accumulate notes. We
conceptualize this complex behaviour as the "stealing" or
"passing back and forth" of captured notes.
Thus, the operation of the capture/sustain has been designed
with three desirable characteristics:
1.  The currently playing note can be captured and
maintained as a background for new playing,
retaining its original volume, pitch, and vibrato.
2. Notes can be continually layered, each with different
tonality (currently eight is the limit, relating to the
number of available channels on the MIDI module).
3.  Coordinated turn-taking is required to build layers
of notes.
Turn-taking presents a parallel with the Gray code button-
pitch mapping of the other 3 buttons. This turn-taking is
difficult to learn as it is easy to lose track of whose turn it is.
This is predicted from the work of Sellen et al. [9] with respect
to mode errors since with Tooka, the state of the capture mode
can be changed by one player while the other is still holding
down the red key. Thus, either one player doesn’t realize they
can lift their capture/sustain key or they may inadvertently lift
it and the drone sustained notes stop. While this approach
makes the instrument more challenging, going against usual
HCI guidelines, it focuses on the relationship between the
players requiring more communication between them.
Players can chose which fingers from which hand control the
buttons. Choosing which hand to use and which fingers is a
complex issue. The note buttons are grouped, as are the octave
and capture/sustain buttons. This arrangement allows one
hand to play within an octave while the othe selects the octave
and capturing effects such as a drone. Each player chose
differently.
From a theoretical perspective, Guiard’s kinematic chain
model [6], suggests using a grouping that allows the non-
dominant hand to establish the context while the dominant
hand plays within the context. Thus, note offsets and pitch
bend should be played with the dominant hand. However, it is
unclear what the octave key does. If playing within an octave,
the non-dominant hand should control the octave, however, if
playing a large pitch range, then the octave key doesn’t
establish the context, so should be played with the dominant
hand. The capture/sustain establishes the background drone so
fits well with non-dominant hand control.
What we observed is that players tended to alternate between
one-handed and two-handed modes. As one musician noted, “I
use my right hand (my non-dominant hand) except when I
need extra help.” As described in section 3, players developed
fingering techniques as they played.
2.1.2  Air pressure
Air pressure is mapped to the loudness of the sound
approximating an effort-to-sound level map that a player
experiences with a recorder. Like the Pipe [8], Tooka uses air
pressure for breath control rather than airflow typically used
with commercial
electronic wind
instruments such as
Yamaha WX5 and
Akai EW1.
2.1.3  Bend
Sensor
Mapping
We attached a 4.5”
resistive bend sensor
to the Tooka so that
we could measure the
bend angle between the two ends as shown in Figure 3. This
allowed the musicians to work together to bend the tubes to
adjust the pitch. This addition is essentially a simplified form
of the Pushka, described in [3]. The bend sensor output maps
to pitch bend of the current note being played by the white and
black buttons. It has no effect on any notes that are being
sustained. (Though, if a pitch bent note is captured, the note
and its bend are captured and sustained.)
2.1.4  Thumb Pressure Sensors
The thumb pressure sensors attached at each end map to
vibrato. This effect is captured as well if a red button is
pressed. See more on vibrato in section 3.
2.2 The Pd Patch
All the sensor data feed into an I-Cube which then feeds into a
Pd patch that performs all the mapping and sends MIDI
messages to a Yamaha MU-100 sound generator as shown in
Figure 2. The software runs on a Mac G4 Powerbook. The Pd
patch has a modular design with three main layers:
1.  Input Layer: receives messages from the I-Cube. Outputs
from this layer can easily be re-routed between modules in
the Control-Mapping Layer.
2.  Control-Mapping Layer: contains sub-patches
embodying the input/output characteristics of each
sensor type. The button-to-pitch sub-patch contains
rewritable look-up tables, mapping four of the Tooka's
buttons to note values and two of the buttons to octave
values (see section 2.1.1 for details). The breath-to-
volume sub-patch performs a linear mapping from breath-
pressure sensor values into MIDI channel volume values.
The vibrato sub-patch performs a similar linear mapping
from finger pressure to vibrato. The bend sensor sub-
patch translates normalized bend-sensor values into
pitch-bend values in semitones. We compensated for non-
linearity in the bend-sensor voltage output by using a 2-
Figure 4: Mapping function to adjust pitch bend
D calibration curve that can be freely edited (see Figure 4).
3.  Output Layer: formats and sends MIDI messages to the
MU-100, and handles channel assignments and
polyphony. The capture/sustain feature is implemented
by taking advantage of the multi-channel capacity of the
MU-100 MIDI module: at the moment a note is captured,
the state of the current channel is 'frozen' and subsequent
input is routed to the next empty channel.
The Pd patch is designed to support easy debugging and
development of the Tooka. Incoming sensor data is visible in
both numerical and graphical form, before and after
calibration. An optional debugging switch enables data
logging to the console. There is also a simulated Tooka input
subpatch for performing sanity tests on the system, as well as a
global configuration subpatch for adjusting constants such as
base pitch and MIDI program number.
3 MUSICIANS’ EXPERIENCES
Given this was a new experience for the wind players, their
initial response to the Tooka has been very positive. While the
instrument provides interesting and some unusual problems
for performance, the musicians seem to be finding solutions
that contribute to the expressive potential of this system. This
section discusses how the musicians currently deal with
breath, finger, pitch bend, and sound capture coordination and
as well as communication experiences.
3.1 Breath Coordination
One of the first lessons in breath control on the Tooka came
when the wind players realized that they would be maintaining
pressure levels rather than airflow. This meant that it wasn’t
necessary to blow very hard, but to gauge the pressure by
sensing it inside the mouth, throat, and lungs. We suspected
that the greatest degree of pressure control would be from the
tongue. However, the wind players would have had to learn a
new type of tongue movement, aiming to adjust pressure rather
than create an attack. As a result, the musicians tended to use
their diaphragm, throat, and cheek muscles for modulating the
air pressure (and hence, volume) instead.  
A number of other expectations were not met from the
experiences with the musicians using their breath. First, the
players only release air from the Tooka into their throat or out
through the sides of their mouths and not through their nose.
Second, most of the articulation was done with the player’s
fingers rather than breath, especially for faster passages.
Finally, even though players can breathe while maintaining air
pressure, this did not seem to be a preferred technique. Instead,
the two musicians sometimes stop breathing and/or remove
their mouth from the mouthpiece to breathe. The musicians
take additional breaths on some occasions due to fatigue, on
others, for expressive effect. The device does leak some air
causing the players to constantly have to add air to keep the
pressure up.
The musicians began looking for expressive ways to shape the
sounds at about the time that they memorized their first scale
pattern. They discovered how to create dynamics by adjusting
the pressure inside the tube. A lower pressure creates a softer
sound; a higher pressure creates more intensity. In this way,
the two musicians can collaborate on note and phrase shape;
however, they must be able to agree on the desired shape and
intensity for the sound. The musicians use notation (such as
shown in Figure 5) and discussion, and real time awareness
and gesture to communicate these intensions. One drawback of
the breath system is the difficulty in creating varied or quick
rhythms through coordinating fingers with breath
articulations. On traditional wind instruments, these systems
can be developed to a high speed. The tongue movements
required for influencing the onset of sound on the Tooka did
not seem to be natural for wind players in the beginning.
Instead, they initiated sounds with the larger systems: cheeks,
throat, and diaphragm. This, combined with the necessity of
two-person collaboration, makes for a slower system overall.
When the musicians want to play faster passages, they revert to
using finger motion alone. In terms of breath attacks, the
musicians can punch notes out, or approach notes gently, but
they find it difficult to replicate the tonguing speed of a
traditional wind instrument. However, the Tooka does provide
its own distinct musical character, even if slower than a
traditional wind instrument. Control over note shape is strong
and effective on this instrument.
Additional expressive shaping occurs with the vibrato
options. Vibrato can be approached in three ways on the
Tooka, through the thumb-pressure sensor, the bend sensor
and through breath control. The breath control vibrato works
for longer expressive passages. To create breath vibrato,
players must cooperate on shifting the pressure inside the
tube; therefore they must look at each other and feel the
pressure inside their mouths and adjust it for expressive effect.
This very intimate collaboration on expressive shaping of a
note can be musically very effective. Finally, the thumb-
pressure sensor and bend sensor vibrato are discussed in 3.2
and 3.4 respectively.
3.2 Finger Coordination
During the first and second practice sessions, the musicians
used fingering charts from the original Tooka [3]. The next
step was to create a four-octave chromatic scale fingering chart
like the ones typically seen for traditional wind instruments.
From this chromatic fingering chart, the musicians figured out
scale and chord patterns. At the same time, they worked with
finger patterns to create more abstract melodic lines based on
finger motion.
It is interesting to note that the musicians find both the
abstract sonic possibilities and the traditional ‘virtuosic’
possibilities to be equally pleasing on this instrument. In fact,
one of the highlights of practice sessions so far was the
moment they were able to recall a scale without using a
fingering chart. This scale, the raga “Mayamalavagowla”
provides the musical backdrop for one of their first
compositions.
Once the scale was learned, the musicians could then discover
the subtleties of finger articulations. The precision of
combined finger movement is what creates the quality and
character of an articulation sound on the Tooka. This effect is
both pleasing and challenging, and contributes to the
Figure 5: Example of one type of Tooka song notation

virtuosic potential of the instrument. Because the articulation
sound is decoupled from the breath sensor (it is coupled with
finger buttons), there are ways to manipulate sounded notes
separately from their articulations to create unique effects.
If the players want to play a scale or melody, they must
communicate clearly on which notes are to be played when.
They must move their fingers at exactly the same time. For
most trained musicians, this is not too difficult. Still, even
trained musicians need to be very aware of the expressive
intentions of the other player on the Tooka. This heightened
need for mutual awareness is one of the collaborative features
of this instrument. Finger motion influences the articulation,
and when fingers do not move together, rough spots can occur
in the melodic line.
The thumb-pressure sensor for adding vibrato to the current
note  improves the expressive quality in a melodic line. It is
most useful for adding color or emphasis to a short note in a
melody. This feature adds to expressive potential in faster
passages where breath and/or bend vibrato are too
cumbersome.  
3.3 Capture/Sustain Feature
After the first few practice sessions, the musicians requested an
additional mechanism for adding texture. So, texture was
added by way of the capture button on the Tooka. This feature
allows the musicians to sustain sounds while playing other
sounds simultaneously. So, a pedal note, chord, or drone can
be held while a melody or other abstract pattern is being
played simultaneously. The musicians first used this feature to
sustain drones for a backdrop improvisation on a raga. Later,
they used the capture/sustain feature for other, more abstract
effects.
Sometimes the musicians use the capture button to surprise
each other by capturing a sound or adding another layer to
sound backdrops while performing. Both players have control
over this feature and can manipulate the sound environment
this way.  A captured sound can be ended or added to by the
second player. This feature created an enlarged musical
vocabulary for the woodwind players. Now they can
accompany their own combined improvisations. This feature
added much musical depth to the instrument and recommends
this feature for other wind instruments.
Currently, sounds remain exactly as they were when captured.
However, the musicians have asked for additional control over
this feature; they would like to drop notes or change the
intensity of the captured sound.
3.4 Pitch Bend Coordination
The bend sensor was added after the sound capture feature to
help the musicians adjust the pitch while playing
simultaneous notes. When the musicians bend the Tooka, the
pitch goes up; when they pull back to straighten the Tooka,
pitch goes down. With this feature, notes can be approached
from above or below, and given a pitch shape.
As mentioned earlier, vibrato can also be accomplished using
the bend sensor. This is the slowest and most awkward vibrato,
but it has dramatic expressive potential because the
movements are obvious and very connected to the sound.
3.5 Tooka Communication
Our primary motivation around designing a two-person
instrument was to explore intimate, engaged experience
around players, instrument and audience. We have recognized
that the experience of the Tooka players have some similarity
and difference from the experience of traditional one-person
instrument players. Because of direct mapping of tone and
pitch bend control, Tooka players quickly notice that they
have certain control over the sound, which increases the
intimacy between the players and instrument. It is
experientially as engaging as any other successful musical
instrument. The difference is that neither of the players can
engage themselves to the instrument independently. From the
simple level of not being able to practice alone, playing Tooka
means you have to communicate with another player and, thus,
intimacy with the instrument occurs only through engagement
with the other player. In a sense, the other player becomes a
part of the instrument and each player starts communicating
with this intelligent, sensitive ‘live’ instrument. In other
words, playing Tooka is a new way of communication between
two people. The Tooka plays the unique role of
communication tool through sound not only as musical
instrument. Players feel satisfaction through play even
without audiences since the other player also plays a role of
primary audience. In this way, Tooka indicates a new meaning
and purpose of musical instrument and it can be also used for
educational purpose or therapy.
Tooka also suggests a new concept of collaborative music.
Traditionally collaborative music has the style of “duo”,
“trio”, “ensemble”, etc. Tooka experience is very different from
those types of collaboration. We have noticed the clear
difference during our improvisation session with other
traditional musical instruments, (piano, harp, violin and
saxophone). Inside a large ensemble of different instruments,
Tooka players formed a sub-unit of communication among the
whole ensemble unit. This influences the dynamic of the
ensemble, which suggests a new possibility of collaborative
musical expression through various group dynamics enhanced
by the Tooka.
The Tooka is an intriguing instrument also from the
perspective of the audience. Usual duets or ensembles provide
coordinated harmony or music to the audience. With the
Tooka, each single note is collaboratively shaped out sound,
and bodily effort of two players coordination is visible. Just
as  Japanese puppet theater (Bunraku) creates one imaginary
puppet character through collaboration of three puppet
masters, Tooka creates one sound which is neither the
intention of player A nor player B. What an audience sees is
effort of communication, and what it hears is the expression
that emerges through two persons’ interaction.
4 FUTURE DEVELOPMENT
We are currently user-testing the Tooka through practice
sessions and performances, including improvisation with
different instruments. For the future development two
directions are possible; instrument improvement and
improvement/invention of the technique/style of Tooka
playing.
4.1 Improving the Instrument
The current version of the Tooka uses a MIDI sound module as
the sound source. We are interested in designing an original
Tooka sound for this instrument to maximize the musical
expressiveness. We have to find the right tonality to match the
form and feel of the instrument better. The second main aspect
the musicians want to change is the ability to control the
captured sound to provide dynamics and texture with it.
Finally, we want to improve the ability to shape the sound
collaboratively and give more dynamic to the sound
performance.  For the captured sounds, we are exploring
additional sensors such as strings and torque sensors as in
Pushka  and Pullka  [3]. An accelerometer is being considered
for providing control of spatialization.
The current version of Tooka already has a good range of
expression through breath, but even finer tuning may give the
players a better feeling of control over sound, providing a
more intimate experience. Thus, we are planning to combine
three pressure sensors with different sensitivity to obtain
maximum dynamic range for finer expressive breath control.
While the inclination of the musicians is to add some new
features, we recognize that each new feature increases the
cognitive load. The musicians are still exploring the current
version of the Tooka and have not reached its limits of
expression yet. We should be selective with new features,
adding only those that improve the musical potential of the
instrument, rather than adding features for the sake of adding
features.
4.2 Improving Performance Technique
As a new instrument, the performance technique of Tooka is
still under refinement. We have encountered several primary
issues around techniques during first practice sessions. For
example, understanding how the instrument is held and which
finger is assigned to which button is important. A more
complex technique coordinates the breath and timing to
generate successful musical expression. We are planning to
monitor the practice of this instrument over the years to figure
out the appropriate and most effective performance technique
around this instrument. Especially, 1) developing a notation
system for composition 2) developing breath technique 3)
developing gesture/signal systems for better coordination.
These techniques are critical for improving the musical
expressiveness of the Tooka.
4.3 Gesture Research with Tooka
The Tooka provides a rich environment for the study of
gesture in collaborative music making. Because both players
have intimate connection with the sound result, they must
learn to move in ways that indicate their musical intention
clearly to the other performer.
We will be using the Tooka to study the ways that these
musicians use gesture to indicate their musical intentions and
to what extent those gestures are predetermined or natural. Our
goal is to gather data on the movements of both players using
Optotrak motion capture and sound recording. Initially, we
will look for the kinds of movements that indicate musical
intention and the kinds of movements that correspond directly
to sonic expression. Not all motions will influence sonic
output on the Tooka. For instance, once a note is captured, it
remains the same regardless of waving hands or feet. However,
movement of the torso up and down, head motion, and facial
expression may change the pressure in the tube, and result in
sonic changes for a sounding note (not captured). Another
example of expressive gesture occurs as the musicians ascend
a scale. It is not necessary for the players to blow harder; the
sounds speak with the same amount of pressure in both the
low and high registers. But the musicians find themselves
gesturing as if the instrument required more air for high notes.
These observations will prove interesting for gesture research
in music performance.
5 SUMMARY
The musicians are, overall, quite pleased with the flexibility
and expressive potential of this wind instrument. They have
managed to find ways to collaborate expressively on
traditional melodies, as well as abstract sonic environments.
Additionally, they have used the instrument in improvisations
with musicians playing traditional instruments, saxophone,
violin, harp, and piano. They have also begun working on a
range of music styles, from gagaku, to raga, to classical
preludes of Hotteterre. The musicians have also begun
requesting new kinds of sonic outputs like street sounds,
environmental sounds and specially designed Tooka sounds.
When we created Tooka, our focus was on exploring how the
intimacy between two players could be expressed through
sound. Through musicians playing it, Tooka has evolved into
an exciting new musical instrument, accepted by musicians,
with many expressive capabilities that reaches into new means
of communication between players, ensembles and audiences.
6 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Our thanks to Florian Vogt, Edgar Flores, Kuang Tien, Brian
Fisher, Giorgio Magnanensi, Eric Vatikiotis-Bateson and
members of the HCT and Psycholinguistics Laboratory and
musicians from the UBC School of Music for their assistance.
This work is supported by MAGIC, POLA Art Foundation,
Japan and the CRC and NSERC, Canada.
7 REFERENCES
[1] Bischoff, J., Gold, R., & Horton, J. (1978). "Microcomputer
Network Music." Computer Music Journal 2(3):24-29. (Reprinted
in C. Roads and J. Strawn, eds. 1985. Foundations of Computer
Music. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.)
[2] Dudon, J. & Arfib, D. (2002), Photosonic Disk Performance,
Concert Performance at the 2002 International Conference on New
Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME02), Dublin, Ireland, May
24-26.
[3] Fels, S. & Vogt, F. (2002). Tooka: Exploration of Two Person
Instruments. In Proceedings of the 2nd  International Conference on
New Interfaces for Musical Expression(NIME02), Dublin, Ireland,
May 24-26, pp. 116-121.
[4] Globokar, V. (1973). Laboratorium: for 10 Instruments, Peters,
(sound recording).
[5] Gresham-Lancaster, S. (1998). “The Aesthetics and History of the
Hub: The Effects of Changing Technology on Network Computer
Music”, Leonardo Music Journal, vol. 8, 39-44.
[6] Guiard, Yves (1987). “Asymmetric Division of Labor in Human
Skilled Bimanual Action: The Kinematic Chain as a Model.”
Journal of Motor Behavior, 19, pp. 486-517.
[7] Puckette, M., (vrs. 0.37-0), Pd: real-time music and multimedia
environment , software,
http://www.crca.ucsd.edu/~msp/software.html   
[8] Scavone, G. P., (2003). THE PIPE: Explorations with Breath
Control. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on
New Interfaces for Musical Expression(NIME03), Montreal,
Canada, May 22-24, pp. 15-18.
[9] Sellen, A., Kurtenbach, G. & Buxton, W. (1992). “The prevention
of mode errors through sensory feedback.” Human Computer
Interaction, 7(2), 141-164.
[10]  Stockhausen, K. (1964,1965), Mikrophonie 1-2. Music of our Time
Series, CBS Records (sound recording, LP).
[11]  Wessel, D. & M. Wright. (2002) “Problems and Prospects for
Intimate Musical Control of Computers.” CMJ, 26(3):11-22.