The JD-1: an Implementation of a Hybrid 
Keyboard/Sequencer Controller for Analog Synthesizers 
 
 
Jeff Snyder 
Princeton University 
310 Woolworth Center 
Princeton, NJ 08544 
josnyder@princeton.edu
Andrew McPherson 
Centre for Digital Music 
Queen Mary University of London 
London, United Kingdom 
andrewm@eecs.qmul.ac.uk
ABSTRACT 
This paper presents the JD-1, a digital controller for analog 
modular synthesizers. The JD-1 features a capacitive touch-
sensing keyboard that responds to continuous variations in 
finger contact, high-accuracy polyphonic control-voltage 
outputs, a built-in sequencer, and digital interfaces for 
connection to MIDI and OSC devices. Design goals include 
interoperability with a wide range of synthesizers, very high-
resolution pitch control, and intuitive control of the sequencer 
from the keyboard. 
 
Keywords 
keyboard, sequencer, analog synthesizer, capacitive touch 
sensing 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Despite advances in digital synthesis, many musicians still 
prefer the sound and interface of classic analog synthesizers 
developed from the mid-1960s to the early 1980s. Current 
trends in commercial electronic music reflect this preference, 
from analog modeling in software synthesizers, to the recent 
releases of new hybrid analog/digital synthesizers by Buchla 
and Associates1 and Moog Music Inc.2, to a growing market for 
modern analog modular synthesizers that are modeled off of the 
extensible systems of the 1960s and 1970s, including 
manufacturers such as Doepfer, MOTM, and Wiard. 
 Advantages of analog modular synthesizers include near-zero 
latency, complete lack of aliasing effects, and a user interface 
that gives each user parameter a dedicated physical control.  
 Disadvantages of analog modular synthesizers include tuning 
instability, high cost when compared with software-based 
systems, lack of repeatability and preset storage, and difficulty 
communicating with modern digital systems.  
 This paper presents the JD-1, a digital controller for analog 
synthesizers that combines a touch keyboard with a built-in 
sequencer. Details of the hardware and implementation are 
discussed, along with our motivations behind the design, and 
our approach to the challenges of building a controller that is 
compatible with several different standards. Our design retains 
the advantages of analog modular synthesizers while alleviating 
some of their disadvantages, while also allowing 
interoperability with modern digital systems. 
2. EXISTING INSTRUMENTS 
The primary historical precedent for our work is to be found in 
touch controllers and sequencers from the 1960s and 1970s, 
which have either become scarce or have no capability for 
digital communication, and our aim is to emulate and extend 
this technology. The primary model for the JD-1 
keyboard/sequencer is the TKB, designed by Serge Tcherepnin 
in the 1970s, and still commercially available today from 
Sound Transform Systems 3. The innovation of the TKB lies in 
its combination of the touch keyboard and analog sequencer 
paradigms. When used as a keyboard, the voltages associated 
with knobs above each key are selected by touching the 
capacitive sensing keys.  
 Though there had been precedents for both capacitive touch 
sensing and sequential voltage control, Don Buchla 4 pioneered 
the application of both the touch keyboard and the analog 
sequencer to modular synthesizers. The model 112 touch 
interface introduced the concept of arbitrary voltages, set by 
knobs, which could be selected by capacitive touch plates, and 
also allowed for the touch plates to send a varying voltage 
derived from the added capacitance of the musician’s finger as 
it covers more surface area on the touch-plate. At around the 
same time, Buchla developed the first analog sequencer, in 
which voltages set by knobs could be stepped through via a 
clock pulse. Moog followed soon thereafter with his own 
version of the analog sequencer, and the design paradigm is still 
present in vestigial form in modern drum machine software. 
Serge Tcherepnin made an important contribution to the 
controller genre in the mid-1970s with the introduction of the 
TKB, which combined the capacitive touch-sensing keyboard 
idea with the analog sequencer. The TKB allowed for more 
control possibilities in a smaller space, since the knobs could 
now serve as both sequencer stage voltages (voltages that are 
output when a sequencer clock steps to them) and key-
associated voltages (voltages that are output when the user 
touches a particular key). 
  More recently, research has continued into capacitive touch 
sensing as a viable technology for extending the keyboard or 
keyboard-like controllers. The Manta, by Jeff Snyder [1], uses 
capacitive touch sensing to achieve continuous control data 
related to surface area covered by a finger on discrete sensors 
laid out in a hexagonal grid. The Touchkeys [2], by Andrew 
McPherson, applies capacitive sensing technology to traditional 
piano keys to achieve additional control information from 
finger position and centroid mass. Other recent inventions that 
extend the touch keyboard concept include the Hakken 
Continuum by Lippold Haken, who has developed a successful 
touch keyboard that senses both finger position and finger 
depth, using a design involving Hall effect sensors [3]. 
 
                                                                                                       
1 http://www.buchla.com/ 
2 http://www.moogmusic.com/ 
3 http://www.serge-fans.com/ 
4 http://www.synthmuseum.com/buchla/buc10001.html 
 
Permission to make digital or har d copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME’12, May 21-23, 2012, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
3. DESIGN 
3.1 Overview 
The JD-1 (Figure 1) is a controller that integrates traditional 
touch keyboard functionality with analog sequencer 
functionality, and extends these paradigms with sophisticated 
digital control and modern interfacing technology. The right 
side of the JD-1 presents the touch keyboard and knob banks, 
and the left side of the controller presents an analog jo ystick, a 
user interface for operational modes and settings, analog 
control voltage outputs, and digital interface ports. 
 
Figure 2: Side view of JD -1 key construction. 
 
3.2 The Keyboard 
The keyboard of the JD-1 (Figure 2) is made up of 32 CNC-
milled aluminum keys, arranged in a traditional diatonic 
piano/organ layout. The keys are fixed in place and do not 
move; they act as capacitive touch sensors, and each sensor 
outputs a value proportional to the surface area covered by the 
musician’s finger on a key. Our early prototypes of the JD-1 
keyboard followed more traditional capacitive sensor design, in 
which the sensors are etched into a PCB as a flat, 
undifferentiated surface. While this works well for generalized, 
tile-like layouts like the Manta or Buchla 112  controller, a flat 
layout was found to be unsuitable for the traditional diatonic 
layout, since it loses the ergonomic advantages afforded by the 
raised flats and sharps on a standard musical keyboard. After 
experimentation, it was found that 3mm of heigh t difference 
between the accidentals and naturals was enough for musicians 
to more accurately play scales with many flats or sharps. 
Another advantage of the JD-1 key design over a flat PCB 
capacitive sensing interface is the tactile distinction between al l 
of the keys. The physical gaps between the keys make the 
keyboard easier to play without visual feedback.  
 Each key is mechanically and electrically connected by two 
screws, which screw through the circuit board from below and 
into threaded holes in the keys. The keyboards have been 
anodized for scratch resistance, aesthetic appeal, and color 
coding, so the threaded holes are plugged before the 
anodization process to maintain electrical conductivity. The 
keys are anodized in a color scheme commonly call ed 
“reverse”, in which the naturals are black and the accidentals 
are lighter, clear anodized aluminum in the case of the JD -1. 
This is done as a visual reference to the harpsichords and 
organs of the 16th and 17 th centuries, to give an attractive 
styling to the instrument.  
 The span size of the keyboard is 158 mm for the octave, 
slightly smaller that a modern piano (which is usually 165 mm), 
and more in line with what is often called the French keyboard 
span, in reference to the key size of 18 th century French 
harpsichords [4]. This was done to conserve panel space, and 
also as another playful reference to keyboard history. 
3.3 Analog Synthesizer Outputs 
The JD-1 has both continuous voltage outputs and gate outputs, 
both of which are necessary to control analog synthesizers. 
 
3.3.1 Continuous Voltage Outputs 
A primary goal of the JD-1 is to allow highly accurate control 
of pitch, ideally within one cent (1/100 th of a semitone) 
precision. The JD-1 has 16 continuous analog control voltage 
(CV) outputs, including four with 16-bit resolution and twelve 
with 12-bit resolution.  The 16-bit outputs are intended as pitch 
control voltages, and the 12-bit outputs are intended for other 
parameters where accuracy is not as critical.  
 Since the JD-1 was designed to allow the control of various 
synthesizer brands, the CV outputs can be scaled to support 
various synthesizer standards. The most prevalent analog CV 
standards for pitch control are 1V/oct, 1.2V/oct and Hz/V. 
1V/oct, in which a change in the input voltage by one volt 
causes a change in frequency of one octave, is the standard 
adopted by Robert Moog, and followed by many synthesizer 
builders in the 1970s and almost all modern modular 
synthesizer manufacturers5. 1.2V per octave is the standard set 
by Don Buchla, chosen so that 100mv is equal to 100 cents. 
The third standard is what is often called Hz/V. In this standard, 
followed by Korg and Yamaha, the linear-to-exponential 
scaling is not done inside the oscillator, and therefore the 
control voltage sent to the oscillator has to implement an 
exponential curve to produce a perceptually linear rise in pitch. 
 In terms of the 1V/oct standard, 16-bit resolution for a 
standard 10V range would theoretically provide 0.183 cents 
resolution over 10 octaves. For 1.2V/oct, 16-bit resolution 
theoretically provides an even better 0.153 -cent resolution 
range. By contrast, a 12-bit resolution DAC would theoretically 
provide 2.92 cents resolution for 1V/oct scaling. If applied to 
the Hz/V standard, resolution would vary over the range of the 
oscillator, with the lowest resolution falling in the lower 
frequencies.  Most synthesizers expect pitch control voltages 
from 0V to 10V, but some, including Serge Modular, use -5V 
to 5V, and others use 0V to 5V for many non-pitch parameters. 
                                                                 
5 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CV/Gate 
 
Figure 1: The JD -1 keyboard/sequencer controller.  
 
 Whether the analog oscillator receiving the voltage is capable 
of a high level of pitch accuracy is beyond the control of the 
JD-1, or any analog synthesizer controller, but our design goal 
was to be at least as accurate as the best analog oscillator 
designs. As for commercial manufacturers, both Buchla and 
Wiard state tuning resolution within +/-5 cents over 8 octaves, 
the extremes of which would be noticeable in a just intonation 
setting; other manufacturers do not state a tuning resolution for 
their oscillator modules. Any inaccuracy or non-linearity in the 
JD-1 would cause even more error in VCO tuning, so our 
design works to minimize these errors. The most critical 
specifications for the DAC IC are offset voltage and 
nonlinearity; frequency domain performance is not important. 
The circuit that follows the DAC output adds a low pass filter 
sufficient to remove high-frequency noise and zipper noise 
without causing perceptible slew, which would be heard as 
portamento, and also scales the voltage with a gain of two, 
using precision resistors to avoid gain error. 
 Our results have been promising. When the JD -1 controls 
VCOs built from Ian Fritz’s sawtooth-core circuit 6, which is 
specifically designed for tuning accuracy and low temperature 
drift, just intonation intervals that sound very accurate to the ear 
are possible over the range from approximately C1 to C7. Tests 
with oscillators following Ray Wilson’s design 7 (which is 
based on the same Terry Mikulic Electronotes VCO design [5] 
as the Ian Fritz) show acceptable but less precise tuning results. 
 
3.3.2 Gate and Trigger Outputs 
Gate Controls are another type of voltage control used by 
analog synthesizers, usually to trigger envelopes or switch 
signals. As with continuous voltage control, there are several 
competing standards. Most manufacturers use a two-state gate 
control, in which there is an off state and an on state. In the 
standard used by Moog, often called “S -Triggered”, a “high” 
voltage (nominally 5V) represents the off state, and a “low” 
voltage (nominally 0V) represents the on state. The inverse of 
this, in which 0V is off and 5V is on, is standard on many 
synthesizers made by other brands, and is often called “V -
Triggered”. Buchla synthesizers follow an alternate standard 
with three states, called “Gate+Trigger”, where a 12V pulse 
signals an event, after which the gate voltage quickly drops to 
7V until a release action occurs to drop the voltage down to 0V. 
The JD-1 has eight gate outputs, all of which are capable of 
conforming to all three of these gate s tandards, depending on 
the mode settings chosen by the user.  
3.4 User Modes and Controls 
There are several user modes and controls that are accesible via 
buttons, potentiometers, and rotary encoders on the left side of 
the panel. LED indicators and a 3x16 LCD display provide user 
feedback. Descriptions of the user controls follow. 
  
3.4.1 Keyboard Mode 
A button labeled keyboard/sequencer allows the user to switch 
between a keyboard-style mode and a sequencer-style mode.  
 When Keyboard Mode is active, the JD-1 only outputs analog 
voltages when keys are touched on the keyboard. Polyphonic 
handling is chosen with a rotary encoder that allows for 5 
modes: monophonic retrigger, monophonic legato, dual-voice 
polyphony, four-voice polyphony, and no polyphony handling 
(equivalent to full 32-note polyphony). The polyphonic 
restrictions are useful for interfacing with analog synthesizers 
                                                                 
6 http://home.comcast.net/~ijfritz/sy_cir2 
7 http://www.musicfromouterspace.com/analogsynth_new/ 
VCO20090724REV0/VCO20090724REV0.html 
where the number of voices is limited, and the mode without 
polyphony handling is useful when the JD -1 is used as a MIDI 
or OSC controller for software and therefore polyphony 
handling is not necessary. Tri-color LEDs above the keyboard 
light red to indicate which pitches are currently assigned to 
polyphony voices. For each active polyphony voice, there are 
four continuous analog voltage outputs, and two gate outputs. 
 One of the 16-bit DAC channels outputs the “pitch” data, 
which relates to the chromatic pitch selected on the keyboard. 
This voltage is in twelve-tone equal temperament by default, 
but can be further adjusted to other scales  stored in memory. 
These alternate scales are selectable by navigating the LCD.  
 One of the 12-bit DAC channels outputs a voltage 
proportional to the amount of surface area covered by a finger 
on the touch key; this voltage is continuously updated every 
four milliseconds while the key is touched. This output can be 
scaled down from full range with a dedicated potentiometer. 
 Two more 12-bit DAC channel outputs the voltages set by the 
two knobs above the touched key. The ouputs are labeled A and 
B, corresponding with labels on the knob banks—the upper 
bank is A, the lower is B. These voltages are also continually 
updated every four milliseconds, so they respond to changes 
that occur while the key is touched, and each output has a 
dedicated knob for proportional scaling. Like all other analog 
outputs on the JD-1, these can be used to control any parameter 
of an analog synth, including pitch, filter cutoff, or amplitude. 
 One of the gate channels outputs a gate-on event when the 
key is touched, and a gate-off event when the key is released. 
Another gate channel outputs a short gate-on event when the 
key is touched, which is quickly followed by a gate-off event—
traditionally called a “trigger” voltage. The actual voltages of 
these events are controlled by internal modes that can be 
changed by the user between S-Trigger, V-Trigger, and Buchla-
style Gate+Trigger.  
  
3.4.2. Sequencer Mode 
When the JD-1 is switched to Sequencer Mode, touching a key 
no longer triggers an output. Instead, output is triggered by a 
clock pulse, either from the internal clock in the 
microcontroller, or from an external trigger voltage. At each 
clock pulse, a new sequencer stage is selected and the 
associated pair of potentiometers determines the voltages at the 
A and B analog outputs.  The tri-color LED associated with the 
currently selected sequencer stage lights up for performer 
feedback, though the color of the LED depends on the current 
sequencer mode. The voltage for the pitch assocated with the 
currently selected sequencer stage is also output from the 16-bit 
DAC channel. The maximum continuous sensor reading for 
surface area on the keys (including all touched keys) is output 
as a voltage on the surface area voltage output.  
 In sequencer mode, there are two sub-modes, which 
determine how the touch keyboard interacts with the sequencer 
functionality. In the first sub-mode, called Range Mode, 
touching two keys on the keyboard will restrict the sequencer to 
only step between the two stages associated with the touched 
keys, which light green for performer feedback. This range 
restriction remains in place after the musician’s fingers leave 
the keys. In the second sub-mode, called Quantize Mode, the 
sequencer does not clock unless at least one key is touched. 
When at least one key is touched, the sequencer will only step 
to stages that are currently touched by the musician, and the 
LEDs above the touched keys light red for performer feedback. 
When used in conjunction with the “pitch” control voltage 
output, the functionality of Quantize Mode is  very similar to a 
classic keyboard arpeggiator.  
 The choice of the next step is determined by a rotary encoder. 
This control chooses between the following modes: left-to-
right, right-to-left, back-and-forth, and random.  
 There several additional feature s that give further control 
over the sequencer functionality. A skip -step value allows the 
user to adjust the percentage of clock pulses that result in a 
sequencer step – allowing for an adjustable proportion of 
randomly skipped steps. When the internal clock is used, user 
parameters accesible from knobs on the panel include a speed 
control and a randomness control, which allows for varying 
levels of randomness in the duration between clock pulses. 
 
3.4.3 The Joystick 
An spring-return analog joystick reports its X and Y location as 
analog voltages between 0V and 5V, and is also sensed by the 
main microcontroller and converted for MIDI and OSC output. 
Each analog output for the joystick can be scaled down from 
full scale by a potentiometer. 
 
3.4.4 Additional Controls 
Octave Up and Octave Down buttons allow the user to 
immediately transpose the pitch out up an down by on octave, 
and the current octave is indicated by nearby LEDs.  
 A Transpose rotary encoder allows for transposition up and 
down by up to twelve semitones. When a tuning system other 
than equal temperament is used, the size of the semitones is 
adjusted according to the pitch class in the current tuning 
system. The current transposition is indicated on the LCD 
screen, and any transposition other than zero causes a 
“transpose on” LED to light above the rotary encoder.  
 There are two buttons that set the functionality of the A and B 
knob banks, called Independent and Combined. When the 
Independent button is pressed, the A and B knob banks are 
treated separately, and output independent voltages. When the 
Combined button is pressed, the B knob bank acts as a set of 
fine tune knobs for the A knob bank, allowing for higher 
resolution if the user wishes to use these knobs for pitch.  
 The LCD menu allows the user to select between 1V/Oct 
control voltages and 1.2V/Oct control voltages, as well as 
allowing the choice of gate style to adapt to different 
synthesizer standards. It also affords the ability to fine tune the 
pitch control voltage scaling, so that synthesizers that don’t 
achieve a linear response can be acommodated. While storage 
of knob settings is currently not implemented in the firmware, it 
is completely possible with the current hardware design, and 
will eventually be navigable via the LCD menu.  
3.5 Digital Interfaces 
In addition to the analog control voltage outputs, there are three 
digital communication protocols implemented on the JD -1: 
MIDI, USB, and Ethernet. 
 MIDI connectivity is provided via two standard 5 -pin DIN 
jacks, one for MIDI In and one for MIDI Out. The MIDI In port 
allows for direct MIDI control of the analog outputs, making 
the JD-1 also function as a MIDI-to-CV converter. The MIDI 
In port also allows for clocking of the sequencer using MIDI 
note-on messages. The MIDI Out port sends data that matches 
the behavior of the analog control voltage outputs, with MIDI 
notes that reflect note-on and note-off events, and MIDI 
continuous controller values that represent the continuous 
surface area outputs and the state of the A and B knob banks . 
When polyphony handling is set to two-voice or four-voice, the 
MIDI Out port sends the data for the polyphony voices on 
separate MIDI channels. When polyphony handling is turned 
off, the MIDI Out port sends individual data on 16 different 
MIDI channels, with up to 16-note polyphony.  
 USB connectivity is limited to embedded host mode, 
meaning that the JD-1 cannot be used as a USB device sending 
data to a computer. Currently, the USB port is only used for 
firmware updates using a USB flash drive, but it could also 
allow for the JD-1 to understand other USB devices, such as a 
Manta controller, HID joystick, or USB MIDI-keyboard. 
 The Ethernet port is to allow the JD-1 to send and receive 
Open Sound Control (OSC) messages when connected to a 
computer or a network [6]. Each of the analog control voltage 
outputs can be independently controlled from a network to their 
full resolution, and the JD-1 keyboard and sequencer 
information is sent out as OSC messages as well. When 
polyphony mode is turned off, the JD-1 sends fully polyphonic 
data over OSC, allowing for a computer to get continuously 
updated information about the state of all the keys and knobs.  
4. FUTURE WORK 
While the hardware is built and functional, there are several 
features that the hardware design makes possible that have not 
yet been implemented in the firmware.  
 The design could benefit from the type of velocity detection 
algorithm employed on the Manta controller, which estimates 
attack velocity on an immobile capacitive touch sensor by 
applying a trained machine learning algorithm to successive 
sensor readings. In fact, the data collected is more suited to the 
task, since the scan rate is 4ms rather than 6 -8ms, as on the 
Manta, and the large surface area of the metal keys allows the 
JD-1 to sense a finger approaching the key at a distance of a 
quarter inch, information that could be used in the velocity 
detection algorithm to speed up response and accuracy.  
 User programmability of the JD-1 could be significantly 
improved. One particularly useful feature that the hardware 
makes possible is the ability to save and recall the states of the 
A and B knob bank. An EEPROM IC was included in the 
hardware design to enable a large amount of saved knob 
settings, but the firmware doesn’t yet support this feature. Also, 
while the JD-1 currently implements six preset tuning system 
options, the instrument would ideally be programmable over 
OSC, enabling the user to enter their own tuning tables, or load 
them in using Scala format files8.  
5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Thanks to Dan Trueman, Jesus Diaz, George Mordecai, Chris 
Zrada and Barry Runner. 
6. REFERENCES 
[1] Snyder, J. The Snyderphonics Manta Controller, a Novel 
USB Touch Controller. In Proceedings of New Interfaces 
for Musical Expression (NIME ‘12) (Oslo, Norway, May 
30-June 1, 2012) 413-416. 
[2] McPherson, A. In Proceedings of the 8th Sound and Music 
Computing Conference (SMC 2011), Padova, Italy. 
[3] Haken, L., Tellmann, E., Wolfe, P. “An Indiscrete Music 
Keyboard,” Computer Music Journal, Vol. 22, No. 1, pp. 
30-48, 1998.   
[4] Ripin, E. Early Keyboard Instruments, London: 
Macmillan, 1989. 
[5] Mikulic, T. "New Design Ideas for Voltage-Controlled 
Oscillators" Electronotes, Vol. 8, No. 62, Feb. 1976, pp 
13-15. 
[6]  Wright, M., Freed, A., "Open Sound Control: A New 
Protocol for Communicating with Sound Synthesizers", In 
Proc. International Computer Music Conference, 1997.
                                                                 
8 http://www.huygens-fokker.org/scala/scl_format.html 