Symbiosis: a biological taxonomy for modes of interaction 
in dance-music collaborations 
 
  
Manoli Moriaty  
School of Arts & Media 
University of Salford 
 Manchester, United Kingdom 
manolimoriaty@gmail.com 
e.moraitis1@salford.ac.uk 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Focusing on interactive performance works borne out of dancer-
musician collaborations, this paper investigates the  relationship 
between the mediums of sound and movement through a 
conceptual interpretation of the biological phenomenon of 
symbiosis. Describing the close and persistent interactions 
between organisms of different species, symbioses manifest 
across a spectrum of relationship types, each identified according 
to the health effect experienced by the engaged organisms. This 
biological taxonomy is appropriated within a framework which 
identifies specific modes of interaction between sound and 
movement according to the collaborating practitioners’ intended 
outcome, and required provisions, cognition of affect, and 
system operation . Using the symbiotic  framework as an 
analytical tool, six dancer-musician collaborations from the field 
of NIME are examined in respect to the employed modes of 
interaction within each of the four examined areas. The findings 
reveal the emergence of multiple modes in each wor k, as well as 
examples of mutation between different modes over the course 
of a performance. Furthermore, the symbiotic concept provides 
a novel understanding of the ways gesture recognition 
technologies (GRTs) have redefined the relationship dynamics 
between dancers and musicians, and suggests a more efficient 
and inclusive approach in communicating the potential and 
limitations presented by Human-Computer Interaction tools.  
 
Author Keywords 
Interaction modes, dance, improvisation, collaboration, taxonomy, 
symbiosis 
 
CCS Concepts 
• Human-centered computing → Interaction design; Interaction 
design theory, concepts and paradigms ; • Human-centered 
computing → Human computer interaction (HCI) ; Interaction 
paradigms; Collaborative interaction; 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Technologically mediated interaction between the artistic mediums of 
sound and movement is a topic that in recent years has received 
rigorous attention. Over the course of more than half a ce ntury, 
specialised research communities have gone to develop a wealth of 
novel outcomes in areas such as Digital Musical Instruments, sensor 
technologies, interaction design, mapping strategies, data sonification 
and compositional processes. Certainly within NIME, the principle 
motivation behind these research outcome is to exploit scientific 
knowledge towards expanding the possibilities of musical practice. 
Such creative outcomes have given rise to the specific practice of 
interactive performances, most often developed in collaboration with 
disciplines expressing through physical movement such as 
performance art and dance. This type of interdisciplinary collaboration 
can be traced from ancient times, and understood to have developed a 
‘complementary relationship… steeped in metaphor as we are invited 
to perceive one in terms of or in the light of the other’ [4]. The 
emergence of interactive technologies has exaggerated this notion, 
with sensing devices allowing the imprinting of chore ographic 
features within digital media. 
Considering Goebel’s definition of interaction a s the ‘interplay 
between two equal parties’ [1], it could be concluded that an interactive 
performance is one where ‘the dancer influences musical processes 
while the music in turn affects the performer’ [21]. However, the vast 
majority of the related lite rature focuses its contributions in the 
aforementioned areas pertinent to technology and music, while 
revealing little about the role of the choreography beyond being a 
source of data for the sonification system. Furthermore, equally often 
the musician is presented as the source of technological innovation, 
who provides the knowledge in the specialised tools necessary to 
implement technologically mediated interaction. Taking this 
generalisation at face value, the reached conclusion is that dancers are 
simply not enthusiastic about technology [3], with the experts 
‘spending more time introducing people to working with computers... 
[than] doing creative work’ [2]. Of course, this is simply not the case, 
as evident from the rich field of dance technology [4] [5] [6] [7], which 
employs and explores scientific knowledge to a degree at least as high 
as that observed in the field of music. From this conclusion , the 
emergent questions concern the role of the dancer in our own field’s 
literature; do dancers need to become proficient in the language of the 
technologies driving our musical expression in order to exploit their 
potential? does music affect movement the same way as movement 
affects music? is there truly equality in the interaction between our 
mediums? and if not, is that something we should strive for? 
Having collaborated with more than twenty dancers and 
performance artists over the past ten years, while our practice 
focused on performances featuring real-time interactions 
between sound and movement, my res earch has been 
investigating those questions through Practice Research and 
autoethnographic methodologies. Acknowledging both the vast 
differences and undisputed connections between music and 
dance [4], I placed my experiences as an electronic musician and 
dance collaborator against a ‘conceptual debate’ [8] with a 
biological mechanism which enables strong bonds between 
disparate individuals; that is the phenomenon of symbiosis. 
While my previous publications employed the biological 
concept towards investigating the social aspects and relationship 
dynamics that emerge during dancer-musician collaborations 
[10] [11], more recent work utilised the same findings, how ever 
focusing on the interaction between the collaborating 
practitioners’ respective mediums. Complementing the latter 
chapter [12], this paper examines outcomes developed within 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
551
and around the NIME community. A discussion on the seminal 
collaboration between John Cage and Merce Cunningham is 
used to establish a relationship between sound and movement, 
and serves as the initial building blocks towards constructing a 
framework that identifies specific modes of interactions 
according to the taxonomy observed in symbiotic relationships. 
Finally, the framework is utilised as an analytical tool in 
examining six performance works borne out of dancer -musician 
collaborations, and concludes with an evaluation of the paper’s 
original aims.  
 
2. DEPENDENCIES AND PROPULSION 
Practice-based and authoethnographic inquiries are certainly not 
new within NIME [13] [14] [15], with my application of Practice 
Research facilitated by using commercially available tools such 
as Ableton Live/MaxforLive combined with the venerable 
Nintendo Wii Remote as means of capturing and communicating 
movement data within the sound-generating systems constructed 
for each performance. Working predominantly with 
contemporary dancer Shona Roberts, who already was a close 
personal friend, we were admittedly inexperienced in each 
other’s discipline, and as such felt more comfortable with 
restricting our labour within our respective practices, thus 
maintaining independence and full freedom of expressi on in 
developing our material. From my perspective, this was an 
opportunity to explore aleatoric  and rule-based compositional 
processes that exploited the movement data as sources of 
randomised modulation, akin to the Low Frequency Oscillators, 
Envelope Generators, and sequencers familiar to elec tronic 
musicians. On reflection (one which we did not realise for 
considerable time), independence between mediums and 
indeterminate sound arrangement echoed the collaborative 
relationship between composer John Cage and choreograph er 
Merce Cunningham, who in developing their joint work s would 
‘intentionally segregate the creation of the sound from t he 
creation of the movement until the performance’ [16].  
Dubbing this relationship ‘autonomous complementarity’, 
Andrew Uroskie notes that the two artists endeavoured to break 
away from the pre viously established ‘propulsive’  relationship 
between music and dance, where ‘ music was understood to 
govern, implicitly or explicitly, the movement of the dancers. 
Choreography, within this propulsive conception, was a kind of 
musical interpretation, judged on  its ability to form a singular 
synaesthetic coherence in th e experience of the audience’  [17]. 
As a result of this relationship between the designs of sound and 
movement, a traditional dancer -musician collaboration also 
followed a similar dynamic, with th e composition of music 
preceding that of dance, and serving as a platform on which the 
choreography can be then developed. This tradition was all but 
eliminated by Cage and Cunningham in the 1965 Variations V, 
arguably the first performance work to feature  technologically 
mediated interaction between sound and movement. Utilisi ng an 
array of analogue input devices [18], dancers were able to initiate 
prerecorded material through their movements, a methodology 
that facilitated a new type of relationship between the two 
mediums, one which allowed a greater level of interaction rather 
than governance. However, as Uroskie points out, the dancers 
were not in conscious control of the sonic palette, which would 
imply that ‘one model of subordination would have merel y been 
exchanged for another’; instead, movement was utilised to ‘set a 
certain train of sonic events in motion’ [17].  
Reflecting with the benefit of more than fifty years of 
technological developments, this lack of precise control in 
Variation V can be at tributed to the  to the limitations of the 
relatively crude analogue system in interpreting mo vement into 
actuating commands. Nowadays, with technology allowing a 
much more precise control of sound through movement, th e 
propulsive relationship between sound and movement is once 
again evident, albeit reversed, with movement being the base on 
which sound can be developed. Setting aside techniques such as 
auditory scene analysis and other non real -time technologies 
commonly used in dance practice, recent outcomes in the field 
of NIME demonstrate  a tendency towards using movement data 
extracted from the choreography as sources of modulation for  
the sound generating devices. In comparison with the original 
observation of ‘choreography, [as] a ki nd of musical 
interpretation’ [17 ] before the rise of interactive technologies, 
sound in these recent works can be described as a kind of 
gestural interpretation. Considering Uroskie’s conceptualisation 
of ‘subordinate’ artistic mediums exploited towards ‘propelling’  
that of their counterpart discipline, a useful investigation is not 
to make a case in favour of one type of subordination, but rather 
look at the causes of this relationship; i nteraction entails the 
creation of emergent elements in one domain resulting from the 
actions conducted in another, and as a result, requires that one of 
the interacting parties will affect its  counterpart. In the context 
of the aforementioned interactive performances, the only means 
of interpreting sonic elements into choreographic expression are 
the dancers’ and physical performers’ own cognitive 
mechanisms. On the other hand, composers are able to exploit a 
range of gesture recognition technologies (GRTs) by which they 
can extract detailed movement data, and use these towards 
modulating real-time composition system s. As a result, an 
inherent dependency emerges, with sound being technologically 
propelled by movement. However, dependency neither implies 
subordination in a particular direction, nor does it describe a 
permanent and static status in the relationship between two 
elements, as evident by the conceptual topic of this paper.  
3. BIOLOGICAL METAPHOR 
The lexicologica l definition of symbiosis (i.e. Oxford English 
Dictionary) suggests two elements existing in a sustai ned 
harmonious relationship. However, in the context of biological 
associations, harmonious coexistence is merely one of the many 
manifestations of symbiotic relationships. Biologists define 
symbiosis as the close and persistent relationships between 
organisms of different species [12]. Organisms engaged in 
symbiosis are identified as the host and its symbiont, with the 
engagement most often initiated by the  symbiont becoming  
attached to the typically larger host, motivated by the former’s 
desire to extract benefit from the relationship. As a result of this 
extraction of benefit, or fitness outcome [19], symbiosis 
manifests in a variety of types. The three co re types are 
mutualism, commensalism, and parasitism, with each type 
identified according to the effects it has on the engaged 
organisms. And since the symbiont is always benefited, it is the 
effect on the host which defines the type. Furthermore, it is 
important to note that the three types of relationship describe 
dynamics as these are observed currently, and follow an 
established evolutionary trajectory [30 ]. Relationships that are 
mutually beneficial to both host and symbiont are sel dom the 
result of a fortuitous meeting between organisms with 
complementary traits. Instead, today’s observed mutualisms 
have emerged from parasitic relationships; starting with a 
symbiont motivated to seek a host for exploitation, prolonged 
interaction causes a parallel adaptation of both organisms’ 
biological traits as to allow both to extract benefit from each 
other [12]. 
Having explained the core taxonomy of symbiotic relati onships, 
the first step towards drawing parallels between biological and 
creative associations is to firstly identify the elements making up 
each partnership, and secondly establish a relationship between 
these elements. The first shared aspect among the two forms of 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
552
association concerns the partners’ motivation towards 
establishing a relationship; that is to combine their individual 
traits as means of jointly overcoming limitations, respec tively 
borne of environmental [19] and disciplinary [20 ] factors. From 
this starting point, the remaining elements are placed through a 
process of conceptual debate, and finally become organised 
opposite each other, as summarised in table 1 . 
This (highly) subjective interpretation assumes the symbiotic 
relationship as the collaborative engagement, with the organisms 
as the collaborating practitioners. The interspecificity of the 
engaged organisms is reflected through the different disciplines 
employed by each practitioner, with each discipline’s specific 
expressive media related to the biological traits carried by each 
species. In interpreting the roles of host and symbiont, these are 
allocated respectively on the practitioner instigating the 
collaboration and the one who is guided according to the 
former’s direction. As will become clearer later on, the used 
nomenclature applies to engagements which feature  a higher 
level of dependency, be that a parasitic relationship in symbiosis  
or a directive collaboration  [31] in artistic practice, with the 
prescriptive meaning of these roles diffused during 
commensalistic/interactive engagements, and almost entirely 
absent in mutualistic relationships and collaborative /collective 
modes. 
 
Table 1. related elements of symbiotic relationships and 
interdisciplinary collaborations 
 
 
The final interpretation concerns the element of fitness outcome 
into expressive range. As mentioned, the types of symbiotic 
relationships are identified according to the host’s fitn ess 
outcome, or the level of benefit that organism experiences as a 
result of its engagement with the symbiont. In the context of my 
interpretation, expressive range refers to the level of creative 
input allocated to each practitioner during  their collaboration. In 
the context of inter disciplinary collaborations, this approach 
presents an efficient way of understanding and allocating each 
practitioner’s liberty in developing their respective disciplinary 
material during the process of collaborative engageme nts, with 
the same principle available towards organising the relationship 
between musician and dancer while operating an interactive 
system. 
4. INTERACTIVE TAXONOMY 
As mentioned in the introduction, the typical approac h of using 
GRTs in music-dance interaction concerns the change of sound 
through movement. This effect is achieved by mapping 
movement data to various parameters of DSP devices, with the 
sound consequently affected as a result of the movement data 
performing alternations on the parameter’s values. Considering 
this relationship between the two media, sound can be 
understood as the symbiont medium, with movement being the 
host governing the development of sound. With this principle in 
place, and taking into account a host’s different fitness outcomes 
during each type of symbiosis, an equal number of interaction 
modes can be derived, where the ‘host’ movement can be 
‘benefited’, ‘harmed’, or ‘unaffected’ by its ‘symbiont’ medium 
of sound. In line with the previous subjective interpretation 
between the elements making up each association, the biological 
notions describing changes in fitness outcome are related to the 
restrictions, or lack of, placed on the expressive range of the 
associated media and their respective practitioners during a 
performance. The most efficient way to establish these 
relationship is by first observing the resulting sonic outcomes, 
followed by the restrictions placed  on the dancer and  the 
provision in which she or he develops movement, and finally the 
dancer’s manner of operating the system , and the level of  
awareness of how movement affects sound, with this latter 
element related to the notion of ‘legibility’ or ‘transparency’ of 
mappings in the field of NIME  [21], albeit from the perspective 
of the dancer rather than the audience . 
5. SYMBIOTIC INTERACTION MODES 
Looking at the first association, when the collabora tive 
performance requires a determined sonic outcome (akin to a 
fixed music score), the dancer must perform a specific set of 
movements in order to alter the values of the DSP para meters in 
a predefined manner. As a result, this interaction mode imposes 
restrictions on the movement’s range of expression in order to 
accommodate the desired sonic outcomes , in quite the same 
manners as traditional choreography does. Furthermore, with the 
the mappings between movement data and DSP parameters 
having been created by the musician, she or he needs to 
communicate to the dancer the required  movements needed to 
achieve the determined development of sound over the duration 
of the performance. Consequently, the dancer is relieved from 
having to fully understand the ways her or his movements may 
affect sound beyond the predefined movements. As such, this 
interaction mode assumes movement as a predefined modulator  
for the sound. In other words, through the previously disc ussed 
subjective interpretation of the biological notions describing 
fitness outcome, the ‘host’ movement is ‘harmed’ in order to 
‘benefit’ its ‘symbiont’ sound, thus establishing a paras itic 
symbiosis between the two expressive media.  
On the opposite spectrum of sonic outcome, an indetermi nate 
score entirely alleviates any requirement for the dancer to 
become familiar with the mappings between movement data and 
DSP parameters, with movement remaining independent to 
sound. However, from the musician’s perspective, the mapping 
must be designed as to accommodate the dancer’s full range of 
movements which she or he may deploy at will throughout the 
duration of the performance. In a way, the randomised alteration 
of DSP parameters during this interaction mode can be related to 
a generative music system, or to provide a further simplified 
reflection, to the modulations derived by an LFO set to random 
or noise waveform. In the context of the symbiotic interpretation, 
the ‘host’ movement is ‘unaffected’ due to enjoying a full range 
of expression, while the ‘symbiont’ sound extracts ‘benefit’ in 
the form of randomised modulations that can be used to develop 
and expand its outcome. As such, this interaction mode forms a 
commensalistic symbiosis between sound and movement, which 
on reflection can be associated with the interaction employed in 
Variations V, when dancers had an effect on sound despite being 
unaware of the ways their movements specifically controlled 
Cage’s tape players. However, while Cage reveled in employed 
indeterminacy as a compositional approach  [22], Cunningham 
directed his dancers through an explicit choreography. 
Nevertheless, this is but one manifestation of a commensalistic 
interaction mode, and free improvisation presents itself as 
fruitful provision for dancer s, with the musician tasked with 
designing a system able to generate meaningful sonic outcome 
through random modulation inputs. 
With mutualism being the remaining type of symbiotic  
relationship, such an interpretation into the context of 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
553
collaborative performance requires for both sound and 
movement to mutually extract ‘benefit’ from their interaction, 
which consider ing the earlier connection between fitness 
outcome and expressive range, suggest simultaneous  full range 
of expression for both mediums. While the provision of free 
improvisation may at first appear salient to this mode, 
developing this mode through practice showcased that an 
intermediate provision is more appropriate, that of structured 
improvisation. Examining this provision in the context of music 
performance, structured improvisation differs from its free 
counterpart by the approach of creating real-time compositions 
by connecting pre -established material over an arrange ment 
which is not predefined [23 ]. As such, while the resulting sonic 
outcome is not determined, its characteristics can be anticipate d. 
Structured improvisation shares a slightly differe nt meaning in 
the context of choreography, with dancers adhering to a 
predefined temporal arrangement in relation to stage placement 
and clustering, while retaining freedom towards their performed 
movements during each section of the arrangement [24 ]. 
Considering this provisions for music and dance respectively, in 
the context of HCI-mediated interaction, the dancer is allocated 
freedom towards her or his movements, with the caveat that these 
movements need to result to anticipated sonic outcomes . As 
such, the dancer must be well -familiarised with the system’s 
mapping, and be aware of the ways each movement may affec t 
sound. In other words, the mutualistic interaction mode presents 
a mutual compromise between the expressive ranges allocated to 
sound and movement, with both mediums  mutually extracting 
‘benefit’ up to the level at which one of them can be s aid to 
experience ‘harm’, thus resembling the mechanisms by which 
mutualistic symbioses are developed over evolutionary scale in 
the natural world. 
  
Table 2. taxonomy of symbiotic interaction modes with 
associated elements 
 
 
The three symbiotic modes of interaction are summari sed in 
table 02, with each mode identified according to their specific 
affect awareness, provision, operation, and outcome borne of the 
interaction between the two mediums. Furthermore, multiple 
modes can also manifest during a performance, either 
consecutively during different sections, or simultaneously while 
operating different layers of sound, each controlled via with a 
different mode, as demonstrated in Symbiont Zero , a work I 
developed in collaboration with Roberts. With this work detailed 
elsewhere [11] as means of activating the framework through 
practice, the framework is employed as analytical tool towards 
examining six collaborative works featuring HCI -mediated 
interaction between sound and movement.  
6. PRECEDENT ANALYSIS 
Table 3 presents a summary of works developed and pr esented 
in NIME and associated communities of researchers. The list is 
by no means exhaustive, and instead uses a sample of 
publications that provided sufficient information in regards to 
the experience of the performers.  As previously stated, with the 
framework being the result of subjective interpretation, s o 
follows that this analysis  in conducted in the context of the 
established conceptual frame.  
 
Digital Dance Project [27] 
This early work describes the allocation of control to parameters 
that are perceptible yet do not require “excessive concentratio n 
on instrumental performance”. While the composers describe 
each section’s sonic characteristics in detail, they also point out 
a degree of freedom on the arrangement borne out of the dancers’ 
interaction, thus suggesting an outcome of anticipated textures 
and structure. The authors also describe the dancers’ positive 
feedback in feeling “freedom in the direct relationship b etween 
movement and music” with “fairly transparent or direct 
relationships between the dancer’s movements and their musical 
consequences”, pointing towards the high level of affect 
awareness. Besides this degree of freedom, the final work 
requires the dancers to follow a set of choreographic instructions. 
 
Arroyo/Aura/Trio de Cuatro [24] 
Traversing a labyrinth through motion -activated sonic clues 
suggests exploratory o peration, with the previous knowledge of 
specific sound cues, albeit triggered over an indeterminate 
arrangement, relating to the notion of anticipated outcomes. At 
the same time however, the authors mention that “it is important 
for dancers to learn the musical consequences of their 
movements”, thus pointing towards a high affect awareness. And 
although the utilised sy stem SICIB is designed towards 
‘improvisation’, in the context of the three described works, a 
pattern of structured improvisation emerges, following a 
predefined rule-based exploration of the dancers’ environment.  
 
Raja [25] 
In Raja, a choreographer designed the dancers’ movements 
following a briefing of the composers’ intentions and 
possibilities presented by the system. Following the initia l 
rehearsals with the interactive system, the dancers com mented 
that “the sounds were somewhat irresponsive, predictability was 
weak”, suggesting a high level of affect awareness. However, 
although described as largely choreographed, the work also 
features a section with improvisation accompanied by “familiar 
piano sounds” as opposed to the “ electronic sound set in the  
beginning and end parts ”, something which allowed the now 
improvising dancers to better process the slow-paced soundscape 
towards developing  their movements. As such, a mutation of 
modes is evident, with the first and third parts requ iring the 
dancers to follow a determined choreography, while the middle 
part’s provision that of improvisation, consequently affecting the 
operation to that of exploration and the outcome to anticipation.  
 
Emovere [26] 
The ‘dynamic and unpredictable soundscape’  resulting from the 
sonified electrocardiography (ECG)  data points towards an 
indeterminate outcome. Considering the opaque connection 
between the dancers’ movements and the sonic output, in 
combination with the largely involuntary bodily data measured 
by the ECG sensors, it can be concluded that the dancers 
possessed a low level of affect awareness, with their movements 
informed purely by the sonic output rat her than a conscious 
engagement with the mapped parameters.  
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
554
OtoKin [28] 
In describing the performative aspects of OtoKin, the authors 
explain that they ‘ did not use explicit choreographed 
movements, but… allow for exploration of various movemen t 
patterns within the sound space’ . As such, any predefined 
structure followed by the performers relate to the conceptual 
narrative of the choreography, rather than any adherence to a 
determined sonic arrangement, thus suggesting an improvised 
provision and indeterminate outcome. The utilised system allows 
for a degree of improvis ation within each section, and ‘ lends 
itself well for both improvisatory exploration, a nd for semi -
prepared narratives’ . In regards to affect awareness, the work 
displays high level of awareness, with the added novelty of 
configuring onset points according to not only movements of the 
body itself, but also its topography within the dance space.  
 
Vrengt [29] 
Vrengt focuses on the dancer’s release techniq ue, which places 
importance to ‘flow pro cedures’. In order to make best use of 
this technique in the context of an interactive performance, the 
composers utilise a sonification system as a ‘more objective 
approach to rendering sound in response to data than more 
creatively based sound design’. H owever, although this may 
suggest an indeterminate outcome, the authors  describe the 
performance as a ‘comprovisation’, where ‘ the composed aspect 
of the instrument and choreography provide a large amount of 
freedom in collectively exploring sonic interaction through the 
performance’, which points closer to an anticipatory outcome. In 
regards to system operation, this exploration becomes a  focal 
point for the dancer, with ‘ listening as the main source for 
decision making, while intuitively moving along with  a physical 
play and exploration’ . This relates to the mode of exploratory 
operation, further supported by a high level of affect awareness, 
with the dancer having developed ‘a gestural repertoire’ through 
a ‘sophisticated control of her movement, and henc e sound’. 
 
Table 3. precedent analysis 
 
 
7. CONCLUSIONS 
As stated in the introduction, this paper aimed to present an 
efficient and inclusive manner of  communicating the principles 
and creative potential of HCI -mediated interactive 
performances. It is worth stating that the symbiotic framework 
does not present any new modes of interaction, but instead 
collects the existing approaches that have been developed within 
the field, and presents them arranged a cross a qualifiable 
spectrum. Moreover, the framework employs language which is 
shared among the two disciplines  of music and dance, which 
holds the potential of efficiently communicating complex 
concepts. For example, the distinction between instrumental and 
algorithmic mapping strategies refers to coupling modulation 
data with parameters  respectively controlling r eal-time and 
‘higher level structural processes’ [21]. While this community 
may be familiar with the intentions described by these strategies, 
their meaning can evade practitioners whose specialism s fall 
outside the field of technologically-mediated performance. In the 
framework, instrumental and algorithmic strategies related to the 
parasitic and commensalistic modes . This is not to suggest  that 
using the decontextualized biological terms would in any way 
constitute an efficient method of clearly conveying one’s 
creative intentions. However, this context is provided through 
the descriptors of each examined area, with the nomenclature 
made of terms that are shared among the disciplines of music and 
dance, even if their specific meaning can be perceived with slight 
differences, as in the case with the distinction of structured 
improvisation described in 4.1. As a result, familiar language 
facilitates clarity in co mmunication, something which 
particularly welcome during the complex and intense process of 
artistic collaboration. 
The symbiotic framework is less useful when the intention is  to 
provide a thorough understanding of interactive systems. As well 
as applying on a fairly narrow area of interactive works (dancer -
musician performance with real-time sound generation), there is 
little context on the technology facilitating the  interaction, nor 
the cultural background of such practices. Of course, possessing 
knowledge in those area s is necessary for the field ’s 
practitioners. Can the same be said for everyone engaging with 
interactive works? In my experience , my collaborators  have 
often viewed detailed t echnical descriptions as  cryptic and 
alienating, and counterproductive in allowing them to thin k of 
potential avenues for engaging their material with HCI tools . 
Similarly, omitting any description can become a barrier  for 
engagement between the two practitioners, resulting in a 
directive collaboration where the musician acts as the gatekeeper 
of t echnology, while the dancer is les s-well equipped to 
conceptualise the developing work in lin e with the affordances 
of interactive technologies . With the framework focusing on the 
principles of operating interactive interfaces , it succeeds in  
filling the gap between ‘too-much-information’ and ‘ no-
information-whatsoever’ by delimiting the  range of potential 
avenues for implementing interactive strategies in performance . 
As a result, it allows our collaborators to actively participate in 
the development of the work, while also serving as a gateway for 
practitioners aiming to further the ir practical skills  in 
technologically-mediated practices. 
Rachel Duerden describes the relationship of dance and music as 
one ‘steeped in metaphor’, inviting practitioners to ‘consider the 
potential transfer of attributes from one to the other’ [4]. She 
further points out the value of allegorical debates between the 
two disciplines as a way of highlighting their co mmon ground: 
‘Linking two disparate entities by metaphor first dra ws attention 
to a clear point of contact between the two, and then goes further 
and implies or invites us  to consider further connections’ [4]. In 
this paper, the intersecting language between dance and music 
makes up the highlighted points of contact between the 
disciplines, which emerged from conceptualising collaboration 
as an allegorical symbiosis . Although a highly subjective 
endeavour which at times verges on being  a poetic novelty, the 
concept is best viewed as a playful provocation, a new way of 
thinking the relationship between collaborating practitioners and 
their respective mediums of artistic expression. Nevertheless, the 
presented interpretation  is informed by a significant body of 
rigorous scientific knowledge. And w ith t he biological 
phenomenon being far more complex than what the brief 
summary presented here may suggest, it holds great potential for 
exploring further lines of inquiry in relation to creative practice, 
collaborative or otherwise . 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
555
8. REFERENCES 
[1] J. Goebel. Man Machine Interaction. in Proceedings of the 
International Computer Music Conference, San Francisco, 
International Computer Music Association, pp. 41-48, 1988. 
[2] A. Horwitz. Talking to Troika Ranch. Ephemeral Objects, 
interview 8 July 2014, accessed 31 Jan. 2020, 
https://www.ephemeralobjects.org/2014/07/05/talking-to-
troika-ranch/, 2014. 
[3] S. Sentürk. Interactivity in Contemporary Dance and Music. 
Accessed 31 Jan. 2020. 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/266369354_Interactiv
ity_in_Contemporary_Dance_and_Music, 2011 
[4] R. Duerden. Dancing in t he Imagined Space of Music, in 
Proceedings of the Sound Moves Conference, pp. 26 -33, 
2005. 
[5] D. Risner and J. Anderson. Digital Dance Literacy: an 
integrated dance technology curriculum pilot project, 
Research in Dance Education, vol. 9-2, pp. 113-128, 2008. 
[6] B. Gonzalez, E. Cherry and C. Latulipe. Dance-Inspired 
Technology, Technology-Inspired Dance. NordiCHI 2012: 
Making Sense Through Design - Proceedings of the 7th Nordic 
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction, 2012. 
[7] http://www.dance-tech.net/ 
[8] R. Nelson. Practice as Research in the Arts. Basingsto ke: 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2013. 
[9] E. Moraitis (M. Moriaty). Symbiotic Synergies: Adaptive 
Framework for Polydisciplinary Collaboration in Performance 
Practice, Ph.D. thesis, School of Arts & Media, University of 
Salford, Manchester, 2019. 
[10] M. Moriaty. Symbiosis: Organisation and Mutual Exploitation 
in Interdisciplinary Collaboration, in Artistic Research Will Eat 
Itself: Proceedings of the The 9th SAR International 
Conference on Artistic Research, University of Plymouth, UK, 
G. Cox, H. Drayson, A. Fatehrad, A. Gall, L. Hopes, A. Lewin, 
A. Prior (eds) Society for Artistic Research, pp. 81-96, 2018. 
[11] M. Moriaty. Interspecific Interactions: interaction modes 
between sound and movement in collaborative performance. in 
R.A. Earnshaw, S. Liggett, P. Excell. and D. Thalmann (eds) 
Technology, Design and the Arts – Challenges and 
Opportunities, Springer, Cham, Switzerland, 2020a. 
[12] S. Paracer and V. Ahmadjian, Symbiosis: An Introduction to 
Biological Associations. New York: Oxford University Press, 
2000. 
[13] A. Weisling, A. Xambó, I. Olowe, and M. Barthet. Surveying 
the Compositional and Performance Practices of Audiovisual 
Practitioners. NIME18, pages 344–345, 2018. 
[14] B. Carey and A. Johnston. Reflection On Action in NIME 
Research: Two Complementary Perspectives. In NIME16, 
pages 377–382, 2016. 
[15] G. Booth and M. Gurevich. Collaborative composition and 
socially constituted instruments: Ensemble laptop performance 
through the lens of ethnography. NIME12, 2012. 
[16] J. Klosty, Merce Cunningham. New York: E.P. Dutton, 1975. 
[17] A.V. Uroskie, From Pictorial Collage to Intermedia 
Assemblage. Animation: an interdisciplinary journal, vol. 5-2, 
pp. 223–241, Sept. 2010. 
[18] L. E. Miller, Cage, Cunningham, and Collaborators: The 
Odyssey of Variations V. The Musical Quarterly, Oxford 
University Press, vol. 85-3, pp. 545-567, 2001. 
[19] A. E. Douglas, The symbiotic Habit. New Jersey: Princeton 
University Press, 2010. 
[20] V. John-Steiner, Creative Collaboration. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2000. 
[21] C. Salter, M.A.J. Baalman and D. Moody -Grisby. 
Between Mapping, Sonification and Composition: 
Responsive Audio Environments in Live Performance. In 
R. Kronland-Martinet, S. Ystad, and K. Jensen (eds) 
CMMR 2007, LNCS 4969, pp. 246 –262, 2008. 
[22] J. Cage, M. Kirby and R. Schechner, An Interview with John 
Cage, The Tulane Drama Review, vol. 10-2, pp. 50–72, Winter 
1965. 
[23] J. Pressing. Improvisations, methods and models. in J. Sloboda, 
Generative processes in music, New York: Clarendon Press, pp. 
129–178, 1987. 
[24] E. Goméz and J. Jaimovich. Emovere: Designing Soun d 
Interactions for Biosignals and Dancers.  In Proceedings of 
the International Conference on New Interfaces for 
Musical Expression, pp. 316–320, Griffith University, 
Brisbane, Australia, 2016 . 
[25] R. Morales-Mazanares, E.F. Morales, R. Dannenberg and 
J. Berger. SICIB: An Interactive Music Composition 
System Using Body Movements, Computer Music 
Journal, Vol. 25-2, pp. 25-36, 2001. 
[26] T. Ahola, K. Tahiroglu, T. Ahmaniemi, F. Belloni and V.  
Ranki. Raja – A Multidisciplinary Artistic  
Performance. Proceedings of the International Conference 
on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, pp. 433–436, 
2011. 
[27] W. Siegel and J. Jacobsen. The Challenges of Interac tive 
Dance: An Overview and Case Study. Computer Music 
Journal, vol.22-4, pp. 29-43, 1998. 
[28] P. Dahlstedt and A.S. Dahls tedt. OtoKin: Mapping for 
Sound Space Exploration through Dance 
Improvisation. Proceedings of the International 
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 
UFRGS, pp. 95–100, 2019. 
[29] C. Erdem, K.H. Schia, and A.R. Jensenius. Vrengt: A 
Shared Body-Machine Instrument for Music -Dance 
Performance. Proceedings of the International Conference 
on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, UFRGS, pp. 
186–191, 2019. 
[30] E. Yong. I Contain Multitudes. New York: Ecco. 2017.  
[31] S. Hayden and L. Windsor. Collaboration and the 
Composer: Case Studies from the End of the 20th Century. 
Cambridge University Press, Tempo, vol. 
61-240, pp. 28-
39, 2007. 
 
 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
556