Silver: A Wire Mesh Textile Interface for the Interactive 
Sound Installation Idiosynkrasia 
 
 
Marius Schebella 
Salzburg University of Applied 
Sciences, Urstein Süd 1 
5412 Puch/Hallein, Austria 
marius.schebella@fh-
salzburg.ac.at 
 
Gertrud Fischbacher 
Mozarteum University Salzburg 
Mirabellplatz 1 
A 5020 Salzburg, Austria 
gertrud.fischbacher@moz.ac.at 
 
 
Matthew Mosher 
University of Central Florida 
500 W Livingston St 
Orlando, FL, 32803, USA 
matthew.mosher@ucf.edu 
ABSTRACT 
Silver is an artwork that deals with the emotional feeling of contact by 
exaggerating it acoustically. It originates from an interactive room 
installation, where several textile sculptures merge with sounds. 
Silver is made from a wire mesh and its surface is reactive to closeness 
and touch. This material property forms a hybrid of artwork and 
parametric controller for the real-time sound generation.  
The textile quality of the fine steel wire-mesh evokes a haptic 
familiarity inherent to textile materials.  This makes it easy for the 
audience to overcome the initial threshold barrier to get in touch with 
the artwork in an exhibition situation. Additionally, the interaction is 
not dependent on visuals. The characteristics of the surface sensor 
allows a user to play the instrument without actually touching it. 
 
Author Keywords 
Interactive, Sound, Installation, Textile, Sculpture 
 
CCS Concepts 
• Human-Centered computing → Human computer interaction 
(HCI) → Interaction devices; Haptic devices; • Applied Computing 
→ Arts and humanities → Sound and music computing;  
1. INTRODUCTION 
This work originates from a collaborative interdisciplinary project 
whose overall goal is to connect textile and auditory art practice. A 
primary aim of the project is to place emphasis on the tangible material 
connections between textiles and sound, while de-emphasizing visual 
components.   
Textile materials in combination with sound share a common history 
in the course of NIME, especially in the form of wearable interfaces.  
However, we did not find many examples of large-scale textile objects 
in connection with sound interaction.  Find a video demonstration of 
the project at: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5rFin71_2j0 
2. RELATED WORK 
There are several examples of projects that deal with textile interfaces 
as a controller for sound creation, Zstretch is an example of a haptic 
textile music controller [1], Aural Fabric uses conductive areas 
embroidered onto a fabric to create an interactive textile map [2], 
FlexTiles is a thin, flexible, stretchable and form-fitting pressure-
sensitive textile sensor [3], Roh et al. introduced robust and reliable 
fabric, piezoresistive multitouch sensing surfaces for mus ical 
controllers [4] and t he FabricKeyboard is a multimodal textil e 
interface based on fabric trackpads and ribbon-controllers [5]. Another 
group of works deal with the handcraft aspect of textiles in 
combination with sound: Encinas et al. explore how audio 
augmentation of routinized motion patterns affects an individual’s 
awareness of her bodily movements [6] and Posch et al. address the 
potentials of the intersection between the textile and the electronic 
domain [7]. There are also projects that integrate controllers into 
wearable textiles or try to make soft materials create sounds [8][9][10]. 
Looking at textile and sound installations in an exhibition context we 
find related artworks by Hyojin Yoo [11] and Malin Bobeck [12].  
3. COLLABORATION PROCESS AND 
DESIGN  
3.1 Overview 
The project brought together the two disciplines, textiles design and 
audio design. Our first questions circled around the correlation 
between sound and textiles and how qualities can be shifted from one 
domain to the other. That led to the idea of expressing the haptic 
sensation of touch into an acoustic manifestation. The goal of the 
project is to manifest aural representations of fabric textures through 
tangible interaction.  In doing so the installation links tactile materiality 
with sound synthesis, complimenting a participant’s sense of touch 
with an artist’s sonic interpretation of that sensation. 
 
 
Figure 1. Silver installed floating above the gallery floor. 
 
With this in mind, students from the University Mozarteum’s design: 
Tech.Tex course were brought together with students from the 
Fachhochschule Salzburg’s Audio program for a series of workshops.  
Together the students experimented with a variety of fabric materials.  
They explored not only how the materials felt to the hand but also the 
sounds that the materials could produce and inspire, for example when 
rubbed together or rasped with a stick. Our design process followed a 
converging and diverging path. First the textiles students selected a 
variety of materials that they felt had engaging tangible properties.  
Many of their selections were woven mesh textiles that had a slight 
transparency.  The ability to see through the material was desirable so 
that the fabrics could be layered together to create complex spatial 
forms, having both real and visual depth.  These materials were 
presented during the first meeting between the disciplines, and 
together the students started experimenting with what sounds they 
could make and recording samples of these sounds.  The students then 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
131
diverged: the textiles students began testing conductive silk screen inks 
and patterns, while the audio students generated 2 minute long looping 
tracks derived from their previous recordings. Converging for our 
second meeting, we all listened to the tracks and categorized them by 
style: metallic, destructive, atmospheric, wet, dark, etc. Diverging 
again the textiles students each took a style of audio and structured the 
form of their fabric sculpture on it.  After seeing the fabric forms, the 
faculty coded the interaction mapping software to play selected audio 
tracks when the forms were touched using a combination of Arduino 
and Max/MSP. 
Ultimately the project reminded students of the properties of each of 
their disciplines that they may have overlooked or forgotten: fabrics 
have inherent sonic properties, sounds evoke materiality. 
3.2 Textiles 
Textiles are used to create second skins like clothes, curtains, furniture, 
etc. But they can also build 3-dimensional spaces, like rooms, or 
sculptures. 
The shape of the Silver sculpture resembles a cloud that is hung from 
three points in the ceiling and floats a couple of centimeters above the 
floor. The top of the sculpture hovers around waist level and invites 
the audience to touch and squeeze it, as seen in figure 1.  This was done 
to place the sculpture around the average hand height for adults, 
making engagement with the sculpture an action of natural fluidity.  
One does not need to stoop down or reach up to activate it.  Most of 
the sculptures in the installation were suspended to give them an 
increased sense of movement and weightlessness. Touching the 
sculptures deforms their surfaces but also changes their location in 
space.  This stepping away of the sculpture allows for a greater range 
of input motion as there is not a rigid backing surface to stop the 
movement – small inputs result in large responses. 
3.3 Sound 
The Audio part was derived from sound experiments inspired by 
the haptic quality of different textile materials. The experiments 
included recordings of several fabrics by rubbing  them, by 
crumpling them up, cutting or ripping them. The recordings were 
then manipulated with different filters, compressors, and 
extended by addition of composed electronic music pieces, to 
add depth, character and creating the mood of the sculpture.  The 
two tracks conjure the underlaying steady but airy pulse of slow 
spinning fan with sudden interjections of crunches and rips that 
echo through a dark metallic space. 
 
3.4 Interaction 
We applied a capacitive sensing method to the wire form as a 
sensory input for the surface.  The output of the capacitive sensor 
circuit is mapped, using Max/MSP, to triggers that add additional 
effects and sounds in real -time. A fter the students composed 
numerous loops for the installation the team organized them into 
categories: atmospheric and melodic.   A few of the melodic 
tracks were associated with the Silver sculpture as it had a more 
characterized presence in the space.  The texture and reflectance 
of the material invites touch, as seen in figure 2, while its 
materiality makes it durable enough to withstand such 
engagements.  Touching the sculpture mixes together two of the 
student’s audio tracks, Scissors and Fences, along with adjusting 
the fade in/out volume. 
4. FUTURE WORK 
The combination of textile and sound warrants further artistic 
exploration. This contains material research, as well as conceptual 
questions that deal with the different perspective of the two disciplines. 
For example, questions around their understanding of room, 
interaction, etc.  
5. REFERENCES 
[1] A. Chang and H. Ishii, “Zstretch: a stretchy fabric music 
controller,” in Proceedings of the 7th international conference 
on New interfaces for musical expression, New York, New 
York, 2007, pp. 46–49, doi: 10.1145/1279740.1279746. 
[2] A. Milo and J. D. Reiss, “Aural Fabric: an interactive textile 
sonic map,” in Proceedings of the 12th International Audio 
Mostly Conference on Augmented and Participatory Sound and 
Music Experiences, London, United Kingdom, 2017, pp. 1–5, 
doi: 10.1145/3123514.3123565. 
[3] P. Parzer et al., “FlexTiles: A Flexible, Stretchable, Formable, 
Pressure-Sensitive, Tactile Input Sensor,” in Proceedings of the 
2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems, San Jose, California, USA, 2016, pp. 
3754–3757, doi: 10.1145/2851581.2890253. 
[4] J.-S. Roh, Y. Mann, A. Freed, and D. Wessel, “Robust and 
Reliable Fabric, Piezoresistive Multitouch Sensing Surfaces for 
Musical Controllers,” Jan. 2011. 
[5] I. Wicaksono and J. Paradiso, “FabricKeyboard: Multimodal 
Textile Sensate Media as an Expressive and Deformable 
Musical Interface,” 2017. 
[6] E. Encinas, K. Koulidou, and R. Mitchell, “The kraftwork and 
the knittstruments: augmenting knitting with sound,” in 
Proceedings of the 6th Augmented Human International 
Conference, Singapore, Singapore, 2015, pp. 49–52, doi: 
10.1145/2735711.2735833. 
[7] I. Posch and G. Fitzpatrick, “Integrating Textile Materials with 
Electronic Making: Creating New Tools and Practices,” in 
Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference on 
Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction, Stockholm, 
Sweden, 2018, pp. 158–165, doi: 10.1145/3173225.3173255. 
[8] “HOW TO GET WHAT YOU WANT.” [Online]. Available: 
https://www.kobakant.at/DIY/?p=2936. [Accessed: 31-Jan-
2020]. 
[9] C. Zeagler, M. Gandy, S. Gilliland, D. Moore, R. Centrella, and 
B. Montgomery, “In Harmony: Making a Wearable Musical 
Instrument as a Case Study of using Boundary Objects in an 
Interdisciplinary Collaborative Design Process,” in Proceedings 
of the 2017 Conference on Designing Interactive Systems, 
Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2017, pp. 369–378, doi: 
10.1145/3064663.3064678. 
[10] E. Giles, J. van der Linden, and M. Petre, “Weaving 
Lighthouses and Stitching Stories: Blind and Visually Impaired 
People Designing E-textiles,” in Proceedings of the 2018 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
Montreal QC, Canada, 2018, pp. 1–12, doi: 
10.1145/3173574.317404 
[11]  “Interactive Textile: multiple sound,” Hyojin Yoo. 
http://www.hyojinyoo.com/interactive-textile-multiple-
sound (accessed Apr. 21, 2020). 
[12] “Emerging Sensation,” Malin Bobeck, Textile Artist, Nov. 13, 
2018. https://www.malinbobeck.se/optical-fiber-
textile/emerging-sensation/ (accessed Apr. 21, 2020). 
Figure 2. Audience interacting with the wire mesh sculpture. 
 
. 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
132