PlaySoundGround: An Interactive Musical Playground 
Michael St. Clair
Drama/Stanford University
551 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA94305
michael.a.stclair@gmail.com
Sasha Leitman
CCRMA/Stanford University
660 Lomita Ct.
Stanford, CA 94305
sleitman@ccrma.stanford.edu
Abstract
 We describe a novel transformation of a playground -
merry-go-round, teeter-totter (also referred to as a see-
saw), swings, and climbing structure – from its traditional
purpose to a collaborative and interactive musical
performance system by equipping key structures with
sensors that communicate with a computer. A set of Max/
MSP patches translate the physical gestures of playground
play into a variety of performer-selected musical
mappings. In addition to the electro-acoustic interactivity,
the climbing structure incorporates acoustic musical
instruments. 
Keywords: Real-time, Music, Playground, Interactive,
Installation, Radical Collaboration, Play.
1. Overview
The PlaySoundGround is a functioning playground (scaled
to adult size) that produces musical sound when
participants play on and with the equipment. It is, as such,
also a musical instrument that allows participants to
explore musical interaction and the creation and control of
musical gestures by learning the musical mappings of the
play structures. As they learn the device's musical
responses to their play, they can alter the quality of their
play to produce desired musical effects. 
The basic premise of the PlaySoundGround is that the
“play” children perform in a playground and the “playing”
of music share the property of creative interaction within
structural, physical and technological constraints.
Furthermore, both concepts of 'play' employ a set of
unwritten implicit social rules. The PlaySoundGround
makes these connections explicit by endowing
recognizable, functional playground equipment with the
power to generate musical sound, extending rehearsed,
playful physical motions into the realm of artistic
expression. In doing so, it also opens up new territories for
instrument design and interactive audio art, acting as a
musical instrument controlled by broad kinesthetic motion
rather than fine motor movements. 
Figure 1. Collaborators enjoying the merry-go-round and
teeter-totter
2. Description
The PlaySoundGround consists of three pieces of furniture
– a merry-go-round, a teeter totter and a pair of swings
appending from a large climbing structure.  The
dimensions of the play structures were scaled such that the
relation between the size of the play furniture and the adult
Figure 2. Playground installed at the Burning Man Art
Festival.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists 
requires prior specific permission and /or a fee. 
NIME09, June 3-6, 2009, Pittsburgh, PA 
Copyright remains with the author(s).  
NIME 2009293
users was approximately the same as the relation between
the size of a children's playground and a child.
The PlaySoundGround was first installed at the Burning
Man Arts Festival outside of Gerlach, Nevada. Burning
Man is a one week art festival and cultural adventure
where approximately 40,000 participants gather in a
temporary city. The festival was founded by a loose
gathering of artists and pranksters who envisioned a
Temporary Autonomous Zone [1] free of the rules and
commerce of contemporary society. With the exception
of a small number of arts grants and limited safety
regulations, there is no institutional control of the work
that is shared at Burning Man.
With the help of a large number of volunteers, we
designed and built the playground using the following
methods and materials. The merry-go-round base is made
out of a car wheel bearing. A web of square tubing and
angle iron are welded to the matching wheel hub and a
wooden platform is bolted to the top. Hall Effect sensors
and rare earth magnets attached to the inside of the hub
and bearing measure the direction and speed of rotation.  
The teeter totter is constructed from a 16' salvaged
aluminum truck ramp. In the center of the ramp, a 1.5"
steel rod is mounted to a trapezoidal fulcrum using two
pillow block bearings. A Nintendo Wii Remote attached to
the side of the ramp near the fulcrum provides
accelerometer data. The swing structure is schedule-40
pipe connected by specialized fittings designed for
playground structures. Removable Kee Klamps are used
to connect the swing structure to the wooden climbing
structure. A potentiometer coupled to the top of each
swing chain measures the placement, speed and direction
of the swing seat. The climbing structure is a multi-tiered
platform structure designed for climbing and playing. It
supports, and is supported by, the swings. These choices
of construction material made each piece of playground
furniture portable and easy to disassemble.
Figure 3. Acoustic instrument designed by students.
The climbing structure contains a number of acoustic
instruments designed by the students of Jonathan Berger's
Technology and Art Class. The class was designed to
engage the students in a radical collaboration where they
worked together to determine how many instruments
would be built, the relation of the instruments to one
another, and the relation of the instruments to the 2008
Burning Man theme, the American Dream. They chose to
use the instruments to tell a history of the American Dream
through American material culture. The first level of the
structure contained instruments made of wood and glass –
scratched gourds burned with buffalo designs on one side
and a set of bellows that blow air over the lips of large jugs
on the other side. The second level contained percussion
instruments built out of metal and housed in two concave
sheet metal enclosures. The third level used plastic
materials – rain sticks made out of pink flamingo lawn
ornaments and PVC pipes pitched in complimentary blues
scales struck on the top of the pipe with a flip-flop shoe.
Besides their interesting and event-appropriate visual
aesthetics, these instruments granted the PlaySoundGround
a variety of additional capabilities. They increased the
number of users that could play at once; they added a
relatively sedentary mode of activity to the higher-energy
modes of activity already available; they allowed users to
gather in more physically intimate and immediate groups
(as opposed to the furniture, which was broadly spaced out
for safety's sake); and they gave users an additional
channel of musical engagement with the amplified audio
produced by the furniture.
3. Sound Processing
Data from sensors embedded in the play structures is
processed and interpreted in a Max/MSP patch. An
Arduino prototyping platform is used to acquire data from
the Hall effect sensors and potentiometers, while the Wii
Remote communicates directly with Max/MSP via
Bluetooth and is interpreted using Masayuki Akamatsu's
aka.wiiremote object [2]. The Max/MSP patches run on a
Mac Mini, which, at Burning Man, was housed in a small
refrigerator to protect it from the dust and heat of a desert
environment.  
Sound processing of the sensor data is also performed in
Max/MSP. Audio is sent to four speakers located around
each piece of furniture. Generally, this audio is spatialized
in relation to the movements of the users on the furniture
(often applying a stereo image based on some arbitrary
reference point). The speakers were constructed from
salvaged car stereo speaker elements mounted in wooden
box enclosures, steel trash cans, and 55-gallon plastic
drums for the merry-go-round, teeter-totter, and swings
respectively.
This audio is generated according to one of five
selectable modes of musico-kinetic mapping. All of these
mappings have sub-settings that alter a variety of
parameters.  The mappings are:
1. A simple additive synthesis system that produces
complex, organ-like chords. The melodic sequences it
produces are pseudo-random, based on one of several
Markov chains that control transitions between pre-
established pitches. The kinetic focus is on speed of
294
motion and frequency of event. The users' motions trigger
the incident tones, thus controlling the melody's rhythm;
their speed also alters the tones' timbres.
2. A granular synthesis system that manipulates
samples from a wide variety of popular music into
complex sound textures or altered versions of the original
music. Depending on the setting, the general kinetic focus
may be on particular position, speed of motion, or
frequency of events; users' motions may control
parameters ranging from grain pitch to volume to the
density of sound textures.
3. A system that produces sounds based on four sorts of
environmental noise : fire, water, electricity, and wind.
The kinetic focus is on speed and position. Using a
combination of spatialization, filtering techniques, and
triggered samples, these sounds change in natural-
sounding ways with the users' movements; water pours and
then splashes at extrema, electricity zaps, and so on.  
4. A simple sampler that, depending on its setting, uses
the players' movements to trigger either notes in a variety
of scales, percussive environmental noises, or looped
mechanical sounds. The kinetic focus is on positioning
and the sequentiality of movement.
5. A "scratcher" that uses the movement of the
instrument like a virtual tape head or phonograph needle,
rapidly advancing or reversing a recorded sample as users
play.
4. Performance Practice
The vast majority of musical interfaces, both traditional
and contemporary, are designed to be responsive to fine
motor control. With few exceptions (large bells and drums,
for example) musical gesture is generated and shaped by
relatively subtle oral or tactile manipulation. Recently, a
growing number of interfaces, particularly for motion-
tracking of dancers [3]– have generated sound from
relatively gross kinetic input. The vast majority of these
instruments, from gloves to motion-capture arrays, are
essentially sensor rigs for the human body rather than
physical objects with meaningful presences in space [4].
They allow free movement and provide guidance to the
user only through aural feedback.  
By contrast, musically-enabled playground equipment
provides users with a powerful set of readily-intelligible
mechanical constraints on their movement. Swings, teeter-
totters, and merry-go-rounds all work to restrict the range
of human motion to a well-defined arc through space. An
instrument that is tangible and provides tactile feedback
has many advantages: increased capacity for precise
control and virtuosity, the possibility of rational mappings
between gestures and output, increased legibility of the
relationships between gestures and musical outputs, and
perhaps the satisfaction of interacting with a device. The
PlaySoundGround provided all of these besides the
development of precision and virtuosity, a quality that
does not easily mesh with gross motor input: while
extremely precise control of global coordination is
certainly possible, it is difficult.
Moreover, because of the ubiquity of playgrounds in
primary education, virtually all of our target audience came
equipped with a carefully-rehearsed (if perhaps only half-
remembered) lexicon of gestures for interacting with our
equipment. In other words, they knew how to operate the
instruments before they ever saw them. This, in
conjunction with the participatory conventions associated
with playgrounds, enabled our users to immediately enjoy
engaging and pleasurable musico-kinetic experiences.
Our desire to facilitate their ability to rapidly gain
facility with the PlaySoundGround strongly influenced our
compositional choices. We preferred easy-to-understand
mappings between musical events and meaningful motor
events on the furniture. For instance, on the teeter-totter: a
mapping between upwards motion and a rising scale, a
mapping between height and the rate of audio grain
generation, a completed “teeter” motion and the generation
of a chord. However, the desire to make the mappings
legible didn't mean that we made the audio output
simplistic. Different settings varied the degree of control
over the resultant musical output given to the performers,
the composers, and randomness. As with many play forms
[5], a pleasant degree of randomness added a great deal of
spice to some of our compositions: among our most
successful (as determined by informal user response) was
our patch that generated chords triggered by completed
motions (teeters, rotations, swings), with variable timbre
based on motion velocity, with pseudo-random melodies
based on preprogrammed Markov chains.
5. User Experience
The PlaySoundGround also works as a novel and
surprising environment. It does so through one primary
mechanism with several elements: the making-unfamiliar
of previously familiar objects through repurposing or
augmentation.
First, much of the PlaySoundGround is constructed
from junk and scrap. It turns half-recognizable elements
like loading ramps and truck bearings into entirely new
objects. In this respect, it sits in a long tradition of
instruments and installations that rely on a junk-
construction aesthetic -- most immediately, Harry Partch's
work, previous NIME work [6] and the environs of Black
Rock City itself. [7]  
This repurposed-and-recycled construction
methodology provided a foundation for a higher-level
defamiliarizing aspect of the PlaySoundGround: its
augmentation of familiar objects with new capacities. It
does not contain mysterious new objects constructed from
junk, like Partch's plantlike fantasias; it contains friendly,
recognizable structures. Moreover, the fashion in which it
augments the capacities of these objects, unlike many
295
methods of musical instrument augmentation, [8] does not
rely on the addition of new control surfaces. Instead, it
adds new functionality to the existing control surfaces of
its furniture. These new functions serve as a set of new
and hidden ways of being used that, while perhaps easy
and natural, are not part of the furniture's conventional uses
and are not telegraphed by some added surface or marking.
There is a relationship between this stealthy
enhancement of usable objects and the notion of ubiquitous
computing [9]. The PlaySoundGround's technological
augmentations, however, do not add entirely new methods
of using its furniture: for instance, one may not blow on
the teeter-totter to check one's email. Instead, it enhances
the existing lexicon of functional gestures towards their
existing purpose. It couples musical play to the motions of
physical play to enhance the fun of play. It gives auditory
feedback that might influence the qualities of these
gestures, but does not alter their fundamental form.
The ease of use, inviting nature, and safely transgressive
qualities of the PlaySoundGround formed a coherent
performance modality, which proved infectious, spreading
to users' interactions with the acoustic instruments
included in the structure. These also had hidden
capabilities, but of a slightly different type -- one does not
normally use fire bellows to create music, for instance.
However, the hidden, playful augmentations in the
furniture led users to see every object in the space as a
proper instrument for musical play -- even, to our chagrin,
those that weren't, like our speakers, which became drums
one too many times for their liking.
6. Performance Ethic
This interface relies on a relational ethic of radical
audience participation -- audience participation so radical
that there is no particular boundary between performers
and audience members. The PlaySoundGround should be
considered a performance space as much as a device for
musical performance – both an installation and an
instrument. As such, its capacity to serve as a fully-
functional playground even apart from its musical
functionality made this ethic immediately and intuitively
perceptible to our users. Playgrounds are not spaces for a
large number of people to watch a single performer or
small group of performers demonstrate their virtuosity;
they are spaces for lots of people to play in all at once.
Their fundamental conventions as performance spaces
demand user participation.
We worked to manifest this ethic through the
construction process and the presentation venue as well as
the final product. The installation was constructed by a
large team of volunteers, who brought a wide array of
skills and interests to bear on the labor and were invited to
participate in every aspect of the work. And Burning Man
was a natural choice for the presentation of a piece of this
nature: one of the central elements of the event is an ethic
of radical participation and collaboration, ensuring an
audience ready to participate in the spirit of the
installation.
7. Conclusion
The design process was influenced by historcical and
psychological studies of play as well as by studies in game
design. We were inspired by philosophical discourse on
play as a phenomenon, and a few brief instances of this
influence are worth citing.  Johan Huizinga's classic
description of play as a generalized cultural process that
manifests itself in a wide variety of contexts influenced our
feeling that musical play and kinetic play were similar and
could be made simultaneous.  This was enhanced by
Richard Schechner's description of play as a mode of
performance, much like theater, dance, and music, which,
along with the contributions of game design scholars like
Katie Salen, led us to conceive the PlaySoundGround not
simply as an instrument, but as a performance space
designed to help its user-performers actively create certain
kinds of experiences.  Finally, Brian Sutton-Smith's
understanding of play as an ambiguous phenomenon that
resists being closely defined by rhetorics or forced to
conform to a particular purpose lent force to our decision
to make our playground's goal entertaining aesthetic
experience rather than teaching or developmental growth. 
The integration of musical performance and recreational
play in a ubiquitous and familiar performance interface
such as a playground provided a novel musical
environment that enables collaborative and social
interaction to create music.
References
[1] H. Bey, Temporary Autonomous Zone, Brooklyn, New York:
Autonomedia, 1991.
[2] http://www.iamas.ac.jp/~aka/max/#aka_wiiremote
[3] A Källblad, A. Friberg, K. Svensson, and E. Edelholm.
“Hoppsa Universum – An interactive dance installation for
children,” in Proc. of the Conf. on New Instruments for
Musical Expression (NIME), 2005, pp. 128 – 131.
[4] http://www.sensorband.com/
[5] K. Salen and E. Zimmerman, Rules of Play, Cambridge,
Massachusetts: MIT Press, 2003.
[6] K Moriwaki, J. Bruker-Cohen. “MIDI Scrapyard Challenge
Workshops,” in n Proc. of the Conf. on New Instruments for
Musical Expression (NIME), 2008, pp. 168 – 171.
[7] D. Pendell, Inspired Madness, Berkeley, California: Frog
Books, 2006.
[8] S. Schiesser and C. Traube, "On making and playing an
electronically augmented saxophone," in Proc. of the Conf.
on New Instruments for Musical Expression (NIME), 2006,
pp. 308-313. 
[9] R. Gold “This is not a pipe,” in Association of Computing
Machinery (ACM), 2006, pp. 72.  1993 
296