Utilizing Tactile Feedback to Guide Movements Between Sounds 
Alexander Müller 
Deutsche Telekom Laboratories 
Design Research Lab 
Berlin, Germany 
a.mueller@telekom.de 
Georg Essl 
Deutsche Telekom Laboratories 
TU Berlin 
Berlin, Germany 
georg.essl@telekom.de 
Abstract 
Vibetone is a musical input device which was build to 
explore tactile feedback in gesture based interaction. It is a 
prototype aimed to allow the performer to play both 
continuously and discrete pitched sounds in the same 
space. Our primary focus is on tactile feedback to guide 
the artist’s movements during his performance. Thus, also 
untrained users are enabled to musical expression through 
bodily actions and precisely arm movements, guided 
through tactile feedback signals. 
Keywords: tactile feedback, intuitive interaction, gestural 
interaction, MIDI controller 
1. Introduction 
The goal of this work was to design a tangible musical 
instrument for gestural control of music that has specific 
qualities: good design and form factors, the ability to both 
play freely in space and on the instrument in a continuous 
fashion. Furthermore we wanted to display a method to 
segregate the continuous space into meaningful discrete 
segments to control the sound in a way that is easily 
accessible to the performer. 
To enhance emotional, experimental and dynamic 
expression with a performing nature, the instrument allows 
users to create music not only via haptic gestures with 
extremities but also through semiotic gestures, integrating 
the motion of the user’s body. Immersive control as one 
part of the design, offers a flexible interface with a large 
free space to move yet it handicaps the performer’s 
estimation of movement-effect mapping. 
To offer additional functionality, artificial boundaries are 
introduced in mid-air. But without physical reference 
points the utilization of gestures may imply ambiguity for 
the user. A visual feedback is not an appropriate medium 
to give this kind of information for many reasons, 
including dependence on lighting conditions and the need 
of the visual channel to be available for performance cues. 
As the artist’s creative process should not be disturbed, an 
audible feedback in the form of an informative or warning 
signal seems unsuitable for a musical application. Hence 
we emphasize the tactile sense as a channel for meaningful 
and unintrusive feedback for this purpose. 
1.1 Related Work 
There is extensive literature on gesture based control - in 
fact musical gesture is a primary aspect of much of the 
research undertaken into new and existing instruments for 
musical expression. The Moog Ribbon Controller [1] and 
the Percussion Ribbon Controller [2] are instruments with 
similar interaction principles that use linear position 
sensors to control the pitch. By analogy with conduction 
this work is very much related to prior art in conducting 
interfaces, for example the work of Lee, Marin-Nakra and 
Borchers [3]. The importance of tactile feedback in 
musical performance has often been highlighted for 
instance by M. Wanderley and M. Marshall [4]. 
O’Modhrain’s thesis showed that tactile feedback can 
drastically improve continuous performance [5]. For a 
review see Miranda and Wanderley [1]. 
2. Designing Vibetone 
Vibetone is modelled on the perspective of a conductor 
facing an orchestra. An orchestra is naturally organized in 
angular segments with different instruments and hence it 
creates discrete sections. For gestural performance this 
analogy causes segments in a way that is body-centric and 
ergonomically easy to perform. The boundaries between 
the segments are, however, arbitrary and invisible. Hence a 
further design concern was to make these boundaries 
accessible in a way that does not hamper continuous play 
or limit the user’s actions. We chose the tactile channel 
due to its non-intrusive character and because it is a 
visceral channel for feedback. 
 
       
  
Figure 1: Virtual segments and boundaries  
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial ad vantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.  
NIME09, June 3-6, 2009, Pittsburgh, PA 
Copyright remains with the author(s).  
NIME 200933
 
Figure 2: Prototype Vibetone  
2.1 Sensors and system details  
The current prototype’s body is made of medium density 
fiberboard and includes following parts:  
 
Part Function 
Linear Force-Sensing Resistor (FSR) Measuring finger position 
Optical Sensor Height recognition 
Magnetic Field/Compass Sensor Direction recognition 
Vibration Motor Tactile actuation 
Table 1: Parts and Function of the Vibetone 
 
The signals transmitted from the sensors ar e sent to a 
microcontroller on a nearby Arduino board. The signals 
are mapped to MIDI data and then sent to a music software 
with a synthesizer. 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Organization and signal flow of Vibetone 
 
2.2 Interaction Methods  
The artist holds the instrument wi th one hand. One 
essential component of Vibetone is the linear FSR. By 
running on it with a finger the melody is played. 
According to a metaphorical translation of low height to 
piano (soft volume) and great height  to forte (loud 
volume) the volume control  depends on the position of the 
Vibetone over the ground: Standing tall is loud and 
crouching is soft. 
In the design of our prototype multiple virtual segments 
are mapped around the user. Each of these segments 
defines a sound (a MIDI channel): If the arti st holds the 
Vibetone within a segment, its sound is set (see Figure 1) . 
Once he changes the segment, the sound changes 
accordingly.  
In order to avoid an accident al overlap into a proximate 
segment, vibrotactile feedback occurs as the performer 
approaches a boundary between virtual segments. The 
intensity of the vibrational feedback increases with a 
greater proximity to the boundary. This feedback gets 
activated only in the marginal area of a particular action-
latitude: So the user becomes aware of the imm inent 
change-over before it happens.  
 
 
Figure 4: Tactile Actuation  
 
3. Conclusion and Future Work  
For the control of  musical interfaces with gestural 
interaction, it is helpful to inform the artist about 
boundaries between virtual segments via tactile feed back.  
The user’s cognitive abilities during a musical 
performance seem to be more effective with the utilization 
of a sensible vibrotactile information signal than with a 
visual or an auditive cue.  
We plan to conduct a study exploring the effectiveness o f 
vibrotactile feedback using this device to guide performers 
in invisible discretizations of space. If viable this could be 
explored to give feedback in instrument play that is 
naturally continuous but usually played mostly discrete 
such as fretless string instruments like violins. Furthermore 
we would like to explore body-centered gestures such as 
the body-posture height control of volume.  
 
4. References 
[1] E. R. Miranda and M. M. Wanderly: New Digital Musical 
Instruments: Beyond the Keyboard, A -R Editions, 
Middleton, Wisconsin, 2006  
[2] http://www.electronicpeasant.com/projects/ribbon/controlle
r.html (accessed 21 January 2009)  
[3] E. Lee , T, Marrin Nakra , J. Borchers: You're The 
Conductor: A Realistic Interactive Conducting Sys tem for 
Children, in Proc. of the Conf. on  New Instruments for 
Musical Expression (NIME), 2004, pp. 68-73 
[4] M. M. Wanderley, M. T. Marshall: Vibrotactile Feedback 
in Digital Musical Instruments, in Proc. of the Conf. on 
New Instruments for Musical Expression (NIME) , 2006, pp. 
226-229 
[5] S. O’Modhrain : Playing by Feel: Incorporating Haptic 
Feedback into Com puter-Based musical Instruments,  Ph.D. 
Thesis, Stanford University, 2000. 
34