InkSplorer: E xploring Musical Ideas  
on Paper and Co mputer  
 
Jérémie Garcia1,2, Theophanis Tsandilas1, Carlos Agon2  and Wendy E. Mackay1,3  
 
1INRIA, Univ. Paris-Sud 
Building 490 
Orsay Cedex 
{garcia,fanis,mackay}@lri.fr 
 
2IRCAM  
CNRS UMR STMS  
4 place Igor Stravinsky, Paris  
carlos.agon@ircam.fr 
 
 3Stanford University 
Computer Science,Gates
 B-280 
Stanford, CA 
ABSTRACT 
We conducted three studies with contemporary music compo s-
ers at IRCA M. We found that even highly co mputer-literate 
composers use an iterativ e process that begins with expressing 
musical ideas on paper, followed by active parallel exploration 
on paper and in software, prior to final ex ecution of their ideas 
as an original score. We conducted a participatory design study 
that focused on the crea tive exploration phase, to design tools 
that help composers better integrate their paper -based and ele c-
tronic activities. We then developed InkSplorer as a technology 
probe that connects users’ hand -written ge stures on  p a p e r  t o  
Max/MSP and OpenMusic. Composers appropriated InkSplorer 
according to their pr eferred composition styles, emphasizing its 
ability to help them quickly explore musical ideas on paper as 
they interact with the computer. We conclude with recomme n-
dations for designing interactive paper t ools that support the 
creative pro cess, letting users explore musical ideas both on 
paper and electronically.  
Keywords 
Composer, Creativity, Design Exploration, InkSplorer, Intera c-
tive Paper, OpenMusic, Technology Probes.  
1. INTRODUCTION 
Composing music is a  h i g h l y  c r e a t i ve  p r o c e s s ,  r e q u i r i n g  b o t h  
musical and technical skills. Within the past few decades, co m-
posers have been drawn to computers that offer powerful tools 
for specific tasks, such as Finale and Sibelius for editing scores, 
as well as full -scale p rogramming environments, such as 
OpenMusic a n d  Max/MSP. Composers use these tools to e x-
plore new mus ical ideas, gene rate novel sounds, and evaluate 
elements of a piece via real -time processing. 
  Composers are well -served with technology that helps them 
execute previously generated ideas. These tools can serve as a 
testbed, providing inspiration and the abi lity to test and assess 
different musical alternatives [2]. However, co mputer software 
is less effective for the earliest stages of the cre ative process, 
when the composer first struggles to represent a m usical idea. 
Many composers still rely on pencil and paper for sketc hing 
partially formed ideas [12]. Coughlan [5] a r g u e s  t h a t ,  w h e n  
expressing ideas, paper requires a lower cognitive load than 
software. A sketch can represent a complex, but as -yet inco m-
plete idea: the d etails can be worked out later. Some sketches 
are rough and unfinished, others are carefully ex ecuted, such as 
curves that repr esent amplitude or other real -time processes 
[10]. Hand-drawn sketches are useful for working out a comp o-
sition’s structure, hand -written notes and annotations  h e l p  t h e  
composer remember specific ideas. In fact, many co mposers 
design their own personal not ations to represent and explore 
their musical ideas [12]. 
 This paper describes our work with contemporary music 
composers to understand and provide technology that better 
supports the creative phases of the design process. We describe 
an initial study of how contemporary musi c composers at 
IRCAM use both paper and software tools. We present a 
framework for understanding their creative pro cess, including 
activities on paper and in software. We then describe two d e-
sign-exploration studies: a participatory -design study in which 
we worked with a composer on tools for paper expression and 
exploration, fo llowed by the exploratory design of InkSplorer, 
an interactive paper applic ation that links hand -written gestures 
to OpenMusic and Max/MSP. We used InkSplorer as a techno l-
ogy probe [11] t o  b e t t e r  u n d e r s t a n d  t h e  c r e a t i v e  c o m p o s i t i o n  
process and to explore how linking paper and softw are can 
better support i nnovation. We conclude with recommend ations 
for the design of such tools and directions for future r esearch. 
2. RELATED WORK 
We are inte rested in developing interactive systems that a c-
tively support the creative aspect of the compositi on pro cess. 
Resnick et al. [16] propose a set of principles to guide the d e-
sign of creativity -support tools. They e mphasize the need for 
simple tools that encourage exploration of multiple altern atives 
and advocate using multiple tools, rather than just one. They 
argue that designers should begin with real -world observation 
and use participatory design for their deve lopment. 
 Composition sof tware has a mixed record for suppor ting the 
creative process. In one in -depth study, Eaglestone and Ford [6] 
noted that an electroacoustic music composer had difficulty 
keeping track of electronic objects and navigating the various 
user interfaces. However, they also remarked on the experime n-
tal nature of his creative process and fo und that errors “often 
produce the most artist ically interesting results”. Amitani and 
Hori [3] e xpl or e d how  pr ovi di ng s pat ia l m usic repr esentations 
to the composer can improve creativity and Gelineck & Serafin 
[9] a r g u e d  t h a t  c o m p u t e r  t o o l s  t h a t  i n t r o d u c e  s o m e  l e v e l  o f  
uncertainty may stimulate creativity.  
 A number of systems, including Xenakis’ UPIC [13], Hyper-
score1, Qsketcher [1], Sonic Sketc hpad [5], HighC 2 and Music 
Sketcher [20] were designed to take adva ntage of the power of 
sketching ideas, by linking drawings to music comp osition. 
These systems all use a mouse, graphics tablet or an ele ctronic 
surface to draw musical forms on a computer screen. An alte r-
                                                                    
1 http://www.hyperscore.com/   
2 http://highc.org 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial adv antage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, r e-
quires prior specific permission and/or a fee.  
NIME’11, 30 May–1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway. 
Copyright remains with the author(s).  
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
361
native approach is interactive paper  [14], which enables users 
to capture hand -written gestures on paper and transmit the m to 
the computer. As with other ta ngible interfaces, interaction on 
paper is space-multiplexed [7] rather than time-multiplexed, as 
with a graphics tablet or a mouse. Users must view everything 
through a single window on a screen or tablet, rather than fli p-
ping through or spreading out different, pote ntially very large, 
sheets of paper. The physical rep resentation of gestures on 
paper also affords exploration and offers both visual and co m-
putational reminders that can be quickly revi sited, evaluated, 
and refined. The direct visual trace that the pen leaves on paper 
reinforces reflection on the task [17] and aids creativity. 
 Early interactive paper systems, e.g., Digital Desk  [23], pro-
jected multi-media content onto paper or used a hand -held PDA 
to augment a biologist’s notebook, e.g., A-book [15]. More 
recent systems [19, 22] use Anoto technology: a pen with a tiny 
video camera detects the precise location of each pen ge sture 
with respect to barely visible dots printed on the p aper.   
 Our previous research, Musink [21], used Anoto to help co m-
posers create and evolve personal not ations on paper over time. 
We focused on initial exp ression of ideas, offering compo sers 
an extensible, gesture -based syntax with the freedom to incr e-
mentally create their own composition languages and link them 
to music software. Here, we focus on how users explicitly co m-
bine paper and software to explore ideas, with the goal of 
creating tools that support such exploration in both m edia. 
3. OBSERVATIONAL STUDY 
Before developing novel technology, we wanted to first unde r-
stand the existing composition process, with particular emph a-
sis on clarifying the early cre ative phases. We interviewed 
composers and watched them work as they expressed and e x-
plored musical ideas, either on paper or with software.  
3.1 Method 
Participants: We interviewed four advanced composition st u-
dents from IRCAM, a center for contemporary music in Paris. 
All are e xperienced composers who have won prizes for their 
compositions. All have studied computer -assisted comp osition 
with software tools including OpenMusic, Max/MSP, and 
Audiosculpt. All are male, aged 30 -40. We identify them by 
their initials: NM, AE, EM and MB. 
Procedure: All participants were finalizing a composition i n-
tended for a soloist, with electronic elements. We asked them to 
bring this piece, plus their personal computers and any other 
related documents. Each interview was recorded  a n d  l a s t e d  
approximately one hour. We transcribed and analyzed each 
interview, along with phot ographs or copies of their sketches 
and scores. We began by asking them to describe their current 
project and discuss how it evolved, in both paper and electroni c 
forms. We asked Critical Incident -style questions [8] w it h re-
cent concrete examples of how they ad dressed problems, fo l-
lowed by more ge neral open -ended questions. At the end of 
each interview, we demonstrated a Livescribe3 pe n,  w hi c h r e-
cords sound with playback, as well as auditory and visual fee d-
back. We asked them to brainstorm how such tec hnology could 
assist their transition between paper and electronic represent a-
tions or enhance their creative work in other ways.   
3.2 Results 
Expressing ideas on paper: Even though they are exper ienced 
users of composition software, all use paper to e xpress their 
earliest musical ideas. Each has a unique way of working that 
varies in form and style. Some begin with blank paper and add 
                                                                    
3 http://www.livescribe.com 
musical scores or other graphical stru ctures. Others develop 
personal notations to represent complex musical ideas or ele c-
tronic processi ng ( Figure 1). Their sketches include various 
graphical parameters, e.g. scale, color settings, orient ation, 
envelopes, and thickness, which are mapped to musical p a-
rameters, often in an as-yet unspecified way. 
 
Figure 1. Left: Graphical representation of a piece (NM).  
Right: Hand-written scores and annotations (AE).  
 These composers distinguish sketches, which represent sp e-
cific musical ideas, from underlying frameworks, which stru c-
ture their ideas. For examp le, some composers redraw the m u-
sical staff; others use graph paper or specia lized grids to lay out 
their ideas. This allows both flexibility and control when e x-
pressing concepts such as time, dur ation, pitch and density.  
Exploring ideas on both paper and  i n  s o f t w a r e : A f t e r  ex-
pressing their initial ideas on paper, composers move to an 
exploration phase, which involves both paper and the computer. 
NM d escribed this as a tree: he generates and tests potential 
branches, succe ssively accepting or rejecting the m for the final 
composition. AE and EM use OpenMusic a n d  Audiosculpt, 
combined with hand -written scores to experiment with ideas. 
NM and MB use Finale and Sibelius (music editors) to produce 
the final score, after first testing and prin ting some ideas. The y 
also explore ideas using OpenMusic, exporting the results d i-
rectly into a music editor or into Max/MSP as an event list to 
control electronic parts. Both NM and MB ann otate printed or 
copied scores. AE and MB use real -time algorithms to co ntrol 
sound pro cessing, AE, EM and NM use spatialization tec h-
niques and EM and MB use real -time synthesis.  
 Regardless of their technical expertise, all move back and 
forth between paper and software, som etimes drawing multiple 
curves on paper that they test in sof tware, sometimes sketching 
an idea on paper that was inspired by a sound generated by the 
computer. Paper is clearly more flexible than software, d e-
manding fewer constraints when expressing an ill -formed idea. 
For example, some composers use sketches to repr esent the 
structure of the whole piece or, like Marco Stroppa [12], use 
graph paper to draw extremely p recise curves. When they move 
back to software, some paper -based represe ntations get lost or 
must be translated into classical notation, which acts as a co m-
mon la nguage between paper and electronic representations. 
This runs counter to a  R e s n i c k ’ s  e t  a l .  [16] s u g g e s t i o n  t h a t  
“creativity support tools should seamlessly interoperate with 
other tools”.  Here, composers must shift b etween two methods 
of exploring ideas, forcing them to stay conscious of the m e-
dium and distracting them from the idea itself.  
Representations evolve over time:  T h e  c h a r a c t e r i s t i c s  o f  
drawings reflect different stages of the composition process. 
Figure 2 shows h ow MB’s ideas evolve over time, as well as 
his use of paper and software. Figure 2a is a quick sketch, 
where the horizontal axis represents time, size corr elates with 
amplitude and the orientation of the lines ind icates transitions 
between notes. Figure 2b  translates this sketch into a score, 
including a hand -drawn staff. MB does this to facilitate the 
transfer of the idea from paper to OpenMusic, which deals with 
curves and notes on a staff. Figure 2c is a printout of the corr e-
sponding musical object from OpenMusic which he has printed 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
362
on paper and added annot ations, as explanations and reminders 
about what to try next. Figure 2d is the final score printed from 
Finale. He keeps both this score and his earlier hand -written 
sketches and printouts, as a record  of his creative process.  
 
Figure 2. Evolution of musical ideas on paper (MB)  
Conclusion: We found that composers engage in three main 
activities: expressing a n  i n i t i a l  i d e a ,  exploring i t ,  a n d  f i n a l l y  
executing it in a composition. This cycle of expression, explor a-
tion and exec ution is highly iterative and occurs on both paper 
and in sof tware, although paper -based activities occur earlier 
and end later. Figure 3 illustrates how composers use paper and 
software in parallel, without  being able to truly integrate them.  
 
Figure 3. Composers work in parallel between paper and 
software, expressing, exploring and executing m usical ideas 
 We were interested in what the composers thought about 
introducing a new tec hnology, the Livescribe p e n ,  i n t o  t h i s  
process and asked them to reflect on how they might int egrate it 
into their own work pra ctices. They all wanted translations 
from hand -written notes into a musical editor, with the ability 
to modify or add details to scores printed from the sof tware, 
ideally in a way that the software could then re -interpret. A l-
though all were fascinated by the possibility of listening to 
parts of a score d irectly from the pen, they found the Livescribe 
pen itself too large and uncomfo rtable for daily use. All co m-
mented that they used pencils, not pens, and needed an eraser.  
 Based on these findings, we decided to conduct two studies to 
explore how interactive paper technology can aid the creative 
process. We wanted to offer composers the advantages of 
physical p aper, with all its affordances, while also enabling 
them to benefit from the power of software tools. Our earlier 
Musink w o r k  f o c u s e d  o n  t h e  i n i t i a l  ‘ i d e a  e x p r e s s i o n ’  p h a s e .  
Here, our goal is to support the middle exploration ph ase of 
Figure 3, more specifically, to help bridge the gap between 
paper-based and electronic composition activ ities.  
4. PARTICIPATORY DESIGN STUDY 
We used participatory design [18] to study how one composer 
explores musical ideas, with an emphasis on how intera ctive 
pens can enhance this process. Clearly, each co mposer has a 
unique composition process. We  did not seek to find a generic 
solution, but rather to explore the design space and gain i n-
sights and ideas grounded in real -world composition activities.   
4.1 Method 
Participant: The  c om pose r  ( M B)  ha d a ls o par ti ci pat e d i n t he 
first study. 
Procedure: We first  m e t  w i t h  M B  i n  a  2-hour participatory 
design session, followed by four shorter meetings over six 
months. We worked with a var iety of different media including 
sketches on paper, a video prototype, and a Livescribe pen, 
used as a tec hnology probe to captur e data about his creative 
process and inspire ideas for new technology.  
 
Figure 4. Left: MB explains his work process on p aper. 
Right: Video prototype extract after a 2 -hour design session 
 Livescribe pens run Java ME programs ( penlets) and offer a 
range of functions, inclu ding auditory and visual feedback, 
audio recording and replay, interactive buttons and special a r-
eas printed on paper. For example, Figure 5 shows boxes with 
multiphonic ton es for a saxophone piece that MB printed from 
OpenMusic. This let MB reflect on each sound while working 
on paper, using a penlet to replay sounds at will.  
 
Figure 5. MB can tap on a box containing multiphonic tones 
and hear them from the pen 
4.2 Results 
MB offered a number of insights as to how he switches b e-
tween expressing and exploring ideas, on paper and in sof tware. 
He begins with sketches and gestures instead of classical mus i-
cal notation so he can improvise and work “at the spe ed of the 
thought”. For him, providing live feedback from the pen would 
be too intrusive or distracting during the early stages of wor k-
ing out an idea. He is, ho wever, interested in automatically 
translating paper -based gestures into classical notation tha t can 
then be interpreted by Finale or  a s  a n OpenMusic pa tc h.  Thi s 
would save time and let him focus on expression rather than 
execution of ideas. He said the pen must capture as many data 
points as possible and he would find it ‘unbearable’ if the pen 
continuously notified him about what it had just reco gnized. 
Design implications: Live interaction with the pen is not re c-
ommended for early expressive activities, but could provide the 
following useful functions during the exploration phase:  
1. Record and play sounds by interacting with drawings or 
printed musical elements (as in Figure 5).  
2. Evaluate and refine the result of drawings and gestures 
drawn on paper.  
3. Define and modify rhythms and dynamics.  
4. Restructure a piece by  i n d e x i n g  d i f f e r e n t  s e g m e n t s  o f  t h e  
piece and exploring new structural alternatives.  
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
363
 We used a video prototype 4 (Figure 4) to explore how to i m-
plement some of these ideas. We created one space for the in i-
tial creation of ideas (gestures, musical symbols and drawings) 
and a separate “interaction space” that runs in parallel, along a 
common timeline. The la tter was designed to be intera ctive and 
allow users to obtain information about their ge stures, refine 
recognition a nd define rhythms. We explored additional inte r-
action techniques to support this functionality including Knotty 
Gestures [22] t o  a s s i g n  m e aning, and physical transpa rent 
lenses [4] to refine the recognition of ge stures. 
5. TECHNOLOGY PROBE STUDY 
We next investigated whether and how intera ctive paper could 
assist c omposers’ exploration activities with OpenMusic a n d  
Max/MSP. Our goal was to enhance the computer -based explo-
ration phase by providing additional physical space on paper 
for refle ction, expression, evaluation and r efinement of ideas. 
Based on our previous research [21], we also expected this 
technology to o ffer composers greater precision when d efining 
musical parameters in a graph ical form. 
 We developed InkSplorer t o  c o n n e c t  i n t e r a c t i v e  p a pe r  t e ch-
nology to OpenMusic and Max/MSP. InkSplorer  is a palette of 
tools, not a single prototype. This supports a tech nology probe 
[11] approach, in which our goal is not to validate a particular 
design solution, but r ather to develop tools that compo sers can 
easily adapt to meet their individual needs. We hope to both 
gain new insights about the composition process as well as 
generate new ideas for designing intera ctive paper technology 
that supports the creative proce ss. 
5.1 InkSplorer 
InkSplorer creates interactive paper with wir eless Anoto ADP -
301 pens that detect position and low -precision pre ssure. Pen 
data is sent to the computer via Bluetooth. Since drivers are not 
yet available for Mac OS X, we redirect pen data fro m a Wi n-
dows 7 virtual machine to OpenMusic and Max/MSP. We use 
the OSC [24] communication pr otocol (fully supported by both 
Max/MSP a n d  OpenMusic). We cr eated a library to manage 
storage and eff icient retrieval of data so we can support real -
time i nteraction with strokes on paper. The library uses the 
SpatialIndex library 5, an impleme ntation of R -Tree, t o store 
strokes, and was implemented as a Java exte rnal for Max/MSP. 
We also impl emented patches and libraries in Co mmon LISP 
for OpenMusic and Java for Max/MSP, to facilitate the integr a-
tion of paper tools into co mposers’ personal wor kspaces. The 
user int erface in Figure 6 i s  a  Max/MSP p a t c h  t h a t  l e t s  us e r s  
launch paper-aware applications and control pen co nfiguration. 
The patch uses Jitter’s OpenGL rendering to display i ncoming 
pen strokes. 
 
  
Figure 6. Max/MSP user interface for managing pen data  
                                                                    
4 http://vimeo.com/12853935  
5 http://trac.gispython.org/spatialindex/  
 We developed a set of mini -applications of InkSplorer t h a t  
integrate interactive paper into Max/MSP and OpenMusic: 
1. A Theremin, controlled by moving the pen on p aper.  
2. A Max/MSP p a t c h  t h a t  m a p s  p e n  s trokes to sound env e-
lopes (Figure 7, left). 
 
Figure 7. Mapping pen strokes to online graphical o bjects 
3. OpenMusic patches that map strokes to BPF and BPC o b-
jects ( Figure 7, right). Custom paper templates facilitate 
drawing and scaling of strokes. 
4. OpenMusic patches that convert multi -strokes into musical 
objects using maquette [2] and custom paper templates. 
5. Pen-drawing support for bach6, a Max/MSP t o o l  t h a t  en-
hances real -time processing with advanced musical not a-
tion. Duration and amplitude profiles of not es can be drawn 
on paper (Figure 8). 
 
Figure 8. Defining a note's amplitude with pen data i n bach 
 We created patc hes that detect and communicate various 
stroke properties: the x -and-y coord inates of each data point, 
data point density, pen pressure and time -stamps for each point. 
We can thus detect writing speed and variability throughout the 
duration of a stroke. From the user’s perspective, InkSplorer 
provides a direct link between stokes on  paper and the software. 
Use Scenario: MB is working on a  piece for piano and real -
time electronics. He has a clear idea for an electronic sound in 
his mind and captures it on paper in the form of a rough, a b-
stract sketch with some text. He then cr eates an  O p e n Music 
patch and proceeds to work out how to impl ement the sound. 
He inserts a BPF o bject to control the pitch range and turns to 
InkSplorer to explore different vari ations. He draws four curves 
on paper, singing the sound to himself as he draws. He ta ps on 
each curve and listens to the corr esponding sounds produced 
by OpenM usic. MB likes the third best, but decides to change 
the final segment. He draws several slightly different curves on 
top of curve three and settles on the second  variation. He adds 
an annotation to r emember certain decision details, and circles 
the chosen curve, which stores it in Ope nMusic. He also saves 
the original rough sketches and an OpenMusic printout in his 
notebook.  
5.2 Method 
We conducted a series of mini -workshops with four c omposers 
at IRCAM, using InkSplorer a s  a  t e chnology probe to help 
them reflect on how to use interactive p aper in their own work. 
Participants: I n  a d d i t i o n  t o  M B  f r o m  t h e  p r e v i o u s  s t u d i e s ,  
three professional composers, KH, GL and MM, aged 31 -52, 
agreed to test the InkSplorer prototype. KH, MB and MM had 
been interviewed in earlier studies [21] and were already fami l-
                                                                    
6 http://www.bachproject.net/  
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
364
iar with the basic Anoto technology. All were expert users of 
Max/MSP and OpenMusic, especially KH who had participated 
in the latter’s development. GL and MM both teach computer -
aided composition at IRCAM. 
Procedure: We conducted a two -hour session with each co m-
poser, who brought his personal laptop and related doc uments, 
including musical scores, drafts of finished or in -progress 
pieces, and patches in Max/MSP and OpenMusic. All sessions 
were videotaped and later analyzed.  
 We first asked each composer about his background, profe s-
sional activities, and experience and frequency of use of diffe r-
ent music-composition tools. We then conducted a 30 -40 mi n-
ute semi -structured interview, focusing on how they represent 
and interpret curves and graphical forms, both in sof tware and 
on paper. We asked for at least three specific e xamples and 
asked them to explain in detail how they worked out d etails, 
e.g. “ D e s c r i b e  t h e  p a r a meters this curve repr esents.” T h ese 
interviews helped us to u nderstand their work in context and 
identify concrete scenarios in which dra wing curves on paper 
could be augmented with software functiona lity. 
 Next, we explained how to use InkSplorer a n d  t h e  m i n i-
applications described above . Together with the compo sers, we 
selected examples from their work and imported their wor k-
spaces or parts of them to our laptop computer, where the pen 
drivers and InkSplorer h a d  b e e n  i n s t a l l e d .  W e  s u c c e s s f u l l y  
imported the OpenMusic workspace for three c omposers but 
not for KH, due to software version incompatibilities.  
 We asked composers to reflect upon how InkSplorer m i g h t  
change how they define, explore or refine musical p arameters 
on paper and in OpenMusic or Max/MSP. We encouraged them 
to draw with  t h e  p e n  a n d  u s e  a  ‘ t h i n k-aloud’ protocol to d e-
scribe its strengths and weaknesses. At the end of each session, 
we asked them to give us their reactions to InkSplorer as well 
as any suggestions they had for future d esigns. 
5.3 Results 
All four composers use OpenMusic, but only MB and MM use   
Max/MSP for composition. The other two use Max/MS for syn-
thesis and interactive performance. These composers demo n-
strated diverse uses of curves to control various processes. For 
example, KH uses short curves to control an  i ndi vi dua l  l oc al-
ized component of an algorithm or a synthesis process. Figure 9 
(left) shows his use of a short curve to define a synthesis env e-
lope or a pitch variation for granular synthesis. KH made a 
strong distinction between sound synthesis and music compos i-
tion: For him, drawing curves to control synth esis, whether on 
paper or in software, is interesting, but he i nsisted that he is not 
a  “painter”  and does not use curves to compose m usic. 
 In contrast, MM uses long curves to control global properties 
of a piece or a section. Such curves are often more complex and 
more precise than short ones. Figure 9 (right) shows how MM 
uses long curves to control tempo variations in a 15 -minute 
piece he composed for a short film. 
 
Figure 9. Hand-drawn curves control diverse processes  
 MM and KH use OpenMusic’s maquette for spatial organiz a-
tions of musical objects, controlled by temporal and graphical 
parameters. R eflecting on InkSplorer’s support for the m a-
quette, the two composers showed examples from their work 
(Figure 10) that could be potentially produced by spatiotemp o-
ral mappings between paper gestures and m aquette. 
 
Figure 10. Spatial and temporal (x -axis) organization of 
musical objects (KH, MM) 
The composers all chose to explore examples d erived from 
their use of OpenMusic. The following issues concern both 
interactive paper in general and OpenMusic in particular.  
Expressing ideas: Composers varied in how well paper helped 
them to express musical ideas. For GL, musical ideas reside in 
computerized patches and InkSplorer is only pote ntially useful 
for exploring these ideas faster. In contrast, MM feels that p a-
per is simpler and more intuitive. For him, paper forms an 
“analog”  space that provides more possibilities for expre ssion 
than the computer, which he finds “digital”  a n d  c o n s t r a i n e d .  
MB finds the expressive power of both m edia to be sim ilar, 
although he enjoys working with the pen more. He treats it as a 
musical instrument that involves physical mov ement of the 
body, a tangible se nsation as the curve is drawn on paper: “[I] 
use this pen just as I do an instr ument. Here, I play the pen.”  
Exploring ideas:  MB a nd GL stated that speed is a major 
strength of interactive paper: it enables them to register mult i-
ple ideas and quickly assess their potential. MB feels that the 
pen saves time and helps him focus on the musical outcome 
rather than how to i mplement it. His hand-drawn gestures act as 
memories of sounds that can be returned to and replayed, even 
though the actual impleme ntation resides on the computer. He 
also notes that computer screens have limited screen real estate 
whereas paper offers almost infinite sp ace for exploring and 
“The work is not lost in the computer” . 
 Composers discovered interesting strategies for exploring 
ideas with InkSplorer. F o r  e x a m p l e ,  M M  d r e w  s e v e r a l  l o n g  
curves on top of each other to evaluate different alternatives in 
the afore -mentioned composition, each providing incremental 
corrections (Figure 11, left). He used layers of curves to guide 
each refinement, explaining, “It’s a kind of guide that lets you 
correct it next time” . In Figure 11 (right), MB draws vari ations 
of a short curve to control a 2 -second sound synthesis. 
 
Figure 11. Reusing or refining curves (MM, MB)  
Precision: C o m p o s e r s  h a v e  d i f f e r e n t  v i e w s  a b o u t  t h e  r e l a t i v e  
amount of precision offered by paper and compu ters. MM feels 
that the computer is more precise because it lets him enter exact 
values, whereas data entry on paper is rougher. In contrast, GL 
finds that drawing on paper is more precise and lets him pr o-
duce “more complex results”. Finally, MB argues that a lthough 
paper affords higher precision when drawing curves, it is not 
necessary for his compositions.  
Design issues:  T h e  c o m p o s e r s  a g r e e  t h a t  i n tegrating paper 
directly into existing tools, rather than creatin g a new inte rface, 
is the co rrect approach. However, they also want richer forms 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
365
of interaction. For example, MM finds it difficult to draw long 
curves without lifting the pen for a pause. He su ggests that we 
let users easily connect segments together. Int erestingly, only 
MM feels that capturing pen pressure or drawing chara cteristics 
such as pen angle are important, because these are esse ntial in 
calligraphy. MB suspects that pressure might be useful, but 
would require practice to be controlled effe ctively. MM, GL 
and KH are particularly interested in using sp ecial pre -printed 
paper templates, particularly graph paper and mus ical sheets. In 
contrast, MB wants to create his own paper interface. The co m-
posers offered various suggestions for improving the pen de-
sign, including making them thinner, offering color, and su p-
porting pencils or at least some form of erasure.  
6. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
Our goal is to design interactive systems that actively support 
the creative, exploratory phase of music composition.  We co n-
ducted three studies to examine how professional co mposers 
combine paper and software tools. Study 1, based on interviews 
and observ ations of four composers, offers a fram ework for 
understanding the comp osition process, from early expression 
of ideas, to their systematic exploration and final execution. We 
found that composers explore both on paper and with software, 
as parallel, inter -related activities that they would like to better 
integrate. 
 Study 2 is a six -month participatory design study with  o n e  
composer that explored how ‘interactive paper’ could better 
support his iterative testing of musical ideas. He argued that 
initial expression on paper is a ‘del icate’ phase and he does not 
want to be distracted by technology, i.e. live feedback that 
communicates state transitions and recognition errors. Musink 
[21], our first system, was designed explicitly to support the  
early creative phase, avoiding the interruption problem b ecause  
data interpretation on first generation pens was delayed until it 
was uploaded to the computer. Although newer wir eless pens 
offer real -time feedback, we recommend limiting this to later 
exploratory phases, when it is less disruptive.  
 Study 3 created InkSplorer, a pen-based composition tool that 
links paper -based and software -based to facilitate explor ation 
of ideas. InkSplorer i s  actually a palette of mini -tools, which 
maximizes flexibility and supports both p aper-to-computer and 
computer-to-paper testing and refinement of ideas. We tested 
InkSplorer with four profe ssional compo sers. Their ge stures on 
paper served as vis ual and computational elements that could 
be quickly revi sited, replayed and eval uated, as well as layered 
and refined with new variations.  
 In future, we plan to more fully incorporate interactive paper 
into composition software such as OpenMusic. This will require 
tools that enable composers to define custom paper -based inter-
faces and richer, more powerful interactions with paper. We are 
particularly interested in gesture -based tec hniques such as our 
Knotty Gestures  [22] a n d  t he  u s e  o f  p o r t a bl e  e l e c t r o n i c  a s s is-
tants [15] t o  a i d t h e  t r a nsition from symbols and gestures on 
paper to digital objects. Finally, we believe that Musink a n d  
InkSplorer are complementary and plan to int egrate them in our 
future work. 
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We thank the composers and researchers at IRCAM, especially 
Mathieu Bonilla, for their willingness to share their creat ive 
process with us. Thanks also to researchers at In|Situ|, in pa r-
ticular Stéphane Huot, for their help and i nsights. 
8. REFERENCES 
[1] Abrams, S., Bellofatto, R., Fuhrer, R., Oppenheim, D., 
Wright, J., Boulanger, R., Leona rd, N., Mash, D., Re n-
dish, M. and Smith, J. QSketcher: an environment for 
composing music for film. In Proc. C&C’02 ( 2 0 0 2 ) ,  
157–164. 
[2] Agon, C., Bresson, J. and Assayag, G. The OM comp o-
sers’s book Vol.1 & Vol.2 . (2006). Collection Mus i-
que/Sciences. Ircam Delatour France. 
[3] Amitani, S. and Hori, K. Supporting musical compos i-
tion by externalizing the composer’s mental space. In 
Proc. C&C  ’02 (2002), 165–172. 
[4] Bier, E.A., Stone, M.C., Pier, K., Buxton, W. and D e-
Rose, T.D. Toolglass and magic lenses: th e see-through 
interface. In Proc. SIGGRAPH  ’93 (1993), 73–80. 
[5] Coughlan, T. and Johnson, P. Interaction in creative 
tasks. In Proc. CHI  ’06 (2006), 531–540. 
[6] Eaglestone, B. and Ford, N. Computer support for cre a-
tivity: help or hindrance. In ARiADA. (Vol.2, 2002). 
[7] Fitzmaurice, G.W., Ishii, H. and Buxton, W.A.S. Bricks: 
laying the foundations for graspable user interf aces. In 
Proc. CHI  ’95 (1995), 442–449. 
[8] Flanagan, J.C. The critical incident technique. In Psy-
chological Bulletin. (Vol.51, 4, 1954). 
[9] Gelineck, S. and Serafin, S. From Idea to Realization - 
Understanding the Compositional Processes of Electr o-
nic Musicians. In Proc. Audio Mostly (2009). 
[10] Healey, P.G.T. and Thiebaut, J.B.T. Sketching Musical 
Compositions. In Proc. CogSci  ’07 (2007), 1079–1084. 
[11] Hutchinson, H., Mackay, W., Westerlund, B., Bederson, 
B.B., Druin, A., Plaisant, C., Beaudouin -Lafon, M., 
Conversy, S., Evans, H., Hansen, H., Roussel, N. and 
Eiderbäck, B. Technology probes: inspiring design for 
and with families. In Proc. CHI  ’03 (2003), 17–24. 
[12] Letondal, C., Mackay, W.E. and Donin, N. Paperoles et 
musique. In Proc. IHM  ’07 (2007), 167–174. 
[13] Lohner, H. The UPIC system: A user’s report. In Com-
puter Music Journal 10. (1986). 
[14] Mackay, W.E. and Fayard, A.-L. Designing interactive 
paper: lessons from three augmented reality projects. In 
Proc. IWAR  ’98 (1999), 81–90. 
[15] Mackay, W.E., Pothier, G., Letondal, C., Böegh, K. and 
Sörensen, H.E. The missing link: augmenting biology 
laboratory notebooks. In Pro c. UIST  ’02 (2002), 41–50. 
[16] Resnick, M., Myers, B., Nakakoji, K., Schneiderman, B., 
Pausch, R., Selker, T. and Eisenberg, M. Design Princ i-
ples for Tools to Support Creative Thinking. In Interna-
tional Journal of Human -Computer Interaction . (Vol.20, 
2, 2006). 
[17] Schön, D.A. The reflective practitioner . (1983). Basic 
books New York. 
[18] Schuler, D. and Namioka, A. Participatory design: 
Principles and practices. (1993). CRC. 
[19] Song, H., Guimbretiere, F., Grossman, T. and Fitzma u-
rice, G. MouseLight: b imanual interactions on digital 
paper using a pen and a spatially -aware mobile proje c-
tor. In Proc. CHI  ’10 (2010), 2451–2460. 
[20] Thiebaut, J. -B., Healey, P.G.T. and Kinns, N.B. Dr a-
wing Electroacoustic Music. In Proc. ICMC  ’08 (2008). 
[21] Tsandilas, T. , Letondal, C. and Mackay, W.E. Musink: 
composing music through augmented drawing. In Proc. 
CHI  ’09 (2009), 819–828. 
[22] Tsandilas, T. and Mackay, W.E. Knotty gestures: subtle 
traces to support interactive use of paper. In Proc. AVI  
’10 (2010), 147–154. 
[23] Wellner, P. Interacting with paper on the DigitalDesk. In 
Commun. ACM. (Vol.36, 7, 1993), 87–96. 
[24] Wright, M. and Freed, A. Open Sound Control: A New 
Protocol for Communicating with Sound Synthesizers. 
In Proc. ICMC  ’97 (1997), 101-104. 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
366