Adapting the trombone: a suite of electro-acoustic
interventions for the piece Rouse
Neal Farwell
University of Bristol
Department of Music, Victoria Rooms,
Queens Road, Clifton, Bristol  BS8 1SA, UK
+44 (0)117 954 5028
neal.farwell@bristol.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
Three electro-acoustic systems were devised for a new
trombone work, Rouse . This paper presents the technical
systems and outlines their musical context and motivation. The
uSlide measures trombone slide-extension by a minimal-
hardware ultrasonic technique. An easy calibration procedure
maps linear extension to the slide “positions” of the player. The
eMouth is a driver that replaces the mouthpiece, with software
emulation of trombone  tone and algorithmic musical lines,
allowing the trombone to appear to play itself. The eMute is
built around a loudspeaker unit, driven so that it affects strongly
the player’s embouchure, allowing fine control of complex beat
patterns. eMouth and eMute, under control of the uSlide, set up
improvisatory worlds that are part of the composed architecture
of Rouse.
Keywords
Trombone, electro-acoustic adaptation, mute, composition,
improvisation, mapping, illusion, emulation, ultrasonic.
1. INTRODUCTION
Rouse  for trombone, trombonist, and live electronics was the
fruit of a commission from trombonist extraordinaire Hilary
Jeffery. Jeffery’s own “tromboscillator” is an improvisation
environment controlled by a sensor-equipped trombone mute
[1]. The further development of a mute, to be somehow
electronically activated, was at the centre of the commission.
The final system has three interlinked components: the uSlide,
an ultrasonic measure of trombone slide-position that is
efficient in implementation and rugged under performance
conditions; the eMouth, a transducer and excitation system that
replaces the player’s embouchure at the mouthpiece so that the
trombone can seem to play itself; and the eMute, a loudspeaker-
based device held and operated like a plunger mute, which
changes the acoustics and playing characteristics of the
trombone. Rouse has been performed in concerts of otherwise-
acoustic music, and its hardware was used on Jeffery’s regular
concert instrument. The devices thus had to be easy to fit and
remove with no damage to the instrument itself. A further goal
was that the system should be low cost, and involve minimal
application-specific hardware beyond the three named devices.
Software was implemented in Max/MSP.
An obvious precursor is Nic Co llins’ “trombone-propelled
electronics”.1 This uses an old trombone as armature for a new
performance  instrument, whose soundworld involves sampling
external sources and reshaping them, often in collaborative
improvisation. By contrast, Rouse aims to make the trombone
more itself, in a surreal or hyper-real presentation of its acoustic
world and playing styles.
This paper has a dual purpose. It will give a technical
description of the suite of electro-acoustic interventions, and
will also summarize aspects of the musical result with the
intention of showing the motivation for the adaptations. The
electro-acoustic ideas grew out of compositional goals, and the
systems were optimized informally. Technical experiments and
developments led to compositional ideas and vice versa. Further
information about Rouse, sound examples, and screenshots of
the operating software have been placed at the Sonic Arts
Research Archive [2].
2. TROMBONE ACOUSTICS
The adaptations for Rouse  engage with aspects of normal
trombone acoustics, summarized below. A more detailed
description is online at [3]. A number of older books on
trombone pedagogy were found useful to relate acoustic
principles to musical practice [4], [7], [9], [10], [13].
The vibrating aperture of the player’s lips creates an oscillating
air pressure. Buzzing on the mouthpiece alone, the frequency is
a continuous variable set by embouchure shape and lip tension.
The trombone acts as a resonator and radiator. The tube is
effectively closed at the player’s lips and is designed, through
combination of the cylindrical section, mouthpiece and flared
bell, to have strong resonances on an overtone series 2f, 3f, 4f,
etc. The pressure anti-node at the closed end interacts with the
embouchure mechanism, forcing the oscillator onto the nearest
preferred frequency. The fundamental f is not at a resonance but
can be played as a pedal tone, the oscillator mode-locked by
reinforcement of its overtones. The slide, a telescoping tube
system, varies the actual length hence effective acoustic length
of the trombone. With the slide closed, 1 st position, the Bb
trombone has notional fundamental Bb1. Each further
numbered position extends the tube and lowers the fundamental
by a semitone, to E1 at full-extension 7th position. The linear
distance between successive positions increases because the
tube length must increase in geometric progression. The slide is
a precision system and the outer part is made of light-gauge
tubing to be low in inertial mass, allowing considerable agility.
The pitch range of the instrument is covered by slide-selection
                                                                   
1 Seen in concert, and described in [5].
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
NIME 06, June 4-8, 2006, Paris, France.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
358
of series and embouchure-selection of overtone. The radiation
characteristics of the bell vary with frequency. A mute reshapes
this frequency dependence.
3. THE uSLIDE
Slide extension is measured by a time-of-flight ultrasound
method using a 40KHz transmit-receive ceramic transducer
pair. There are many existing implementations of ultrasonic
distance measurement. The version here offered particular
advantages for the trombone and in conjunction with the other
hardware for Rouse . Mapped to slide position, the uSlide
provides control information to the eMouth and eMute.
3.1 Hardware
The computer audio interface (a Hammerfall DSP Multiface)
hosts the ultrasound transducers directly, at a system sample
rate of 96kHz. The ultrasound transmitter is driven by the
headphone output, and the receiver is wired to an analogue
input – there is no hardware amplification or signal
conditioning. This further simplifies an approach described by
Johannes Taelman [12]. The transducers are mounted on
buffers shaped from pencil erasers, and bound to the trombone
tubes with double-sided eye-and-hook tape (see Figure 1). This
makes a lightweight non-slip and non-abrasive mount, possibly
with a shock-decoupling effect, and is very quick to attach and
remove from the instrument.
Figure 1. The uSlide transmitter (right of photo) and
receiver (upper middle). The player's left forefinger is
resting on the mouthpiece, next to the Trombone  push-
button (hidden). The nylon coil-wrap (centre left) is an
easily released tether for the umbilical cable.
Measurements of the trombone spectrum (see below) suggest
the trombone can produce significant energy in the 40KHz
region. The transducer mounted on the outer slide will pass in
front of and behind the bell edge as the slide moves. To
minimise interference, the receiver is mounted on the static
inner slide, where its acoustic environment is more stable, and
the transmitter is fitted to the outer. An umbilical cable
connects both signals to the computer, extended by a fly-lead of
miniature coax in the case of the moving transmitter. The
umbilical is tethered to the cross piece of the inner slide and
falls loose in front of the player’s body. This proves very
workable in practice, the main inconvenience being that the fly-
lead sometimes tangles when the instrument is first picked up.
Early experiments with a miniature powered satellite, optical in
one direction, ultrasonic in the other, were abandoned. Future
development may revisit this idea, or explore the mechanically
simpler option of a reflector mounted on the slide.
3.2 Drive and Conditioning
The uSlide uses continuous-wave (CW) transmission, with
phase inversion acting as the change-of-state to be detected.
The ultrasound system runs in a software shell at 96KHz – see
[2] for Max/MSP patches.2 The nominal measurement accuracy
is one sample, or 3.5mm, at a refresh rate of 200Hz.
At 96KHz sampling, one cycle of 40KHz occupies 2.4 samples.
An exactly repeating pattern of 12 samples generates 5
complete cycles. As far as the audio hardware is concerned, this
is an ordinary signal at less than the Nyquist frequency and so is
reconstructed by the DAC as a smooth 40kHz sinewave for the
transmitter.
Pulsed transmission was rejected for this application. If the
pulse amplitude is high, it can be audible as a click or buzz. The
drive level available from the interface headphone jack was in
any case limited. If the pulse amplitude is smaller, the receiver
is susceptible to mis-triggering from air-born interference and
from mechanical impact pinging the transducer. Both are likely
in the case of the trombone, mechanical noise arising for
instance from the proximity of the F-valve trigger. Time-based
averaging or reasonableness-measures introduce latency.
Simple pulse systems can also suffer from a “cogging” effect,
when the detection threshold interacts with the received pulse
envelope and distance-dependent amplitude: depending which
cycle of the received waveform is registered, the measured
distance can show abrupt jumps of around 8mm.3
For the uSlide CW implementation, a buffer is pre-filled with
cycles of the 12-sample pattern, and played in a continuous
loop. The buffer index provides both a trigger for synchronous
inversion of the carrier at the loop start, and a measure of
elapsed time since that inversion. The loop period is 5ms, more
than enough for the <2ms time-of-flight at full slide extension,
but short enough for acceptable latency.
The buffer is in fact two-channel, the second channel filled with
a quadrature version of the first. These sine and cosine signals
(without the periodic inversion) are used for synchronous
demodulation of the receiver signal. The cutoff frequency of the
filters in the demod chain (8-pole lowpass) can be adjusted to
trade off selectivity against response time. The received signal
must pass through an amplitude null at the notional phase
inversion. The null is detected by thresholding the demodulated
amplitude against a fraction (set empirically at 0.7) of its
locally-smoothed value. This also implements AGC on the
received signal, with controllable parameters.4 When the null is
detected, the buffer index is captured in a sample-and-hold,
rescaled as slide position, and passed from the shell to the main
software body running at 48kHz.
                                                                   
2 The CW technique here was originated for Rouse, and I have
not seen other examples in NIME applications. A later search
suggests that related techniques are documented in the
engineering and instrumentation literatures.
3 340ms-1 x 1/(40kHz). I encountered this effect during work on
my “funny fiddle” (1996), described in [8].
4 Continuous-wave reception also allows (though not used in
Rouse ) the continuous direct measurement of movement
velocity via Doppler shift. For the “funny fiddle”, a self-
zeroing digital hardware implementation was devised for bow
velocity [8]. For Doppler sonar, see also [12].
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
359
In use, the AGC seems to prevent the cogging phenomenon,
and the system copes readily with the unamplified transducer
signal some tens of dB below full-scale. Resilience to air-borne
and mechanical interference has not been systematically tested,
but the uSlide has so far proved reliable in concert use.
3.3 Scaling
The ultrasonic system generates a raw linear measure of slide
extension. For most purposes in Rouse , a measure of slide
position – the musical measure natural to the player – is needed,
which at integer values corresponds one-to-one to a chromatic
scale of pitches identifying the overtone series. If the ultrasonic
measure is x and the effective length of the trombone tube is L,
then L = L0 + kx for some L 0 and k. The notional fundamental
frequency Fx = cs/L, where s is the speed of sound in the tube,
and c depends on the geometry.
For the player, it is much easier to deal in pitches than
frequencies. For calibration, we select two pitches in a register
that is easy to play accurately, both on the third overtone. Using
the MIDI-note  frequency conversion functions in Max and
simplifying fractions:
note# = ftom (Fx) = ftom ( 1 / (a + bx))
Once the uSlide sensors are fitted, and the acoustic instrument
tuned and warmed up, we play F3 (1 st position, note# =53) and
C3 (6th position, note# =48), register the two x values and solve
the pair of equations for the variables a and b. A simple user
interface hides the math. The slide position, floating-point for
continuously-variable control, is then
POSx = 54 - ftom ( 1 / (a + bx))
A higher order function was considered, but this was found to
be as accurate as needed. The transducers need not be precisely
positioned when fitted, because variations are calibrated out.
4. THE eMOUTH
For the opening of Rouse , I wanted the trombone to appear to
play itself. The illusion should be strong, yet also be easy to
blur, and the trombonist would gradually be allowed to
participate in the trombone’s dream. The eMouth system
provides an acoustic drive to the trombone in place of the usual
mouthpiece, with constrained control from the uSlide.
4.1 Driver
In his “trombone-propelled electronics”, Collins used a
compression driver  of the kind designed for use with an HF
radiator horn in loudspeaker arrays. I concluded that available
models were too bulky and massive for Rouse . With the
eMouth fitted, it had to be possible to handle the trombone as
normal; and the physical loading could not risk damage to the
mouthpiece socket. I wanted also to use a wide audio spectrum.
Jeffery provided a typical mouthpiece that fitted his instrument,
of 26mm inner diameter at the embouchure opening. The driver
selected is a small-diameter metal diaphragm, rubber surround
type. This type allows a long-throw pistonic movement of the
diaphragm, producing a high sound level for the small size.
Despite their widespread use inside computers and in miniature
satellite loudspeakers, these drivers seemed to be unavailable
for one-off purchase in the UK. I sought a model closely
matching the mouthpiece in diameter: for the eMute prototype,
this was a 24mm-diaphragm device cannibalized from an Apple
computer. The driver is mounted to the mouthpiece using a
plastic gasket, and the assembly held together by a web of cable
ties. This is readily adjustable, and easy to dismantle for
transport or storage. See Figure 2 and Figure 3. The connection
must be airtight and somewhat rigid for all the sound to appear
to come through the instrument, since this might not otherwise
be the path of least resistance.
This arrangement places the diaphragm of the driver as close as
possible to where the player’s lips would normally be, and with
minimal alteration of the mouthpiece enclosed volume. This
gives a close match to the instrument’s normal closed-tube
acoustics, so that the tuning of the slide positions feels normal
to the player and the transducer approximates the pressure drive
of the buzzed lips. The transducer is powered by one channel of
a small hi-fi amplifier.
Figure 2. eMouth components. The plastic enclosure has a
small port on the rear, which is here sealed closed.
Figure 3. The eMouth assembled and fitted to the trombone.
4.2 Excitation Function
The excitation signal for the eMouth transducer is from a
simple synthetic model of the trombone. Test recordings were
made of the trombone played normally. An omnidirectional
microphone was placed on-axis in front of the bell at around
50cm, in a dry acoustic. Spectral analysis of the recordings
yielded some heuristic conclusions:
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
360
1. At a given pitch and sustained dynamic, there is an
approximately straight-line relationship between partial-
amplitude in dB and frequency on a linear scale.
2. The slope varies with dynamic level, flatter at forte hence
more energy in high partials, steeper at piano with the high
partials lost below the measurement floor.
3. The overall spectrum is subtly modulated by a formant
shape, and the fundamental is typically a few dB weaker
than the 2nd or 3 rd harmonics. The fundamental, however
varies relatively little with playing dynamic.
4. Short notes confirm this behaviour, with the spectral
envelope tilting from steep to flat and back during the
attack and release of the note.
A surprisingly simple model approximates the measured
spectrum. An anti-aliased sawtooth passes through a two pole
low-pass filter, a state-variable implementation at low Q. A
further high-pass filter rolls off the lowest partials (and protects
the driver from exaggerated cone excursions). The interaction
of the 1/f amplitude-spectrum of the sawtooth and the LPF
slope approximates the measured variable dB/frequency slope
by varying the filter cutoff relative to the oscillator frequency.
In steady state, the timbre is plausible for the trombone, but
very clearly synthetic. A much more “real” effect, reflecting the
common psychoacoustic observation that instrumental timbres
are characterised strongly by their transients, is gained by
modulating the LPF cutoff with an envelope, linear in
frequency/time but matching the timing of staccato notes.
Figure 4 shows a test version of the model.
Figure 4. Simple trombone model.
5. THE eMOUTH IN CONTEXT
5.1 Illusion and Transformation
When the eMouth is fitted to the trombone body and driven
with passages of notes synthesized by the basic trombone
model, the effect is disconcerting. The resonances of the
physical instrument overlay and enrich the synthetic timbre, and
all the sound is heard to come from the bell. The instrument
seems indeed to play itself. However, the sound is “not quite
right”. In part this is because the dynamic level available from
the eMute is quieter than would be expected for the heard tone-
colour – I was not prepared to destruct-test the transducer to
establish a maximum level(!) – and the frequency of the eMute
drive is not precisely matched to the acoustic response of the
resonant system.5
                                                                   
5 I made early experiments in matching the eMute pitch
automatically to the actual trombone response; but I chose
instead to use defined drive pitches, enjoying the timbral
inflection created by uncorrelated movement of the slide.
The ambiguity and incompleteness of the illusion was retained
because it was what I sought compositionally: an image of the
not-quite trombone. To manipulate further the illusion, a “noisy
trombone” extension was made to the basic model. Pink noise
is fed through a comb resonator, implemented as a bank of
individual resonators, whose Q can be varied to give a tone
from nearly-unpitched to strongly focused in pitch, with a
spectral envelope close to that of the sawtooth. When the tone is
most focused, the noise source is crossfaded to the pure
sawtooth. Parameters are mapped to give subjectively smooth
transformation from noisy to pure in a single control variable.
Table 1. The five phases of "Dream".
P Mapping of slide position to pitch
behaviour.
Automation
1 Slide locked in 1 st position.
Trombone solo.
Trombonist joins for Phase 2.
Emergence from noise
to resonance to
trombone-tone. Bb
horn-call figures,
initially three low
notes, expanding to
five. The tone returns
gradually to noise.
2 Fundamental moves in discrete
semitone steps. New pitch takes
effect at the start of the next note to
be sounded.
Tone re-focuses. Range
gradually expands to
seven notes of the
series.
3 Fundamental moves in discrete
semitone steps, but pitch changes
straight away, in the middle of any
note already sounding.
Tone abruptly changes
to noise. Tempo
becomes more brisk.
4 Pitch-control becomes continuous:
slide to any fundamental in the Bb –
E range, and not just tempered
semitones.
Noise becomes
abruptly darker, then
re-forms into
trombone-tone.
5 Tessitura also responds to the slide
position. If the slide spends more
time in positions 1–3, the tessitura
drifts towards upper overtones. If the
slide spends more time in positions
4–6 (–7), the tessitura drifts down
towards the pedal range.
The Trombone button has an effect:
while pressed, the pitch moves
rapidly down towards the pedals;
only shorter notes are played; and
there are no rests in the eMouth
phrases. Intended for the end of
Phase 5, but may be used earlier if
desired.
Note-speed accelerates.
A continuous rushing
noise gradually fades
in.
5.2 Music and Mappings
The opening section of Rouse  is called “Dream” and has five
phases. At the start, the trombone is set on stage, bell facing the
audience, and the player sits unobtrusively upstage. The player
takes up the instrument for Phase 2. Throughout, the “note”
information to the eMouth is an algorithmically generated
cadenza exploring horn-call figures. The trombone
automatically plays notes up and down an overtone series
(including the pedal tone), and the uSlide determines which
series is used. For slide positions 1 – 7, the fundamental is Bb –
E (descending), just as in normal playing. Position 7 also acts as
trigger for the transition to the next dream-phase. The visual
component of reaching full extension may be theatricalized or
underplayed. The effective resolution of the uSlide control
evolves through successive phases, as do the note-speed and
range of the algorithmic cadenza, and trajectories automated
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
361
between noisy and pure tone. Table 1 summarizes the
behaviours. The score guides the trombonist through “an
improvisation within the strange dreamworld of the not-quite-
trombone”, moving from calm to frenetic.
5.3 Player and Audience
The sensory feedback loop from the trombonist’s action – the
uSlide selection of pitch-series – is incompletely closed because
a heard pitch may arise from different series. The player can
draw on practised knowledge, (pre-)setting the slide intuitively
for a desired pitch-set. However, the controlled-random detail
of pitch and rhythm, the progression of the slide mapping from
under- to over-determined, and the programmed trajectories in
texture, tend to undermine this security. The player has to
balance the attempt at fine control with the management of
larger-scale momentum. For the audience, the fact of the
player’s control is apparent, but its limits and frustrations are
also suggested. The ambiguity and the partial redundancy of the
player help set the dramatic intent of the dreamworld.
6. THE eMUTE
My initial idea for a new mute was to create a device with
electronically-variable frequency dependence in its muting
effect. Experiments with small loudspeakers in the trombone
bell led to a different discovery, which became the core of the
eMute. The eMute is a hand-held device build around a
loudspeaker driver and fed by a variant of the simple synthetic
trombone model. Because the driver has no housing, the sound
heard from the mute is quiet compared to that from the
trombone yet, with the trombone acting in reverse as an “ear
trumpet”, exerts a strong effect on the player’s embouchure. If
the played and eMute pitches differ,  strong pulsation is heard
in the played tone corresponding to the beat frequency, and this
beat is closely felt through the embouchure.
Embouchure tracking has been investigated as a means of
electronic control [6], and breath control has appeared in
several commercial products. With the eMute, the effect is
rather reversed. The embouchure provides haptic sensitivity to
the electroacoustic intervention, while continuing its normal
purpose of acoustic control. This facilitates, with a nearly
normal playing technique, fine control of the beat-interval from
unison through microtonal to large. Coupled with a quasi-
intuitive manipulation of the eMute pitch, this proved a rich
space for contemplative improvisation; and, with the eMute
driven programmatically, for scored materials.
6.1 Hardware
A large driver is preferred for a strong acoustic effect, and the
driver must also withstand induced vibrations from the blown
trombone. However, the assembly must be light enough to be
held in the hand and operated like a plunger mute, without
fatigue, because this player-adjustment is essential to the
improvisatory control. The driver model chosen for the
prototype is a mid-range/woofer with a 12cm diaphragm and
compact magnet assembly. The paper diaphragm is not ideal,
because water droplets can be propelled out of the trombone
bell; but it has so far withstood extended sessions without harm.
A glued surround cut from 5mm foamboard matches the outer
diameter (18cm) to that of a metal plunger mute favoured by
Jeffery, and provides non-abrasive and circular contact with the
instrument bell. The assembly balances in the hand, and a push
switch (labelled eMute ) is mounted at a convenient position for
the player’s fingers. A tethered cable connects the driver to the
spare channel of the hi-fi amplifier, and the switch to a hacked
USB game controller serving as computer interface. The eMute
prototype is shown in Figure 5 and Figure 6.
Figure 5. eMute. The white foamboard surround has a
circular cutout matching the inner diameter of the frame.
Figure 6. eMute in use.
6.2 Control mapping
Real-time change of the eMute pitch is by manipulation of slide
position and the eMute  button, using a click-drag metaphor
modelled on the computer mouse. Table 2 summarizes the
actions. eMute pitch changes, though quiet, are sometimes
audible to the audience, but this is absorbed into the
improvisation.
6.3 An eMute context: “respiration”
The second section of Rouse  is called “Deep Sleep”, an
extended improvisation with the eMute. For the first time,
sound is heard from two playback monitors, placed discreetly in
the near stage-space of the player. Within the imagined world
of the piece, these create a “respiration field” extending the
body. In this section, the monitors quietly play a shifting
overtone field related to the eMute pitch.
A synthesis engine periodically triggers overlapping sine-tone
voices each with a slow attack-release envelope. The frequency
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
362
of each tone is a controlled-random exact multiple of the
current eMute frequency, whether or not the eMute is currently
sounding. At the start, the eMute pitch is preset but the device
itself is silent. Overtones sound while the player changes from
eMouth to mouthpiece and takes up the eMute. As the eMute
pitch subsequently changes, new overtone triggers relate always
to the current pitch. The result is a disembodied sound-bed with
no abrupt transitions. Yet the overtone field always suggests,
probably unconsciously for the audience,6 the eMute pitch and
hence anchors the blown pitch: there is a “rightness” to the
played pitches.
There are three further influences on the overtone field. Patterns
of rapid slide movement (whether or not they are changing the
eMute pitch, and whether or not the instrument or eMute are
sounding) accelerate the synthesis retriggering to produce
flurries in the overtones. Over time, the tessitura of the field
migrates. Lastly, once the trombone begins playing, a small
random frequency deviation is added to each sine voice, less
than or equal to a maximum that gradually increases from zero.
This gradually increases the likelihood and intensity of beats
perceived in the respiration field, a mirror of those created by
the trombone and eMute.
Table 2. eMute control mappings.
single-click
Toggle the eMute on/off (i.e. sounding / non-sounding).
If the eMute is “off”, the actions below still change the (silent) pitch.
If “on”, the change is heard immediately.
single-click-drag
Slide moves the eMute pitch up/down the present overtone series (as
performed by embouchure in normal playing). Motion is relative to
the initial pitch when eMute  is pressed.
Example: the eMute pitch is currently in the pedal range. Move the
slide to 7th position; click and hold eMute  while bringing the slide
into 1st position; release eMute . The eMute pitch will ripple up to the
7th harmonic. To raise it further, repeat (go to 7th, click-drag
upwards, release).
double-click-drag
Change the fundamental pitch for the eMute, according to the slide
position when the second click on eMute  is released. Slide positions
1 – 7 give fundamentals Bb – E, “as normal”.
A quick double-click gives near-immediate pitch change.
If the button is held  –  click-release-press-hold-release  –  the pitch
makes a glissando. The duration of the gliss is equal to the hold time,
and begins at the final button release.
You can play normally at the same time as changing the eMute pitch.
7. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE PLANS
The systems described above were developed for a particular
composition, Rouse. Control mappings here have an important
role in specifying the musical intent and result, by defining an
improvisatory space. Choices within this space are further
conditioned by composed indications in the score. The network
of  interactions in the trombone-trombonist-electronics system
involves various different pathways. The electro-acoustic
interventions set up the dramatic shape of Rouse, which moves
from a disembodied, electronically mediated and improvisatory
                                                                   
6 The perceptual mechanism infers a fundamental pitch [11],
though the effect is subtle here.
starting point in “Dream” and “Deep Sleep” to an acoustic and
fully-scored ending via (not described here) three further
sections, “Half World”, “Snooze”, and “Rouse”. I welcome
enquiries from interested performers!
The electro-acoustic systems have the potential for other
applications and for evolution. The uSlide system offers another
option in the range of techniques for ultrasonic distance
measurement. The eMouth may be strongly bound to Rouse by
its visual theatre, but future plans include a higher sound level,
matching of excitation to acoustic-system spectrum, and many
possibilities for emulation and dissolution of the trombone tone;
hence, perhaps, setting new allusive contexts. The eMute/uSlide
system can be made self-standing as a tool purely for
improvisation. A line of exploration for the eMute is to use the
transducer simultaneously as driver and as microphone, to
investigate muting and synthesis behaviours steered by the
trombone’s acoustic output. eMouth and eMute may be readily
adapted to other brass instruments, perhaps in ensemble.
8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
My thanks to Hilary Jeffery for the invitation to make this
piece, for supplying the mouthpiece used for the prototype
eMouth, and for his patience, skill and musical insights in our
experiments and rehearsal.
9. REFERENCES
[1] http://www.mti.dmu.ac.uk/~jrich/kreepa/tromb.html
[2] http://www.sara.uea.ac.uk/?work&id=2450
[3] http://www.phys.unsw.edu.au/~jw/brassacoustics.html
[4] Bate, P. The trumpet and trombone : an outline of their
history, development and construction, 2nd ed. E. Benn,
London, 1978.
[5] Collins, N. Low Brass: The Evolution of Trombone-
Propelled Electronics. In Leonardo Music Journal, 1
(1991), 41-44.
[6] da Silva, A., Wanderley, M., and Scavone, G. On the Use
of Flute Air Jet as A Musical Control Variable. In
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New
Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver,
BC, Canada, 105-108.
[7] Dempster, S. The modern trombone: a definition of its
idioms. UC Press, Berkeley/London, 1979.
[8] Farwell, N. J. being what I am, doing what I do: manifesto
of a composer. PhD Thesis, University of East Anglia,
Norwich, UK, 2001, 131-133.
[9] Gregory, R. The Trombone. The Instrument and its Music.
Faber, London, 1973.
[10] Kleinhammer, E. The Art of Trombone Playing. Summy-
Birchard, Evanston, IL, 1963.
[11] Pierce, J. Introduction to Pitch Perception. In Cook, P.R.
Music, Cognition, and Computerized Sound, MIT Press,
MA, 2001, 58-63.
[12] Taelman, J.  A low-cost sonar for unobtrusive man-
machine interfacing. In Proceedings of the 2002
International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical
Expression (NIME02), Dublin, 92-95.
[13] Wick, D. Trombone Technique, 2nd ed. OUP, Oxford,
1984.
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
363