Minimally Invasive Gesture Sensing 
Interface (MIGSI) for Trumpet
Sarah Reid, Ryan Gaston,, Colin Honigman, Ajay Kapur  
California Institute of the Arts  
Valencia, California  
sarahreid@alum.calarts.edu, ryangaston@alum.calarts.edu  
chonigman@calarts.edu, akapur@calarts.edu 
ABSTRACT 
This paper describes the design of a Minimally Invasive 
Gesture Sensing Interface (MIGSI) for trumpet. The interface 
attaches to any B-flat or C trumpet and requires no permanent 
modifications to the host-instrument. It was designed first and 
foremost with accessibility in mind—an approach that is 
uncommon in augmented instrument design—and seeks to 
strike a balance between minimal design and robust control. 
MIGSI uses sensor technology to capture gestural data such as 
valve displacement, hand tension, and instrument position, to 
offer extended control and expressivity to trumpet players. 
Several streams of continuous data are transmitted wirelessly 
from MIGSI to the receiving computer, where MIGSI Mapping 
application (a simple graphical user interface) parses the 
incoming data into individually accessible variables. It is our 
hope that MIGSI will be adopted by trumpet players and 
composers, and that over time a new body of repertoire for the 
augmented trumpet will emerge. 
Author Keywords
Augmented trumpet; hyperinstrument; minimally invasive; 
gesture sensing; arduino; force sensing resistor; interface for 
improvisation 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation] Interface Design– 
Prototyping, I.2.9 [Artificial Intelligence] Robotics–Sensors, H.5.5 
[Information Interfaces and Presentation] Sound and Music 
Computing. 
1.  INTRODUCTION 
The augmentation of acoustic instruments has tremendous 
potential to expand the creative limits of musical composition 
and performance practice. Researchers and music technologists 
have been compelled by the idea of electronically augmenting 
instruments for numerous years, resulting in exciting 
technological developments and a growing body of literature. 
Certain music technologists such as Perry Cook, among others, 
have looked beyond the scope of traditional musical 
instruments by turning every day objects such as coffee cups 
and salt shakers into augmented gestural controllers[2]. These 
controllers, while quite simple in design and in function, 
respond to gestural input in real time to create interesting pieces 
of music.  
Miranda and Wanderly[12] break down the concept of a 
gestural controller into four general categories:  
1. Augmented Musical Instruments : acoustic instruments 
augmented by the use of various sensors;  
2. Instrument-Like Gestural Controllers : modeled after 
acoustic instruments, with the goal of completely 
reproducing original features;  
3. Instrument-Inspired Gestural Controllers : inspired by 
pre-existing instruments, but do not try to reproduce them 
exactly; and  
4. Alternate Gestural Controllers : which do not bear a 
resemblance to pre-existing instruments. 
This paper focuses on the Augmented Musical Instrument  
category, and presents a new design for the augmentation of an 
acoustic trumpet. Augmented instruments—also referred to as 
hyper, hybrid, meta, or extended instruments—can be further 
defined as acoustic instruments that have had digital sensors 
strategically attached to them, with the purpose of collecting 
performative and gestural data, as well as providing the 
performer with extended digital control[7].  
Although research and development in this field had begun 
years earlier, the term hyperinstrument was first formally 
introduced by Tod Machover in 1987[10]. In his writing, 
Machover stated that he believed hyperinstruments would 
become the “instruments of the future”, and that they would 
positively impact the development of music by giving 
musicians—both professional and amateur—tools through 
which they could explore their full creative and expressive 
potential. Examples of early hyperinstruments are the 
Metasaxophone[1], Hypercello [10], the Hyper-Flute[15], and 
the Cook/Morrill trumpet controller[3], among others. This type 
of instrument was designed to provide musicians with a deeper 
level of possible interactions, allowing them to not only 
produce individual notes or melodies, but also to trigger and 
manipulate additional sounds that exist beyond the acoustic and 
technical capabilities of their instrument[11]. 
However, despite the fact that hyperinstruments have the 
potential to enhance performance to such a degree, their 
adoption by musicians other than the original creators has been 
minimal and idiosyncratic. Generally speaking, most new 
interfaces for musical expression are created expressly for the 
creator[11], which suggests that concerns for accessibility may 
simply have not been highly considered in the design process. 
Furthermore, Jenkins, et al. highlights the fact that 
hyperinstruments are expensive and difficult to replicate, 
frequently require permanent modifications to the host-
instrument, and often require significant technical expertise for 
maintenance and ongoing operation—all factors which could 
certainly pose a challenge for adoptability[7]. 
419
This paper describes the design of a Minimally Invasive 
Gesture Sensing Interface (MIGSI) for trumpet. In this paper 
we will present: 
• A history of augmented trumpet controllers, detailing 
different approaches and designs. 
• Discussion of hyperinstrument design ideals centered 
around adoptability. 
• The creation of a new gesture-sensing interface for 
trumpet. 
• The creation of a standalone application for mapping, 
monitoring, and personalization of sensor data. 
• A description of MIGSI being used in live performance. 
2.  RELATED WORK 
The trumpet controller built by Perry Cook and Dexter 
Morrill[3] used sensors on the valves, mouthpiece, and bell for 
pitch detection and extended computer control. Although one of 
the initial musical applications of the Cook/Morrill trumpet was 
unfortunately deemed a “miserable failure”[2], this 
revolutionary project laid the groundwork for the development 
of numerous new musical interfaces, and inspired many others 
to explore the possibilities of trumpet augmentation.  
In the years that followed the pioneering work of Cook and 
Morrill, many significant contributions were made to the field 
of trumpet augmentation. Well known examples include Ben 
Neill’s Mutantrumpet[13], the Meta-Trumpet[6] created by Bert 
Bongers and Jonathan Impett, and Hans Leeuw’s 
Electrumpet[9].  
The Mutantrumpet originated as an acoustic instrument that 
combined parts of three trumpets and a trombone into one 
hybrid instrument. In the mid 1980’s, electronics were added to 
the instrument in collaboration with Robert Moog, which were 
then refined by Neill in subsequent years[13]. The 
Mutantrumpet is performed on by its creator Ben Neill, 
however it has not been widely adopted by other trumpeters, 
likely due to the extensive modifications required and the 
expense of recreating the instrument[7]. 
The Meta-Trumpet, created by Bongers and Impett, employs 
magnetic “Hall Effect” sensors permanently affixed to the 
bottom of each valve piston, numerous buttons, switches, and 
pressure sensors, as well as a number of ultrasound sensors and 
an accelerometer on the bell of the trumpet. This instrument 
also requires permanent modifications to the host-instrument. 
Hans Leeuw created the Electrumpet, a wireless hybrid 
instrument that does not require direct destructive modification 
of the original instrument. The Electrumpet employs an array of 
buttons, knobs, a second mouthpiece with breath control, an 
infrared emitter/detector placed in the bell, and a series of other 
touch-activated sensors. This instrument also contains facilities 
for sonic analysis and re-synthesis when used in conjunction  
with external microphones and a software of Leeuw’s creation. 
Leeuw continues to develop and perform with the instrument. 
While the technology is removable, it does not lend itself to 
frequent installation/removal , due to the complexity and 
quantity of components.  
MIGSI is notably distinct from the above augmented 
trumpets due to the fact that it was designed to be minimally 
invasive, easily removable, and readily adoptable by 
experienced trumpet players. Much like a mute, MIGSI can 
become a part of a trumpeters toolkit—something that can be 
attached to the performer’s personal instrument to give them 
extended musical control and expressivity, without impeding 
playability or quality of sound.  
3.  MOTIV ATION AND DESIGN 
Our primary goal was to design an augmented trumpet that 
could be easily adopted by expert trumpet players (who are not 
necessarily expert technologists), for both composed and 
improvised music. This means that accessibility and playability 
are fundamental to the design. An important distinction to make 
is that in this context “playability” does not exclusively refer to 
ease or simplicity of playing, but rather to having a full 
spectrum of musical and expressive control, just as an expert 
musician would expect from their regular instrument. It is not 
enough to build an instrument that can simply play notes. There 
must be enough fine-grained control that the notes can be 
played expressively, with subtle inflections and changes to 
timbre, intensity, taper, and articulation[11]. 
Our design allows us to take advantage of a professional 
trumpet player’s years of training and experience by capturing 
physical gestures that are inherent to trumpet technique. 
Furthering this point is Cook’s design principle that “Copying 
an instrument is dumb, leveraging expert technique is 
smart”[2]. As lifelong trumpet players ourselves, our approach 
was to build a flexible yet minimal interface, through which the 
quality of sound production, range of motion, and overall 
instrument functionality are not impeded. 
3.1  Design Considerations
Our approach was inspired largely by the recently developed 
Easily Removable Optical Sensing System  (EROSS) for 
trumpet[7]. EROSS is unique among the other augmented 
trumpets referenced in this paper, insofar that it was not 
designed for a specific trumpet player or musical application, 
but rather as the beginnings of an exploration into a minimal, 
easily removable, user-accessible trumpet interface. To date, 
there is only a small body of literature which discusses the 
accessibility and adoptability of augmented trumpets[18][7]
[17]. It is our hope to be able to bring more awareness to this 
field, and to encourage musicians and music technologists to 
consider these concepts in their designs. 
Figure 1. Preliminary design rendering of MIGSI. The 1000 mAh battery and two Force Sensing 
Resistors are housed inside of the trumpet’s hand guard, which is not illustrated here. 
420
The following criteria formed the basis for the design of 
MIGSI: 
• The technology is easy to attach and remove, much like 
inserting a trumpet mute. 
• No damage or permanent modification is required to the 
host trumpet.  
• The interface does not impede instrument playability or 
discourage use of unconventional and extended techniques 
(extended techniques are methods for producing non-
traditional sounds, such as pressing a valve down only half-
way or singing and playing at the same time[19]).  
• The interface is minimal enough not to impact the quality 
of acoustic sound production or the trumpet’s functionality, 
and is familiar enough not to interfere with the performer’s 
ability to play the instrument 
3.1.1  Physical Considerations 
Similar to EROSS, MIGSI has discreet optical sensors that 
capture a stream of continuous data from each of the trumpet’s 
three valves. A similar optical sensing technique for trumpet has 
been proposed as part of a project at Cornell University[5], 
however it was used to sense binary, or “open” and “closed” 
states, rather than continuous control. While in traditional and 
classical trumpet playing valves are predominantly used in a 
binary fashion, there is a substantial—and continuously 
expanding—area of practice in which throttling, or half-valve 
playing, is prevalent[19][18]. Being able to utilize all of the 
microtonal fluctuations and subtle changes to timbre that result 
from half-valve playing is an important part of contemporary 
trumpet technique. Our design was therefore developed in order 
to leverage this technique by capturing continuous rather than 
discrete valve data.   
EROSS is an extremely minimal interface, which uses 
nothing but the optical sensors beneath each valve. Although 
compellingly simple, this approach poses some challenges 
when it comes to playability. The valves on a trumpet are 
necessarily operational components, meaning that in order to 
change pitches or to play a musical passage, they must be 
pressed or released in some configuration. For a composer or 
improvisor this may be very limiting. If, for example, every 
time valve combination “1 & 2” was pressed down, “X” 
happened, and every time “2” was pressed, “Y” would occur, 
one might find themselves feeling the need to choose between 
making functional decisions or musical ones. 
The approach that we adopted to overcome this issue was to 
leverage the unused surface area of the interface to add more 
levels of control that could be used independently from playing 
the trumpet. By adding sensors that capture hand tension and 
instrument position in addition to the optical sensors, the 
performer gains valuable expressive control; now they have the 
ability to gradually introduce the synthesized sound material 
triggered by the valve movement, to create subtle and nuanced 
interactions with the computer, or to transition between 
different states or modes. In the original designs, the 
accelerometer was placed on the bell of the trumpet, similar to 
the Meta-Trumpet[6], however this was later reconsidered in 
favor of a smaller overall footprint. In the later iteration the 
sensor was placed just beneath the optical sensors. Figure 1 is a 
computer generated mockup that shows MIGSI’s physical 
layout and sensor placement. 
MIGSI is more multifaceted than the EROSS in terms of 
hardware and sensing capabilities, yet it is just as minimal in 
terms of design footprint. In fact, a direct contribution of our 
work to EROSS is the repurposing of unused space on the 
trumpet’s hand guard—which is used in their designs to help 
secure the optical sensors to the trumpet—to also house the 
battery. EROSS used two AAA batteries, which were mounted 
beneath the optical sensing system, below the valve casing. 
Switching the AAA batteries out for a thinner 1000mAh LiPo 
and adding a discreet pocket on the inside of the hand guard 
minimizes the impact of the optical sensing system. Because the 
LiPo batteries are thin and flat, there is no discernible difference 
to the trumpet player when the battery is inserted into the 
pocket.  
MIGSI also contains force sensitive surfaces in the hand 
guard, allowing us to gain additional gestural control without 
increasing the size or physical impact of the interface. All 
connecting wires from these sensors are contained inside the 
hand guard. The rest of the electronics are contained in a small 
area beneath the instrument’s valve casing and therefore do not 
physically impede normal playing. The electronic compartment 
is directly attached to a silicone-lined bracket, a small box 
whose inner dimensions closely match those of the valve 
casing’s exterior. The entire array of electronics is thereby held 
in place with the slight amount of tension/friction provided 
from the contact of this silicone-lined bracket with the metal of 
the valve casing itself (see Figure 2). There are no mechanical 
components, latching mechanisms, or magnets involved. The 
electronics securely remain in place during extended use and 
can be attached to and removed from the valve casing as easily 
as a mute is attached to and removed from the instrument’s bell. 
Careful consideration was given to using materials that would 
not scratch or damage the trumpet in any way, even after 
prolonged and/or repeated use. 
3.1.2  Cognitive Considerations 
Although not the primary focus of this paper, it is important to 
consider factors such as cognitive load and the performer’s 
relationship with his/her instrument, also referred to as their 
embodied relationship[14]. Moreover, we believe that it is also 
beneficial to consider the engagement of the audience members 
in addition to the performer. There is a lot we can learn from the 
people who are watching, listening to, and experiencing these 
performances from the outside.  
In his design principles, Cook states that “Some players have 
spare bandwidth, some do not”[2] and also that “Trumpet 
players lie squarely in the ‘some players have spare bandwidth’ 
category”[2]. While we feel that it is important to focus on a 
minimal design in the interest of accessibility, it seems there is a 
necessary balance to be struck between minimality and 
expressive capability, or playability. In order for the performer 
to feel engaged and satisfied with the music they are playing, 
they should have full expressive control over their instrument. 
Jenkins et al. express concern that requiring a trumpet player to 
interact with controllers which are beyond their learned 
technique may result in a cognitive load similar to trying to play 
two instruments at once[7]. However, not giving the performer 
enough control can also have adverse effects. Our approach was 
to carefully consider which sensors were to be used, and to 
select ones that could be utilized without impeding normal 
playing technique. Numerous researchers have noted that 
trumpets lend themselves to the addition of sensors more than 
other instruments[2][18][9]. During initial pilot testing by three 
Figure 2. MIGSI prototype.
421
players, the addition of the extra sensors to supplement the 
control of the optical sensors proved successful in performance 
and as reported, did not overload the trumpet players’ 
“bandwidth”. We look forward to conducting a more in-depth 
evaluation with a larger sample of performers. 
MIGSI is a fully wireless system. The reasoning behind this 
decision was twofold. Firstly, we wanted to give the performer 
as much freedom to move about the stage and to interact with 
other performers as possible. Knowing that the trumpet player 
would likely be changing the position of their instrument by 
raising and lowering the bell or tilting from side to side, we also 
wanted to minimize the chance of any wires being snagged or 
tripped over. Secondly, we wanted to give the performer the 
option of not having an onstage computer workstation. Since 
there is no strict need to interact directly with the computer 
during the course of a performance, it would just sit idle and 
unused. It is possible that this could cause an unnecessary 
distraction or source of confusion for the audience members, 
causing them to focus more on the technology and "how it 
works" than on the music itself[16]. 
4.  HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION 
The current MIGSI prototype is built around the Arduino Fio 
development board,  selected for the accessibility of its 1
programming, its reasonable number of analog inputs, its 
comparatively small footprint, and its intended use as a wireless 
microcontroller. Using the built-in scheme of integration for the 
Digi XBee radio module,  the Fio can transmit sensory data to 2
any computer equipped with the appropriate XBee radio 
receiver USB dongle. Though range will vary based on 
location, our tests have shown that line-of-sight and non-line-
of-sight communication are achievable at distances in excess of 
50 meters. This should be sufficient for most typical uses, and 
in situations where XBee range is insufficient, data may be 
easily rebroadcast via User Datagram Protocol (UDP) over 
WiFi from the computer to which the XBee receiver is attached. 
Refer to Figure 3 for hardware block diagram. 
4.1  Optical Sensors 
The optical valve sensors are largely borrowed in concept and 
design from EROSS. Once implemented, the valves themselves 
become sources of continuous data. To a trained trumpeter these 
become a particularly fast, responsive, and controllable source 
of data. 
A Vishay Semiconductors VCNL4000  infrared emitter/3
detector placed beneath each valve generates continuous data 
related to the valve’s current displacement. As noted by Jenkins 
et al.[7], despite the VCNL4000 being an I 2C device it is fixed 
by Vishay at a set address, so groups of these sensors cannot act 
as individually addressable slave nodes as would be the case in 
typical I2C implementation. In addition to this complication, the 
Arduino Fio has only one input capable of communicating with 
I2C sensors, so simply reading them at different inputs on this 
microcontroller is not possible. Instead, a multiplexing circuit is 
implemented in order to rapidly read and store data from each 
sensor in sequence.  
In the EROSS design, this task was handled utilizing an I 2C-
based multiplexer, the Texas Instruments PCA9544A . In our 4
own tests, however, we discovered that equally useful results 
can be had using a simple analog multiplexer. The current 
MIGSI prototype accomplishes this task by way of a Texas 
Instruments CD4052BE  2x4-channel multiplexer. 5
The I 2C serial clock (SCL) line is multiplied from the 
microcontroller and attached directly to each sensor while the 
serial data (SDA) line of each sensor is connected to the inputs 
of the CD4052BE. Three digital outputs from the Fio are 
assigned to the the multiplexer’s logic inputs and activated in 
such a way that it becomes a sequential switch, with the Fio 
taking readings as it switches between the sensors in series. 
These readings are taken mere milliseconds apart, so the 
resulting data is convincingly continuous.  
The CD4052BE analog multiplexer was selected for its easy 
programmability, low cost, and accessibility for prototyping. 
Because it is readily available in a Parallel Dual In-Line (PDIP) 
through-hole packaging, it can easily be used in the process of 
breadboarding and prototyping without the need for specialized 
tools for Surface Mount Device (SMD) soldering. Currently, the 
PCA9544A multiplexer used in the EROSS design is 
exclusively available as an SMD component . This is a further 
contribution of our work, considering that not everyone has the 
means necessary to work with SMD components. 
Despite the VCNL4000’s 16-bit resolution (yielding 65,535 
individual steps across the sensor’s range), the usable range 
yielded within the distance from the bottom of the trumpet’s 
valves in their open and closed states is typically less than 7,000 
individual steps. Of course, this resolution is still perfectly 
usable for most musical applications.  
It is also worth noting that the scaling of these sensors is 
inherently logarithmic, with less change in value per millimeter 
as the valve approaches the sensor. This can be scaled as needed 
in the MIGSI Mapping application on the receiving computer 
(see 5. Software Implementation).  
A further issue with this optical sensing system is that the 
data output range of each sensor varies considerably from 
trumpet to trumpet. The length of the valve casing varies 
between different trumpet brands, models, etc., so the practical 
output range of these sensors varies accordingly. However, a 
calibration tool in the MIGSI Mapping application solves this 
problem, allowing for quick and easy rescaling when switching 
between trumpets. As a result, music written for MIGSI is 
playable on any standard B-flat or C trumpet. 
4.2  Accelerometer 
Basic instrument orientation is detected using an Analog 
Devices ADXL335  accelerometer. The ADXL335 provides 6
readings for pitch (vertical instrument angle relative to ground) 
and roll (left and right instrument tilt). The sensor is located 
directly below the trumpet valve casing parallel with the 
trumpet itself so that the pitch output is at ¼ its potential 
capacity (90º) and the left and right tilt readouts are opposite 
(180º and 0º respectively) in the typical resting position.  
 https://www.arduino.cc/ 1
 http://www.digi.com/lp/xbee/2
 http://www.vishay.com/docs/83372/vcnl4000.pdf3
 http://www.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/pca9544a.pdf4
 http://www.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/cd4051b.pdf5
 http://www.analog.com/media/en/technical-documentation/data-sheets/ADXL335.pdf6
Figure 3. Simple block diagram for MIGSI prototype
422
As with the optical sensors, the values yielded from the 
accelerometer may be scaled as desired in the MIGSI Mapping  
application on the receiving computer. Conversion of these 
continuous values into multi-level momentary and latching 
switches opens up the possibility of creating a multitude of 
specific physical “behavior zones,” so that both local and global 
changes in the computer’s behavior become accessible by the 
player simply altering his/her posture. The MIGSI Mapping 
application contains facilities for mapping these “behavior 
zones”. 
4.3  Force Sensing Resistors 
Physical contact with the valve casing is detected by Force 
Sensing Resistors (FSRs) placed inside a hand guard at points 
that make contact with key parts of the instrument’s valve 
casing. Sensors placed near the locations where a player’s left 
hand thumb, index, and middle finger make contact with the 
trumpet are used as a source of continuous control. A trained 
trumpet player has a high degree of control of their hand tension 
in these areas, as the fingers that typically make contact here do 
so for entirely functional reasons: in conventional trumpet 
playing, the thumb is responsible for frequent manipulation of 
the first valve slide, while the index and middle finger provide 
support for the instrument’s weight and balance on the opposite 
side of the valve casing[19]. Careful placement of the sensors 
makes them accessible to these particularly well-suited fingers 
without impeding their normal functionality as instrument 
support and tuning control.  
However, not every musical style, instrument, or player 
promotes or uses precisely the same hand position. For greater 
flexibility and easier integration on any player’s instrument, 
future designs may include arrays of smaller sensors arranged in 
groups at key points of contact from the player’s left hand. This 
would allow for definable regions of the valve casing to be 
mapped and and averaged into individual variables for 
distribution from the MIGSI Mapping application, and would 
allow for greater personalization of this aspect of the interface. 
5.  SOFTWARE IMPLEMENTATION 
The several streams of data transmitted by the MIGSI hardware 
are sent to the receiving computer via XBee radio receiver USB 
dongle. The MIGSI Mapping standalone application, developed 
in Max/MSP, provides a simple GUI for sensor calibration and 
visualization and modification of the received data (see Figure 
4). The calibration procedure allows for personalization of 
MIGSI’s physical response. Ability to monitor the incoming 
data aids in realtime debugging. 
Each incoming stream of data is assigned an OSC variable 
name, allowing all messages to maintain the original degree of 
resolution and to be easily utilized in any number of software 
environments. MIGSI does not inherently generate MIDI data, 
nor does the MIGSI Mapping standalone in its current form.  
We do not consider the lack of MIDI support to be a 
shortcoming. As noted by Impett[6], standard MIDI 
implementation is a bit “thorny” in communicating common 
practice technique from non-keyboard instruments. 
Additionally, no form of note detection is a goal in our design. 
We chose not to link the trumpet’s sounding pitch to any aspect 
of the systems MIGSI controls. We believe that this provides 
the artist greater creative freedom and control of the audience’s 
experience, nudging their focus away from the technology itself 
and toward the music it is used to create. 
The MIGSI Mapping application also contains support for 
data scaling and basic reformatting. Data ranges may be scaled 
as desired, and continuous data can be reformatted into a series 
of basic logic functions, including multi-level latching and 
momentary switches. OSC data is named and sent both before 
and after this scaling/reformatting process, so both the raw data 
and reformatted data may still be used as desired.  
Mapping configurations may be saved as presets. Presets are 
a global collection of all of the Mapping application’s internal 
variable data (scaling ranges, digital conversion thresholds, 
etc.), saved to the host computer in the form of JSON text files. 
Presets may be generated and altered either by manually 
adjusting these individual variable parameters or by editing the 
JSON file itself via the Mapping application GUI. 
6.  MIGSI IN LIVE PERFORMANCE 
MIGSI was premiered in May 2015 at the Digital Arts Expo 
hosted by California Institute of the Arts. Two different pieces 
were presented at the event: a solo improvisation titled “Before 
North”, and a telematic audio-visual composition in 
collaboration with Perry Cook called “Stockhausen by Proxy 
Syndrome”. During the improvisation, data was mapped in such 
a way that MIGSI became a spontaneous performative partner
—gestural data controlled timbre and the level of rhythmic 
activity of electronic sounds, and accelerometer data was used 
to spatialize the same material. In the piece with Perry Cook, 
MIGSI was mapped in part to generate visualizations such as 
score fragments and phonemes, as well as to manipulate 
graphics being transmitted from Cook’s performance location.   
These performances confirmed the functionality of the interface 
and established an exciting trajectory for future development 
and creative work. We have continued to develop additional 
mappings for improvised performance, which we look forward 
to sharing with the community in the near future (and after 
more thorough testing). 
7.  FUTURE WORK 
Now past the prototyping stage, MIGSI schematics are being 
drafted for the development of PCBs with little to no hand 
soldering required. Being that nearly all involved electronic 
Figure 4. Scaling and conversion module for the valves’ 
optical sensors from the MIGSI Mapping application.
423
components are available in various SMD packagings, a printed 
version of the circuit promises to be considerably more discreet 
than the already minimally invasive prototype. 
We plan to continue experimentation with grouping and 
placement of FSRs or other touch-sensitive surfaces along the 
valve casing. This hopefully will lead to a more natural use of 
left-hand control for the player. Additional hardware 
developments will include integration of a small number of 
buttons along the bottom of the interface, primarily for the 
purpose of enabling and disabling the interface and switching 
between stored scaling/distribution presets in the MIGSI 
Mapping application. 
New developments in the MIGSI Mapping application itself 
will include improved facilities for data smoothing, data 
response curve reshaping, and a more intuitive GUI for defining 
accelerometer-related “behavior zones.” We also hope to 
incorporate facilities for data recording into the MIGSI 
Mapping application itself, opening up the interface’s potential 
as a platform for pedagogical analysis of performance 
technique. 
MIGSI and the Mapping application are currently in the 
hands of several performers and composers. We are already 
collecting valuable feedback from these musicians in regards to 
the functionality of the hardware, software, and the new 
possibilities they are finding hidden within their already highly 
developed technique and practices. We are excited to continue 
to explore the trumpet’s creative potential and to rediscover 
exactly what that means. 
8.  CONCLUSIONS 
This paper presents a valuable contribution to the field of 
augmented instruments and gestural controllers. MIGSI is a 
Minimally Invasive Gesture Sensing Interface that can be 
attached to a trumpet as easily as inserting a mute. It requires no 
damaging modifications to the host-trumpet, is  fully wireless, 
and leverages familiar expert techniques rather than requiring 
interaction with controllers outside of the trumpet paradigm.  
One of the most unique and valuable aspects of MIGSI, is 
that it strikes a balance between minimal design and robust 
capabilities—the interface feels familiar and unobtrusive to a 
trumpet player, and yet is capable of offering a full range of 
expressive control. We believe that due to its minimal design 
and strong focus on accessibility, MIGSI has the potential to be 
adopted by trumpet players and composers in a more 
widespread manner than is typical of new interfaces for musical 
expression. Even though it is still in its initial stages, MIGSI has 
been used in multiple public performances and demonstration, 
with great success. We look forward to continuing our work in 
this field. 
9.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
Leonardo Jenkins for discussion in the early stages of design 
and for inspiration. Perry Cook for collaborating on one of 
MIGSI’s debut performances, “Stockhausen by Proxy 
Syndrome.” Ajay Kapur, Colin Honigman, and Rebecca 
Fiebrink for their encouragement and wisdom. Brian 
McWhorter for his ongoing support, and for inviting us to bring 
MIGSI into the UofO trumpet studio. 
10.  REFERENCES 
[1] M. Burtner. 2002. The metasaxophone:  concept,   
 implementation, and mapping strategies for  a new  
 computer music instrument. Organized Sound. 7(2):201–
 213. 
[2] P. Cook. 2001. Principles for designing computer  music 
 controllers. In Proceedings of the International Conference 
 New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME), 1–4. 
[3] P. Cook and D. Morrill. 1989. Hardware,    
 Software, and Compositional Tools for a Real-Time  
 Improvised Solo Trumpet Work. Center for Computer  
 Research in Music and Acoustics, Stanford    
 University. 
[4] P. Cook, D. Morrill, and J. O. Smith. 1993. A MIDI  
 Control and Performance System for Brass    
 Instruments. In Proceedings of the International   
 Computer Music Conference (ICMC). 
[5] T. Craig and B. Factor. Trumpet MIDI Controller.  
Retrieved on Sept 18, 2015 from https://
courses.cit.cornell.edu/ee476/FinalProjects/s2008/
twc22_bef23/twc22_bef23/index.html 
[6] J. Impett. 1994. A Meta-Trumpet(er). In    
 Proceedings of the International Computer Music  
 Conference (ICMC), 147–150. 
[7] L. Jenkins, W. Page, S. Trail, G. Tzanetakis, and P.  
 Driessen. 2013. An Easily Removable, wireless   
 Optical Sensing System (EROSS) for the trumpet. In  
 Proceedings of the International Conference New  
 Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME), 352–357. 
[8] J. E. Oliver La Rosa. 2008. To Un-Button:    
 Strategies in Computer Music Performance to   
 Incorporate the Body as Re-Mediator of Electronic  
 Sound . Master’s Thesis, University of California,  San  
 Diego, CA. 
[9] H. Leeuw. 2009. The electrumpet, a hybrid electro- 
 acoustic instrument. In Proceedings of the    
 International Conference New Interfaces for Musical  
 Expression (NIME), 7–12. 
[10] T. Machover. 1992. Hyperinstruments: A Progress  
 Report, 1987–1991.  MIT Media Laboratory.  
[11] R. Medeiros, F. Calegario, G. Cabral, and G.   
 Ramalho. 2014. Challenges in Designing New   
 Interfaces for Musical Expression. In Design, User  
 Experience, and Usability: Theories, Methods, and  
 Tools for Designing the User Experience. Aaron   
 Marcus (ed.). Springer International Publishing,   
 643–652. 
[12] E. Miranda and M. Wanderly. 2006. New Digital   
 Musical Instruments: Control and Interaction   
 Beyond the Keyboard . A-R Editions, Inc. 
[13] B. Neill and B. Jones. 2010. Posthorn. In    
 Proceedings of the 28th International Conference  
 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing  
 Systems (ACM), 3107–3112. 
[14] Garth Paine. 2013. New Musical Instrument Design  
 Considerations. In IEEE MultiMedia, vol. 20, no. 4, 76–
 84. 
[15] C. Palacio-Quintin. 2003. The hyper-flute. In   
 Proceedings of the International Conference New  
 Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME), 206–207. 
[16] S. Reid. 2014. Music and Augmented Reality:   
 Creating an Immersive Environment for Performers and 
 Audience Members. In Proceedings of the IEEE  Games, 
 Entertainment, and Media Conference (IEEE-GEM),  
 247–250. 
[17] C. Rinaldi, F. Battista, M. Carli, and L. Pomante.  2015. 
 Design of a Non-intrusive Augmented Trumpet , In Arts 
 and Technology: Lecture Notes of  the Institute for  
 Computer Sciences, Social Informatics, and    
 Telecommunications Engineering ,  Anthony Lewis Brooks, 
 Elif Ayiter, and Onur Yazicigil (eds.). Springer   
 International Publishing, 108–115. 
[18] J. Thibodeau. 2010. Trumpet Augmentation: Rebirth and 
 Symbiosis of an Acoustic Instrument . Master’s thesis,  
 McGill University, QC.  
[19] A. N. Tribuzi. 1992. Extended Trumpet Performance  
 Techniques. Master’s thesis, California State   
 University, Hayward, CA.
424