Interactive Music Studio : The Soloist 
 
Hyun-Soo Kim 
Platform team, Mobile Business 
Samsung Electronics 
416 Maetan-3dong 
Yeongtong-gu, Suwon-City, 
Gyeonggi-do, 443-742, Korea 
+82-31-301-9173 
Hyunsoo72.kim@samsung.com 
 
 
Je-Han Yoon 
Convergence team, R&D Center 
Samsung Electronics 
416 Maetan-3dong 
Yeongtong-gu, Suwon-City, 
Gyeonggi-do, 443-742, Korea 
+82-31-279-5558 
jehan.yoon@samsung.com 
 
 
Moon-Sik Jung 
UX team, Mobile Business 
Samsung Electronics 
416 Maetan-3dong 
Yeongtong-gu, Suwon-City, 
Gyeonggi-do, 443-742, Korea 
+82-2-2255-5442 
moonsik.jung@samsung.com 
 
ABSTRACT 
In this paper, we present and demonstrate Samsung’s new 
concept music creation engine and music composer application 
for mobile devices such as touch phones or MP3 players, 
‘Interactive Music Studio : the soloist’.   
Keywords 
Mobile device, music composer, pattern composing, MIDI 
1. INTRODUCTION 
We have developed a new concept music creation engine and 
composer application based on MIDI format, for mobile devices 
(such as mobile phones or MP3 players) at Samsung electronics.  
In this demo presentation, we will demonstrate its first 
implantation on Samsung’s Cubic37 (LCD size 3.7 inch) touch 
phone (next generation concept mobile phone not 
commercialized in the market yet.) 
2. The Interactive Music Studio Project 
The Interactive Music Studio Pr oject at Samsung has various 
music-related compone nts regarding advanced music specific 
functions and applications espe cially for mobile devices. The 
most exciting and interesting part of the project is considered to 
be the new concept music composer application, called ‘the 
soloist’. 
The soloist is composed of th ree independent user interface 
modes. That is, the solo performance (keyboard and handle 
based), the master setting mode and the pattern composing 
mode, which are described briefly as follows, 
3. User Interface Modes 
3.1 Solo Performance Mode (keyboard) 
The Solo Performance Mode is the first and most important 
mode that user plays his/her own melody using the chosen 
instrument, on top of the background music. (called ‘the 
template music’.) 
The background music is initially a recommended music 
template (based on the combination of different music pieces 
with several instruments at the same time). However, the 
Master setting and Pattern com posing mode is provided for the 
user to change any music style and instrument combination of 
his/her choice. 
 
Figure 1. The Solo performance Mode (keyboard). 
 
3.2 Solo Performance Mode (Handle) 
The Solo mode can be change to ‘the handle mode’, where the 
use can hold and drag or tab the handle and actually ‘draw the 
music’ (with various graphical effects provided for difference 
instruments/style). 
 
Figure 2. The Solo performance Mode (Handle). 
 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copi es of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME2010, 15-18th June, 2010, Sydney, Australia 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
444
3.3 Master Setting Mode 
Master Setting Mode is separa te mode for instrument/music 
genre/style/BPM/volume change. (Please refer to the Figure 3 
for the details.) 
3.4 Pattern Composing Mode 
Pattern composing mode is a mode  to turn on/off each part of 
the selected music instrument and style (as chosen from the 
Master Setting Mode). 
 
Figure 4. The Pattern Composing Mode. 
 
4. Additional Functions 
There are several additional functi ons that make ‘the soloist’ 
more interesting. 
For the solo performance, the motion (up/down tilting) of the 
mobile device can replace the melody creation based on the 
touch (although the default is set to be the touch-based mode) 
Not only the motion-based melody creation, but the music style 
recommendation and pattern compos ing can be replaced with 
‘shake’ motion of the mobile device. 
For example, if the user shake the mobile device fast, then the 
fast music style and template will be chosen at Master Setting 
Mode (on the other hand, slow shake means slow music). 
In case of the Pattern Composi ng Mode, when the user shakes 
the mobile device slow, small numb er of the music part will be 
turned on. (on the other hand, fast shake turns on more parts) 
Up Tilting           Down Tilting
 
Figure 5. Melody Creation based on the ‘Tilting’ Motion of 
the mobile device. 
 
 
Figure 6. Music recommendation and pattern composing 
based on ‘Shake’ Motion of the mobile device. 
Also, the created melody and the composed background music 
can be applied to various interesting audio effects (such as Echo, 
Crystal Hall or Live etc.), as shown below. 
 
Figure 7. The Sound Effect Mode on created music. 
Music genre/style/template/BPM is recommended based on the 
preview image of the camera  or  the photo stored at the user’s 
mobile device.  
 
Figure  8. Music recommendation using camera or photo 
 
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
445
The block diagram for the soft ware structure of the music 
composing and synthesizing engi ne (MIDI based) is shown 
below. 
 
Figure 9. The music composing and synthesizing engine. 
 
5. Conclusion 
In this demo presentation, we have presented and demonstrated 
our interactive music studio application, ‘The Soloist’. This is a 
novel concept application for mobile device with touch, motion 
and camera functions embedded.  The created music from this 
music creation application can be used as a ring-tone/alarm for 
the user’s mobile device or be shared with others based on any 
application store or various network connections. 
 
 
 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. The Master Setting Mode 
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
446