Using Haptics to Assist Performers in Making Gestures to a Musical Instrument
Edgar Berdahl
CCRMA
Stanford University
Stanford, CA, USA
G¨unter Niemeyer
Telerobotics Laboratory
Stanford University
Stanford, CA, USA
Julius O. Smith III
CCRMA
Stanford University
Stanford, CA, USA
Abstract
Haptic technology, providing force cues and creating a pro-
grammable physical instrument interface, can assist musi-
cians in making gestures. The ﬁnite reaction time of the
human motor control system implies that the execution of a
brief musical gesture does not rely on immediate feedback
from the senses, rather it is preprogrammed to some degree.
Consequently, we suggest designing relatively simple and
deterministic interfaces for providing haptic assistance.
In this paper, we consider the speciﬁc problem of assist-
ing a musician in selecting pitches from a continuous range.
We build on a prior study by O’Modhrain of the accuracy
of pitches selected by musicians on a Theremin-like haptic
interface. To improve the assistance, we augment the inter-
face with programmed detents so that the musician can feel
the locations of equal tempered pitches. Nevertheless, the
musician can still perform arbitrary pitch inﬂections such as
glissandi, falls, and scoops. We investigate various forms
of haptic detents, including ﬁxed detent levels and force-
sensitive detent levels. Preliminary results from a subject
test conﬁrm improved accuracy in pitch selection brought
about by detents.
Keywords: Haptic, detent, pitch selection, human motor
system, feedback control, response time, gravity well
1. Introduction
Haptics is an important application of feedback control to
musical instrument design. Kinesthetic haptic feedback can
alter the gestures made by musicians during a live perfor-
mance. In particular, it can assist musicians in making cer-
tain types of gestures. For example, Figure 1 depicts a cellist
assisted by two SensAbleTM PHANTOM R⃝ Desktop haptic
devices. 1 Each haptic device would exert forces on one end
1 PHANTOM, PHANTOM Desktop, SensAble, and SensAble Tech-
nologies, Inc. are trademarks or registered trademarks of SensAble Tech-
nologies, Inc.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists
requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee.
NIME09, June 3-6, 2009, Pittsburgh, PA
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Figure 1. Cellist assisted by two haptic devices
of the bow. By way of feedback control, the physical prop-
erties of the device could be changed and even non-physical
behaviors could be created, altering the way in which the
musician would interact with the bow.
The idealized conﬁguration shown in Figure 1 would be
rather involved, so we simplify it in our laboratory. We vir-
tualize the instrument, allowing the musician to interact with
it by way of a single haptic device [2]. Ahaptic musical
instrument consists of actuators that exert forces on the mu-
sician, sensors that measure the response of the musician,
and a programmable controller that determines appropriate
forces to exert on the musician. Figure 2 illustrates how
the musician is included in the feedback loop, allowing the
musician’s gestures to be controlled. The controller also
synthesizes sound signals in response to the way in which
the haptic musical instrument is played. We employ the
Model T PHANTOM desktop device because it has a rela-
tively large workspace and provides high resolution position
measurements. The end of the arm is attached to a thimble,
into which a musician can insert his or her index ﬁnger (see
Figure 3).
Because the haptic device is controlled by a digital feed-
back system, it can be programmed to behave like any of
a wide array of dynamical systems. For instance, it can be
programmed to behave like a physical acoustic instrument,
such as a bowed string instrument. On the other hand, it can
also be programmed to behave like an instrument with an
NIME 2009177
Figure 2. Musician playing a haptic musical instrument
Figure 3. Musician’s ﬁnger inserted into PHANTOM thimble
internal energy source, or it can be programmed to assist the
musician in some way, etc. Clearly haptic musical instru-
ment designers enjoy an amazing amount of freedom, and
for this very reason, we investigate some designs for assist-
ing musicians as we expect these designs to be especially
useful in practice.
2. Assisting the Human Motor System
Both closed-loop and open-loop control models provide dis-
tinct perspectives from which the human motor system can
be studied. Humans use closed-loop control for complet-
ing ﬁne tasks such as threading a needle, where the control
loop is closed around decision-making centers in the brain.
The sequence of actions is as follows: the human attempts
to move the end of the thread, waits for feedback from the
senses about the new position of the thread, attempts to re-
ﬁne the position of the thread, waits for sensory feedback
again, etc. The speed of closed-loop control of the human
motor system is affected by the reaction time (RT) of the
human motor system. The RT describes the time interval
from the sudden presentation of an unanticipated force sig-
nal to the beginning of the human motor response, as di-
rected by a signal returning from the brain [10]. Due to the
relatively long motor system RT of roughly 120ms-180ms,
the RT feedback mechanism is apparently not used for con-
trolling brief tasks, such as for playing trills at up to 20Hz
[7]. The reaction times for other modalities (auditory, vi-
sual, etc.) have similar durations, so they cannot be used to
signiﬁcantly speed up motor system responses either.
According to the open-loop controltheory of the human
motor system, once a human makes the decision to carry out
a brief movement, a motor program is called up, which se-
quentially issues commands to the muscles [10]. The way
in which the commands are issued may depend on feedback,
but the feedback in this loop is limited by the RT. There is
evidence that many fast portions of tasks involved in playing
a musical instrument, such as rapidly pressing a sequence
of keys, are governed primarily by open-loop control. For
instance, Schmidt discusses the “example of a skilled pi-
anist playing a piano with a broken key that could not be
depressed. As the pianist played a string of notes, the at-
tempts to press the broken key did not interrupt the series
of actions at all. In fact, only after the entire sequence was
completed did the individual notice and remark that the key
was broken” [10]. Since it took the pianist longer to notice
the broken key than the duration of a single note in the se-
quence, it seems likely that the pianist must have been play-
ing the broken key using some form of open-loop control.
Skilled typists [11] and telegraphers [1] are also believed
to use open-loop control for completing motor tasks rapidly
[7].
If an assistive haptic interface ever takes an unexpected
action too quickly, then a musician who uses some elements
of open-loop control will not be able to respond appropri-
ately, possibly making a mistake. Hence, we argue that an
assistive haptic interface should not take an action that the
musician does not expect, unless the interface takes the ac-
tion so slowly that the musician has time to react. In practi-
cal contexts, we recommend simply that anassistive haptic
interface be deterministic and relatively simple so that no
actions surprise the musician.We now shift gears slightly
to focus on a more speciﬁc problem.
3. Pitch Selection Problem Overview
A musical tone can be described as having a distinct pitch,
loudness, and timbre [15]. We study how haptic devices
can assist musicians in selecting pitches accurately. Con-
sider the different ways in which pitches are selected while
playing the piano versus playing the cello. The piano has
88 strings of ﬁxed length, so a pianist using standard play-
ing techniques can play only a discrete set of pitches. If the
strings are tuned consistently, then no matter which keys the
pianist presses, the performance will be approximately in
tune. In contrast, the length of a cello string can be adjusted
directly by the musician’s hand, meaning that a cellist can
play pitches over a continuous range. This freedom can be
troublesome for beginning cellists who might for example
wish to initially limit themselves to playing a discrete set of
pitches corresponding to a scale. In fact, this freedom can
also allow vocalists, trombonists, violinists, viola players,
string bass players, etc. to unintentionally play out of tune.
In a broad sense, we seek to combine the way that pitches
are selected on a piano and on a cello in order to make it
178
easy to play pitches accurately while still allowing arbitrary
continuous pitch inﬂections to be created. More speciﬁcally,
we consider using haptic feedback to improve the accuracy
with which a musician can select a pitch over a continu-
ous range. We design the haptic assistance to help guide
the musician to desirable pitches. Of course, musicians may
disagree over the meaning of the word desirable, so for sim-
plicity, we restrict ourselves to more traditional music and
the equal temperament tuning system. 2 Then given a scale,
only a discrete set of pitches are considered desirable. De-
spite the haptic assistance, the musician should still be able
to play pitch bends, glissandi, etc. to take advantage of the
additional ranges of expression afforded by continuous pitch
control.
4. Prior Work on Pitch Selection Problem
The Theremin electronic instrument, which was patented in
the United States in 1928, produces a harmonic tone as out-
put [12]. The pitch of the tone is controlled by the position
of one hand in free space, while the amplitude of the tone is
controlled by the position of the other hand. The Theremin
instrument provides no haptic feedback, and it is often in-
formally considered to be difﬁcult to play as it is non-trivial
for the musician to orient his or her hands in free space.
O’Modhrain studied the accuracy with which musicians
select pitches with a Theremin-like interface implemented
using a haptic device. She compared controlling pitch given
the complete absence of haptic feedback versus several kines-
thetic haptic feedback conditions such as a spring force, a
viscous damping force, and a constant force. In chapter 4
of her PhD thesis, she draws the conclusion that the “ex-
istence of force feedback in a computer-based instrument
marginally improves performance of a simple musical [pitch
selection] task” (p. 49) [7].
Besides Theremin-type interfaces, glove-based and other
continuous interfaces may lack signiﬁcant haptic feedback.
We generalize O’Modhrain’s conclusion by hypothesizing
that if a musical instrument does not provide any haptic
feedback at all, it will probably be more difﬁcult to play
accurately. We term this hypothesis the “Theremin hypothe-
sis. ”As a consequence, we recommend that musical instru-
ment designers incorporate haptic feedback into their instru-
ment designs.
We hypothesize further that speciﬁc kinds of active force
feedback assisting the musician in selecting desirable pitches
may be even more effective. This hypothesis is also sug-
gested by Moss’ and Cunitz’s work in which a speciﬁc kind
of haptic feedback pushes the musician’s ﬁnger toward the
notes of the chromatic scale; however, Moss and Cunitz do
not consider any other types of haptic feedback [4].
2 We acknowledge that the equal temperament tuning system is only
approximate [15]. Consequently, we choose pitch selection tasks difﬁcult
enough that tuning ambiguities are considerably smaller than task errors.
Figure 4. Force proﬁle F(y) and terrain height proﬁle h(y)
5. Simple Pitch-Controlled Instrument
We have strived to make our example instrument as sim-
ple and easy to play as possible. Although the PHANTOM
Model T can move in three dimensions, we restrict motion
of the thimble to a linear axis and simultaneously measure
pressure applied normal to this axis in the vertical direction.
For simplicity, we allow the musician to adjust only the pitch
of the sound. Due to the ﬁnite workspace size, the horizon-
tal positiony (see Figure 3) of the musician’s ﬁnger can vary
over about 20cm and is mapped to the logarithm of the pitch
of the musical instrument. This mapping allows the distance
between each pair of adjacent notes in the chromatic scale
to be about 0.75cm. Higher pitches are further to the right.
6. Assistive Haptic Feedback
We consider controllers that exert force in the lateral y-axis
as a function of the current and past y-positions of the thim-
ble (see Figure 3). Many forms of haptic feedback are imag-
inable, so we limit these forms here by considering the lit-
erature and the guidelines developed in section 2.
6.1. Basic Detent
The detent is simple, deterministic, and can help the musi-
cian orient himself or herself. A detent can be created even
using 1DOF haptic interfaces. Figure 4 illustrates how to
implement a simple piecewise linear detent. Near the cen-
ter of the detent, the force in the lateral y-axis behaves like
that of a spring, while the force goes to zero when the posi-
tion y moves further from the detent’s center [13]. The force
proﬁle is consistent with the lateral forces one would expe-
rience in the terrain height map h(y) shown at the bottom of
in Figure 4.
Researchers from the human computer interaction (HCI)
literature have experimented with piecewise linear as well as
piecewise nonlinear detents [4]. However, they report that
altering the shape of the detent nonlinearly manifests itself
psychophysically as apparently only an intensity difference
[14][8]. We have also carried out some informal tests and
also believe that the details of the detent shape are not of
primary importance, so we believe the piecewise linear de-
tent design to be sufﬁcient for our study.
6.2. Force Feedback Conditions
We now describe the speciﬁc haptic force feedback condi-
tions that we incorporated into our subject test.
179
Figure 5. Force proﬁle for DET condition
6.2.1. Multiple Detents (DET)
We extend the basic detent described in section 6.1 to assist
the musician in playing notes from a diatonic scale consist-
ing of whole and half steps, which is based at the origin of
the haptic device. Figure 5 shows the piecewise linear force
proﬁle for the ﬁrst ﬁve notes of the scale. A spring force
ﬁeld is centered around each note, making the y-position a
locally stable equilibrium point, as denoted by each dashed
blue circle [9]. In between each pair of notes, the forces
must be tapered toward each other to avoid creating any dis-
tracting discontinuities. Since there is a half-step instead of
a whole-step betweenmi and fa, the force proﬁle is warped
to retain the same form (see Figure 5). Note that we have
made the detent force proﬁles as wide as possible to ensure
that we are providing haptic assistance for the largest possi-
ble set of positions y.
6.2.2. Force-Sensitive Detents (FRC)
While the HCI literature is in agreement that a single detent
centered around a single target, such as a menu item, im-
proves performance, it may be harder for interface designers
to improve performance when faced with multiple possible
targets, each having its own detent, especially when the user
must traverse through distracting detents in order to reach
a speciﬁc target [6][5]. We hypothesize that by considering
notes to be the analog of menu targets, we might take ad-
vantage of this feature to improve upon the DET condition.
We design a novel force condition that has the advantage
that the musician can actively adjust the strength of the hap-
tic assistance. In other words, the musician may control the
assistance so that he or she only receives it when he or she
requests it by pressing downward with forcep > 0. If the
musician instead pulls the thimble even slightly upward (i.e.
p <0), then no haptic assistance will be provided at all, al-
lowing the musician to breeze over any distracting detents.
We deﬁne FFRC (y, p)as follows:
FFRC (y, p) =FDET (y) · min(lp, M0) · (p >0), (1)
for some constants l > 0, M0 > 0. The parameter M0
serves as the maximum detent gain, which prevents the de-
tents from becoming unreasonably strong if the musician
ever presses down especially hard.
6.2.3. Spring Force (SPR)
For the sake of comparison with O’Modhrain’s experiment,
we introduce also the SPR condition, where FSPR (y) de-
scribes a spring. The virtual spring center is placed near
the edge of the workspace so that the spring always exerts a
force to the left.
6.2.4. No Feedback (NOFB)
We ﬁnally introduce a control condition, in which the force
in the y-dimension is always zero:
FNOFB (y) = 0. (2)
Due to O’Modhrain’s work and the Theremin hypothesis,
we expect this condition to be the most frustrating for musi-
cians [7].
7. Subject Test
7.1. Experiment Design
To verify the efﬁcacy of haptic assistance, we are conduct-
ing a subject test to compare how accurately subjects can
select pitches under the DET, FRC, SPR, and NOFB force
conditions. The experiment design was motivated by the de-
sire to obtain data that could be compared across subjects,
even if some learning effects could possibly be seen in the
data. We recruited seven subjects from the Stanford Sym-
phonic Orchestra and six subjects from the M.S. program at
the Center for Computer Research in Music and Acoustics
(CCRMA) at Stanford University. Of the thirteen subjects
total, one was left-handed and four were female.
The total time commitment required of each subject was
about one hour on average, and each subject was compen-
sated with $20 for his or her efforts. Each subject was trained
and tested as follows:
• At the beginning, the subject was presented with a
sheet containing seven simple melody excerpts. The
ﬁrst excerpt was for training, while the remaining ex-
cerpts were for testing. Each excerpt contained an av-
erage of about 9 notes from the C major scale and was
followed by a glissando. To help the subject learn the
excerpts before being tested, the subject was asked to
play them once on a standard piano keyboard-based
instrument. Then the subject was asked to play them
again to reinforce learning of the excerpts.
• The subject was introduced to the musical instrument
described in Section 5. The subject was asked to feel
each force condition using his or her dominant hand,
while the operation of the force condition was ex-
plained. The subject was instructed to try to use the
following strategy when using the FRC condition: the
subject should press down slightly when playing small
intervals and lift up slightly or maintain a neutral hand
weight when playing larger intervals or glissandi.
• The process for recording performances was explained
to the subject. This process modeled the procedure for
recording a part of a song in a music studio and con-
sisted of the steps 1) listen, 2) practice, 3) perform,
180
4) consider whether to move on. In the third step, the
subject performed an excerpt for a given force condi-
tion along with a metronome track. In the fourth step,
the subject could elect to re-record a performance if
he or she were unsatisﬁed with how he or she played
the given excerpt.
• Next the subject practiced using the recording process
and manipulating the PHANTOM by recording his or
her performance of the single training melody excerpt
for each of the force conditions. Any additional ques-
tions were then answered.
• Finally the subject recorded himself or herself per-
forming according to the four force conditions. In or-
der to minimize the ordering effects of the subjects’
being tested on one force condition before another,
the force conditions were presented across subjects
according to a balanced Latin square [3]. However,
during the testing of each force condition, the six test
melodies were presented in always the same order.
We chose to do so because we believed that since
the subjects learned the (very simple) melodies before
performing the test, the ordering of the force condi-
tions would affect the results much more than the or-
dering of the melodies. Moreover, in this conﬁgura-
tion, it would be more straightforward to compare the
performances of the melodies for a given force condi-
tion across subjects.
• The subject was asked to ﬁll out an exit survey.
7.2. Data Analysis
Let Ps(m, c, t)be the MIDI note contour played as a func-
tion of time t by subject s for the mth melody excerpt and
the cth force condition. For example, the fairly typical mea-
surement P5(5, c, t)is shown in Figure 6 for all four condi-
tions. It can be seen that the DET and FRC force conditions
tend to push the subject’s ﬁnger toward notes of the C major
scale such as 71, 72, and 74. In contrast, the NOFB and SPR
conditions allow the subject to drift further away.
To obtain an estimate of the discrete note sequence that
a subject intended to play, we started by simply quantizing
the measured MIDI note contour to the nearest MIDI notes
from the MIDI scale. However, some spurious notes were
detected in the note sequences, especially for large note in-
tervals. To greatly reduce the number of these artifacts, we
developed an improved quantizer calledEstimated Intended
Note Quantizer, orEINQ, which eliminated quantized notes
with durations shorter than 0.2 sec. As each short note was
eliminated, it was replaced by its neighbors, where the tran-
sition time was chosen to minimize the error measure de-
scribed in the following section.
To evaluate the quality of the tuning of each performance,
we calculated the norm between the estimated intended note
Figure 6. Sample MIDI note contours (subject 5, excerpt 5)
Figure 7. Mean absolute error for subject 5
sequence and the actual performed note sequence. We chose
to use theL1-norm instead of the L2-norm so that the error
measure did not emphasize the inevitably large error contri-
butions stemming from note transitions, but rather focused
more on the typically more constant error contributions from
within notes (see the contours in Figure 6). TheL1-norm of
the error, also known as the mean absolute error, from time
T1 to time T2 is
1
T2 − T1
∫ T2
T1
⏐⏐Ps
(
m, c, t
)
− EINQ(Ps(m, c, t))
⏐⏐dt. (3)
T1 and T2 were chosen by hand for each performance so
that the time segment included only the notes prior to the
glissando even if the subject made any small errors in tim-
ing. Figure 7 shows a typical set of mean absolute errors.
7.3. Preliminary Results
7.3.1. Mean Absolute Pitch Error
The clearest trend is that the DET and FRC conditions gen-
erally resulted in smaller mean absolute error than the SPR
and NOFB conditions (see Figure 7 for an example). In
other words, detents seem to cause the average error to be
smaller. In particular, for 89% of the melody-subject pairs,
the DET error was smaller than both the SPR and NOFB er-
rors. The FRC error was also smaller than both the SPR and
NOFB errors for 89% of the melody-subject pairs.
All subjects were able to perform the glissandi for all
of the force feedback conditions, including the detent con-
181
ditions FRC and DET. In addition, some subjects learned to
play glissandi smoothly with FRC by lifting upward slightly
with the PHANTOM thimble.
7.3.2. Surveys
The thirteen subjects were asked to order the force feedback
conditions from the most to the least preferable for playing
glissandi accurately as well as for playing notes accurately.
In agreement with section 7.3.1, twelve subjects most pre-
ferred either FRC or DET for playing notes accurately. Of
these subjects, nine most preferred FRC for playing notes
accurately.
Conversely, ten subjects most preferred either SPR or
NOFB for playing glissandi accurately. The remaining three
subjects most preferred FRC for playing glissandi accurately,
presumably because these subjects had learned sufﬁciently
well to lift the thimble up slightly while playing glissandi,
so as not to get distracted by detents.
7.3.3. Conclusions
Haptic detents improve the accuracy with which musicians
select pitches over a linear range in comparison with a sim-
ple spring force or no haptic feedback at all. In addition,
more musicians seem to prefer the novel detent type FRC to
DET. Indeed, musicians can even learn to play glissandi and
large melodic intervals when using FRC by lifting upward
slightly. Testing more subjects and carrying out a more com-
plete statistical analysis will help us solidify our conclusions
from the subject test.
8. Final Words
The possibility of providing musicians with haptic assis-
tance is indeed intriguing. After taking the ﬁnite reaction
time of the human motor system into account, we suggested
designing assistive haptic interfaces that are deterministic
and relatively simple.
Our subject test shows that detents can be used effec-
tively to assist musicians in accurately selecting pitches over
a modest linear range. The novel FRC condition appears
to be the most promising. At ﬁrst our conclusions might
seem to be at odds with O’Modhrain’s experiment. Indeed
while O’Modhrain suggested simply that some form of hap-
tic feedback was better than none at all [7], we suggest that
detents are even more helpful in assisting musicians in se-
lecting pitches over a modest linear range. However, we
think that the real lesson to learn is that the best type of hap-
tic assistance depends on the task. In fact, this was the mo-
tivation behind the development of the novel force-sensitive
FRC condition, where the degree of haptic assistance de-
pends directly on user input. We believe that future hap-
tic assistance devices should consider taking advantage of
real-time user input in a similar manner, allowing users to
constantly regulate the assistance that they receive.
9. Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge Sile O’Modhrain, Carr Wilk-
erson, Hiroko Terasawa, Javier S ´anchez, Nelson Lee, Rob
Hamilton, Fernando Lopez-Lezcano, Bill Verplank, Chris
Chafe, and Jonathan Berger for making this work possible.
References
[1] Bryan and Harter. Studies in the physiology and psychology
of the telegraphic language. Psychological Review, 4:27–53,
1897.
[2] C. Cadoz, A. Luciana, and J.-L. Florens. Synth `ese musi-
cale par simulation des m ´ecanismes instrumentaux. Revue
d’acouqistique, 59:279–292, 1981.
[3] G. Grindlay. Haptic guidance beneﬁts musical motor learn-
ing. In Proc. of Symposium on Haptic interfaces for Vir-
tual Environment and Teleoperator Systems, pages 397–404,
Reno, NV , March 2008.
[4] W. Moss and B. Cunitz. Haptic theremin: Developing a hap-
tic musical controller using the sensable phantom omni. In
Proceedings of the International Computer Music Confer-
ence, Barcelona, Spain, Sept. 2005.
[5] I. Oakley. Haptic Augmentation of the Cursor: Transforming
Virtual Actions into Physical Actions. PhD thesis, University
of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scottland, May 2003.
[6] I. Oakley, A. Adams, S. Brewster, and P. Gray. Guidelines
for the design of haptic widgets. In Proc. 16th British HCI
Group Annual Conference, pages 195–211, London, Eng-
land, Sept. 2002.
[7] S. O’Modhrain. Playing By Feel: Incorporating Haptic
Feedback into Computer-Based Musical Instruments. PhD
thesis, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA, 2000.
[8] F. Picon, M. Ammi, and P. Bourdot. Force model for CAD
selection. In Proc. ACM symposium Virtual reality software
and technology, pages 283–284, Bordeaux, France, 2008.
[9] L. Rosenberg and S. Brave. Using force feedback to enhance
human performance in graphical user interfaces. In Proc.
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages
291–292, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, April 1996.
[10] R. Schmidt. Motor Control and Learning: A Behavioral
Emphasis. Human Kinetics Publishers, Champaign, Illinois,
1982.
[11] Shaffer. Cognition and motor programming. Tutorials in
motor neuroscience, pages 371–383, 1991.
[12] L. Theremin. U.S. Pat. No. 1,661,058, 1928.
[13] B. Verplank. Haptic music exercises. In Proc. of the Int.
Conf. on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, pages 256–
257, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2005.
[14] T. Yamada, D. Tsubouchi, T. Ogi, and M. Hirose. Desk-
sized immersive workplace using force feedback grid inter-
face. InProc. IEEE Virtual Reality Conference, pages 135–
142, Washington, DC, USA, 2002.
[15] E. Zwicker and H. Fastl. Psychoacoustics: Facts and Mod-
els. Springer, New York, NY , 2nd edition, 1999.
182