Fourteen Years of NIME: The Value and Meaning of
‘Community’ in Interactive Music Research
Adnan Marquez-Borbon
Sonic Arts Research Centre
Queen’s University Belfast
Belfast, Northern Ireland
a.marquez-borbon@qub.ac.uk
Paul Stapleton
Sonic Arts Research Centre
Queen’s University Belfast
Belfast, Northern Ireland
p.stapleton@qub.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the notion of community as commonly
employed within NIME discourses. Our aim is to clarify and
deﬁne the term through the community of practice frame-
work. We argue that through its formal use and application,
the notion of community becomes a signiﬁcant space for
the examination of emergent musical practices that could
otherwise be overlooked. This paper deﬁnes community of
practice, as originally developed in the social sciences by
Lave and Wegener, and applies it within the NIME con-
text through the examination of existing communities of
practice such as the laptop performance community, laptop
orchestras, as well as the Satellite CCRMA and Patchblocks
communities.
Author Keywords
NIME history, performance, situated learning, communities
of practice, communities of interest
ACM Classiﬁcation
H.5.5 [INFORMATION INTERFACES AND PRESENTA-
TION (e.g., HCI)] Sound and Music Computing — Method-
ologies and techniques, J.4 [Computer Applications] SO-
CIAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES – Sociology.
1. INTRODUCTION
In the 14 years of NIMEs existence, the conference has
showcased work of a highly varied nature produced in in-
creasingly diverse contexts. Across these various practices,
NIME has focused on developing novel or alternative mu-
sical interactions by merging together the principles, tradi-
tions and innovations from both Human-Computer Inter-
action and from 20th century Western European concert
and experimental musics. Despite the desire for novelty
driving these technological developments, this work is not
realized within a vacuum and inherits, intentionally or not,
characteristics of the social, cultural or economic environ-
ment from which it emerges. In e↵ect, outcomes are still
bound to theoretical and aesthetic inﬂuences from tradi-
tional musical practices regardless of the ebb and ﬂow of
fashionable research approaches and aims or performance
styles and technologies. Transplanting these devices into
established musical practices, or generating new ones, raise
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’15,May 31-June 3, 2015, Louisiana State Univ., Baton Rouge, LA.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
many questions that cannot be simply addressed by investi-
gating isolated features of the devices themselves or through
individual, isolated, developments of practice.
One recent approach that has gained greater interest within
NIME research is the community aspect surrounding spe-
ciﬁc digital musical interactions. By taking a global per-
spective and moving away from the individual, it is expected
that a shared knowledge and experience amongst the in-
dividuals within a group can yield both novel and lasting
musical practices with a particular system. While the term
community is often used, it is rarely deﬁned or contextu-
alized in NIME research by means of existing frameworks
from other research disciplines, such as social sciences. In
this light, the examined community is identiﬁed by default
as part of a participatory design framework or in some cases
loosely deﬁned as an aggregation of practitioners, whether
performers, designers or composers [19, 29, 43].
Indeed, it is our belief that new research in this area ben-
eﬁts from this perspective by delineating and examining the
internal dynamics of communities surrounding digital musi-
cal interaction practices. However, due to a lack of support-
ing theoretical concepts, it can be easy to overlook impor-
tant issues given the inability to examine the complexities
of a community as they develop a mutually supported activ-
ity. Opportunities for examining di↵erent activities, such as
teaching, learning and the development of new practices are
potentially neglected [5]. Such behaviours may contribute
in important ways to furthering our understanding of novel
interactions and developing new musical practices within
this domain. Attempting to ﬁnd alternatives to the term
community, rather than redeﬁne and deepen it, may not
be an entirely fruitful endeavour. As observed by Shelemay
[39], a rethinking of the concept may see the transmission of
musical knowledge and performance not as ‘expressions or
symbols of a given social grouping, but as an integral part
of processes that can at di↵erent moments help generate,
shape, and sustain new collectivities’. Given this position,
in this paper we introduce and describe the community of
practice and community of interest frameworks by present-
ing existing communities within NIME as case studies iden-
tiﬁed and examined through their learning activities.
2. BACKGROUND
While the notion of community in this domain is often used
as a descriptor for an aggregate of people involved in ac-
tivities relating to digital musical interaction design, in this
section such groups will be analytically framed within the
context of a community of practice in order to gain an un-
derstanding of how learning is supported.
307
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
2.1 Learning in Context: Situated Learning
and Communities of Practice
Learning is an activity commonly thought of as occurring
within a classroom environment and with an authority ﬁg-
ure such as a teacher or instructor. This further taking
place within a formal institution, or school, which deter-
mines speciﬁc curriculum, evaluation criteria and other ed-
ucational protocols in order to evaluate the knowledge or
competence of the pupil. Additionally, this learning con-
text can be further framed through the speciﬁc pedagogical
methods that are employed. However, this type offormal
learningis often criticised due to their abstracting, or sep-
arating, between the contents of learning (i.e. knowledge)
and the actual practice in which these contents are applied.
In other words, the school learning environment is seen as
existing apart from the broader socio-cultural context in
which we actually dwell in.
The classroom education perspective is challenged by a
number of models – such as situated learning and commu-
nities of practice – that attempt to remedy the problems
of formal learning, as well as provide alternative learning
scenarios. The situated learning framework [6, 23] asserts
that knowledge is inextricably a product of the activity and
situations in which it is produced. More than simply be-
ing situatedin time or space, situated learning implies that
activity isin and with the world [23]. Situated learning,
as a broad framework, o↵ers di↵erent perspectives on how
learning is carried out, whether as guided participation [37],
cognitive apprenticeship [6], or legitimate peripheral par-
ticipation (LPP) [23]. Despite their di↵erences there is a
consensus which views and describes learning in terms of
activity and participation within a community of practice
[35]. As originally deﬁned by Lave and Wenger [23, p. 98],
a community of practice (CoP) is ‘a set of relations among
persons, activity, and world, over time and in relation with
other tangential and overlapping communities of practice’.
For Wenger in particular, a community of practice is more
than a group of people who share a common interest or ac-
tivity; it is a social structure that reﬂects shared histories
of learning [49]. For a more detailed comparison between
di↵erent CoP deﬁnitions refer to Cox [14].
Situated learning requires the engagement of the indi-
vidual in ‘authentic’ practice (i.e., activities of a domain
framed by its culture) developing within a socio-cultural
environment [6]. More than gaining abstract knowledge,
learning requires actually engaging in the particular activi-
ties of a community. Gaining an understanding and mastery
of knowledge and skill in this context requires learners to
participate in such activities and let themselves be absorbed
by the ‘culture of practice’ [23]. Thus this process of estab-
lishing membership within a community is how an individ-
ual acquires knowledge and skills. This process of learn-
ing is deﬁned by Lave and Wenger as legitimate peripheral
participation (LPP) [23]. Although this concept emerged
from the learning process observed in ‘traditional’ appren-
ticeships (such as tailors or midwives), Lave and Wenger
note that learning can occur in the absence of a formally
organised apprenticeship or teacher. One of situated learn-
ing’s most resonant critiques is that it obscures the pro-
cess in which the individual transforms socio-cultural pro-
cesses into mental processes. Lave and Wenger would re-
fute such a premise since the claim itself divorces and ab-
stracts mental and bodily activity (i.e., knowing-through-
practice) from the social environment in which they are
embedded. Nonetheless, Billett puts forth a model based in
what he deems a complementarity between cognitive psy-
chology and socio-cultural theory [4]. Billet’s model sug-
gests that higher-order procedural knowledge in the form of
goal-directed problem-solving activities is used for generat-
ing and organising knowledge from speciﬁc and socially de-
termined problems. Outcomes and their meanings are then
regulated according to di↵erent experiences of the individ-
ual and the community. Similar approaches examining the
social regulation of higher mental processes are presented
in [2] and [34].
3. NIME AS A COMMUNITY
Recalling Lave and Wenger’s original deﬁnition of a commu-
nity of practice, as emergent from legitimate peripheral par-
ticipation, we see that this particular model does not quite
ﬁt what is observed in the NIME community. Namely, there
is no form of learning analogous to apprenticeships (in the
strict traditional sense), where learning involves the gradual
participation of the novice in the communal practices and
activities. Without a doubt there are expert and novice
practitioners within NIME; however, the learning that oc-
curs is mainly institutionalised and conducted through a
teaching curriculum [16]. As distinguished by Lave and
Wenger, a ‘teaching curriculum’ is structured for newcom-
ers and mediated by an instructor; it supplies boundaries
and learning resources, and establishes the meaning of what
is learned. This di↵ers from a ‘learning curriculum’ in that
knowledge is explicitly taught and decontextualised from
the socio-cultural environment in which the activity takes
place [23]. Of course, attempting to educate through an
apprenticeship model in modern academic settings is in-
deed impractical, hence the choice of applying structured
pedagogical strategies. Nonetheless, as shown in the mu-
sic domain, informal learning environments within commu-
nities of practice have proved successful in improving stu-
dents’ learning of performance, improvisation and composi-
tion skills, as well as enriching their own personal learning
experiences [25, 45, 44].
In the broadest organisational sense, NIME aims towards
the goal of developing a shared body of work on new mu-
sical interface design. In this manner both joint enterprise
and shared repertoire are met. Additionally, the NIME con-
ference provides opportunities for developing personal net-
works, sharing experiences and learning from other mem-
bers. Therefore the mutual engagement condition is sat-
isﬁed. Given this view, NIME likely ﬁts the community
of practice proﬁle. However, the community is not ho-
mogeneous; members do not engage in similar work in a
particular domain. Practitioners from di↵erent domains –
HCI, computer science, electrical engineering, (computer)
music, and arts – engage in a joint enterprise. Perhaps
NIME could appropriately be described as a ‘community-
of-communities’ [7]. This particular conﬁguration is deﬁned
by Fischer as acommunity of interest(CoI) [18]. A CoI, in
contrast to a CoP, attempts to solve a common task across
multiple domains. In this manner, the overarching goal of
NIME is to develop a body of work related to new digi-
tal instruments from di↵erent disciplines and perspectives
(Figure 1).
The interdisciplinary nature of NIME can be deemed an
asset. Indeed, Fischer observes that stakeholder diversity
becomes a strength for this type of community. This same
diversity, however, also produces a signiﬁcant challenge due
to a lack of shared understanding. Perspectives and vo-
cabulary may initially di↵er, hence producing di culties in
308
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
Figure 1: Di↵erentiating CoP and CoI (from Fis-
cher 2009)
communication [18]. With time this understanding evolves
incrementally, through collaborations producing ideas and
external artefacts. Thus, there is a process of integration of
multiple knowledge systems manifested in the form of syn-
thesis and mutual learning. Learning in these communities,
rather than through apprenticeship, is by ‘informed partici-
pation’ which is characterised by the concurrency of experts
and novices [18]. Although it may seem contradictory, Fis-
cher explains that expertise occurs when stakeholders com-
municate their knowledge to others; these same stakehold-
ers become novices themselves when they learn from others
who are experts in areas outside their own expertise.
Speciﬁcally, discussions surrounding learning and peda-
gogy within this domain have centred on learning a diverse
set of related topics ranging from music theory, composi-
tion, interaction design, and HCI to computer science, elec-
trical engineering, and signal processing [13, 15, 16, 24, 26].
However, despite a few claims to the development of per-
formance skills with new instruments [24], there is a lack of
supporting learning structures aside from prescribing pro-
longed practice or actual performance [8, 32, 50]. Compe-
tency in this domain, thus, is achieved by the mere accumu-
lation of knowledge and its application in designs, whereas
approaches for developing skilled performance are notori-
ously absent. The multiple reasons a↵ecting this issue are
discussed in depth by O’Modhrain [31]. However, inspect-
ing speciﬁc practices within the broader community may
shed light on the existence of such learning structures.
3.1 Case Studies: Interactive Music Commu-
nities within NIME
Emerging from electronic and computer music in general
we can identify a number of communities that engage in
ways that are distinguishable as being communities of prac-
tice. Some of these lie outside and overlap with NIME and
academic institutions as seen in the Max/MSP, Pure Data,
Super Collider, ChucK, monome [43], or even the circuit
bending communities. However, in this discussion I will
solely focus on those communities that have closely devel-
oped and established themselves alongside the institutional
boundaries of the NIME ecology.
Applying Wenger’s later framework (Figure 2) within the
broader NIME community, we can ﬁnd smaller subsets that
meet the criteria of a community of practice – a community
based on the existing conditions of joint enterprise, mutual
engagement and shared repertoire. The laptop performance
community, as oriented towards performance and learning,
meets such conditions. The laptop as a musical instrument
has enjoyed a signiﬁcant degree of longevity and gained a
considerable amount of practitioners since the laptop be-
came an increasingly a↵ordable commodity in the 1990s.
Despite the sustained criticisms of laptop performance [33,
36, 38, 40], the laptop-as-instrument [27] has engendered a
variety of practices involving a diversity of software tools,
techniques, aesthetics, politics [20, 30, 40, 42], as well as
its own ‘genre’ [10]. This uptake has certainly beneﬁted
from the role of the Internet as a space supporting learning,
interaction, and collaboration with other practitioners [9].
Online forums and message boards permit obtaining rele-
vant information, engaging in dialogue, and acquiring the
appropriate software tools [9]. In this manner, there is both
a shared repertoire of practice-directed objects and a virtual
space supporting opportunities for mutual engagement.
Figure 2: Practice within CoP (from Wegner 1998)
More recently, laptop performance in academic contexts
has gone through a process of formalisation in which per-
formance practices have given rise to the ‘live coding’ (Fig-
ure 3) [12, 11, 28, 48, 46] and the ‘laptop orchestra’ (Fig-
ure 4) movements [17, 41, 47]. The sub-communities of live
coding and laptop orchestras can be deemed proper CoPs.
Following Wenger’s community elements, these communi-
ties have properly developed conditions for mutual engage-
ment in which members, through participation, establish
relationships of learning and collaboration in a joint en-
terprise (i.e., designing and performing music with laptop
based instruments).
Figure 3: Live Coding: Benoit and the Mandelbrots
(Steve Welburn, CC-BY-SA)
309
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
Figure 4: Laptop Orchestra
For both live coders and laptop orchestras the activity
of performance is not the only goal. While performance is
certainly important, the community itself has established
other goals. This is apparent in the e↵orts for improving
live coding languages and software, as well as documenting
their practices, activities and other relevant information for
distribution. In this manner, the structure of practice is
not externally imposed, but is (re)negotiated by the mem-
bers of the community; they themselves give meaning to
actions, objects, and other elements important to the com-
munity itself. Similarly, values for judging performances are
generated from within the community of practitioners [12,
28].
A shared repertoire emerges with time in the form of spe-
ciﬁc activities, symbols, or artefacts that show a history of
mutual engagement. Whether they are expressed through
laptop ‘battles’, established laptop-orchestra rehearsal rou-
tines and pieces [1], or repositories of code and documenta-
tion [43], they show the development of the community and
demonstrate how meaning changes over time. Of course,
as Wenger [49] comments, this meaning retains some de-
gree of ambiguity. However, this ambiguity provides the
basis for creating new practices. Despite the usage of on-
line resources for communication and storage of materials,
geographical location is not a strict condition for the es-
tablishment of a community of practice [44, 49]. Indeed,
one can see that on some live-coding sites (for example, the
Supercollider, Max/MSP or ChucK forums), levels of en-
gagement and exchange are rather high [28].
Another recent and emergent community of practice in
this context is the Satellite CCRMA community1 (Figure 5)
[3]. In the few years of existence, Satellite CCRMA has
gained traction as a compelling resource for developing em-
bedded music computing applications. It has a well docu-
mented repository of information, as well as an active online
community forum2. While the homepage is an important
source of information for getting started with the platform,
the forum plays a signiﬁcant role in furthering the knowl-
edge of members of the community. The forum provides
an important source of information for continuing the de-
velopment of one’s practice. It is evident in the form of
technical issues brought up during the deployment of the
platform and implementation of more speciﬁc features. Fo-
rum members, aside from the webmaster, openly contribute
1https://ccrma.stanford.edu/~eberdahl/Satellite/2https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/
satelliteccrma
their experiences and knowledge in order to solve common
issues or prevent future problems. Additionally, members
share their work with others as exemplars of the diverse
technical capacities and artistic possibilities with the plat-
form.
Figure 5: Satellite CCRMA
Our ﬁnal example is Patchblocks3, a tangible interface
for collaborative performance (Figure 6). What is particu-
larly interesting in this case is the fact that the notion of
community as a resource for technological development was
explicit since its inception [22]. Such social factors are inte-
grated in this tangible interface are through individual cre-
ation and the adaptation and sharing within a community
which leads to the collaborative development of the inter-
faces’ technology. Recently, the project has established a
signiﬁcant online community with a large and active user
base invested in the development of both Patchblocks soft-
ware and hardware. Patchblocks provides a striking con-
trast to other digital musical interaction projects where the
community aspect is secondary to the projects’ objectives
and often emerges in a secondary or unintended fashion.
Similarly, the notion of collaboration within Patchblocks is
not limited to performance, but to the communal develop-
ment of knowledge and technological resources. From these
conditions it is evident that this particular project ﬁts the
CoP framework in an exemplary manner.
4. SUMMARY
As presented in this paper, the notion of community in
NIME is examined through the lens of a community of
practice so as to identify its constituting elements and re-
lationships amongst the members of existing communities
as they learn through the development of a mutual activity.
These communities of practice, as represented by live cod-
ing, laptop orchestra, Satellite CCRMA, and Patchblocks
user groups, exemplify how learning diverse elements of
digital musical interactions emerge and are structured in
informal contexts. Through websites and forums, novices
are introduced to the practices, tools, and human resources
3http://patchblocks.com/
310
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
Figure 6: Patchblocks
of the community in order to gain the necessary knowl-
edge for embarking on their projects, as well as improving
their competencies. The documented activities of the com-
munity serve to make public the activities and share the
experiences of more skilled practitioners, thus structuring
and guiding beginners own practice and learning. In this
manner, novices are made aware of the speciﬁc criteria for
achieving proﬁciency along with loosely established goals to
attain.
In examining the learning practices within a subset of
communities we can note the presence of established mech-
anisms for judging what could be considered a ‘good’ per-
formance. This is particularly evident within the laptop
performance and live coding communities. However, the
absence of such mechanisms within the broader NIME com-
munity leads us to raise the questions of how can we develop
a communal understanding of performance and how can we
arrive to it, if it is possible to do so. Indeed, there is much
to learn from the presented case studies as they may provide
some answers to such complex questions (other lines of in-
quiry regarding judging NIME performances are presented
in [21]). As it stands, the lack of a community understand-
ing of performance inhibits the development of constructive
critique which in turn inhibits forward movement.
The community of practice framework is a powerful ana-
lytical resource for investigating the dynamic relationships
and learning activities within social organizations. Although
the presented case studies may provide an initial step to-
wards understanding – through their actions, relationships,
and outcomes – the complexities of a community, we ﬁrmly
believe that such analytical tools can yield profound in-
sights, as well as foster the development of new musical
practices with digital musical interactions.
5. REFERENCES
[1] J. Albert. Improvisation as tool and intention:
Organizational practices in laptop orchestras and
their e↵ect on personal musical approaches.Critical
Studies in Improvisation /´Etudes critiques en
improvisation, 8(1), May 2012.
[2] I. M. Arievitch and J. P. P. Haenen. Connecting
sociocultural theory and educational practice:
Galperin’s approach.Educational Psychologist,
40(3):155–165, 2005.
[3] E. Berdahl and W. Ju. Satellite CCRMA: A musical
interaction and sound synthesis platform. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on New
Interfaces for Musical Expression, pages 173–178,
2011.
[4] S. Billett. Situated learning: Bridging sociocultural
and cognitive theorising.Learning and Instruction,
6(3):263–280, Sept. 1996.
[5] W. Bowman. The community in music.International
Journal of Community Music,2 ( 2 - 3 ) : 1 0 9 – 1 2 8 ,2 0 0 9 .
[6] J. S. Brown, A. Collins, and P. Duguid. Situated
cognition and the culture of learning.Educational
Researcher, 18(1):32–42, Jan. 1989.
[7] J. S. Brown and P. Duguid. Organizational learning
and communities-of-practice: Toward a uniﬁed view
of working, learning, and innovation.Organization
Science, 2(1):40–57, Jan. 1991.
[8] J. Butler. Creating pedagogical etudes for interactive
instruments. InProceedings of the International
Conferences on New Interfaces for Musical
Expression,p a g e s7 7 – 8 0 ,2 0 0 8 .
[9] K. Cascone. The aesthetics of failure: “Post-digital”
tendencies in contemporary computer music.
Computer Music Journal,2 4 ( 4 ) : 1 2 – 1 8 ,2 0 0 0 .
[10] K. Cascone. Grain, sequence, system: Three levels of
reception in the performance of laptop music.
Contemporary Music Review,2 2 ( 4 ) : 1 0 1 – 1 0 4 ,2 0 0 3 .
[11] N. Collins. Live coding of consequence.Leonardo,
44(3):207–211, 2011.
[12] N. Collins, A. McLean, J. Rohrhuber, and A. Ward.
Live coding in laptop performance.Organised Sound,
8(03):321–330, 2003.
[13] P. Cook. Re-designing principles for computer music
controllers: A case study of squeezevox maggie. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on New
Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME). Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania: Carnegie Mellon University, pages
218–221, 2009.
[14] A. Cox. What are communities of practice? A
comparative review of four seminal works.Journal of
Information Science, 31(6):527–540, Dec. 2005.
[15] G. D’Arcangelo. Creating a context for musical
innovation: A NIME curriculum. InProceedings of the
2002 conference on New interfaces for musical
expression, pages 1–4. National University of
Singapore, 2002.
[16] S. Fels and M. Lyons. Creating new interfaces for
musical expression: Introduction to NIME. InACM
SIGGRAPH 2009 Courses, page 11. ACM, 2009.
[17] R. Fiebrink, G. Wang, and P. R. Cook. Don’t forget
the laptop: using native input capabilities for
expressive musical control. InProceeding Of The
Conference on New Instruments for Musical
Expression (NIME),2 0 0 7 .
[18] G. Fischer. Learning in communities: A distributed
intelligence perspective. In J. M. Carroll, editor,
Learning in Communities: Interdisciplinary
Perspectives on Human Centered Information
Technology, pages 11–16. Springer, 2009.
[19] L. Gaye, L. E. Holmquist, F. Behrendt, and
A. Tanaka. Mobile music technology: Report on an
emerging community. InProceedings of the 2006
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression,
pages 22–25. IRCAM – Centre Pompidou, 2006.
[20] R. Grossmann. The tip of the iceberg: Laptop music
and the information-technological transformation of
music.Organised Sound,1 3 : 5 – 1 1 ,32 0 0 8 .
[21] M. Gurevich, P. Stapleton, and P. Bennett. Design for
style in new musical interactions. InProceeding Of
The Conference on New Instruments for Musical
311
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
Expression (NIME), pages 213–217. New Instruments
for Musical Expression (NIME), 2009.
[22] S. Heinz and S. O’Modhrain. Designing a shareable
musical TUI. InProceedings of the Conference on
New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME),2 0 1 0 .
[23] J. Lave and E. Wenger.Situated Learning: Legitimate
Peripheral Participation. Cambridge University Press,
1991.
[24] H. Leeuw and J. Tamminga. NIME education at the
HKU. InProceedings of the International Conference
on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME),
2012.
[25] M. MacMillan. Autonomous learning within a
learning community?: Musicians have been doing it
for years! InProceedings of the XXIXth Annual
Conference: 2-4 July 2007. Music Education
Research, Values and Initiatives, page 104. Australian
Association for Research in Music Education, 2007.
[26] T. Magnusson. Of epistemic tools: Musical
instruments as cognitive extensions.Organised Sound,
14(02):168–176, 2009.
[27] T. Magnusson. Designing constraints: Composing and
performing with digital musical systems.Computer
Music Journal,3 4 ( 4 ) : 6 2 – 7 3 ,N o v .2 0 1 0 .
[28] T. Magnusson. Confessions of a live coder. In
Proceedings of International Computer Music
Conference. University of Huddersﬁeld, 2011.
[29] A. McPherson and Y. E Kim. The problem of the
second performer: Building a community around an
augmented piano.Computer Music Journal,
36(4):10–27, 2012.
[30] A. Monroe. Ice on the circuits/coldness as crisis: The
re-subordination of laptop sound.Contemporary
Music Review,2 2 ( 4 ) : 3 5 – 4 3 ,2 0 0 3 .
[31] S. O’Modhrain. A framework for the evaluation of
digital musical instruments.Computer Music Journal,
35(1):28–42, 2011.
[32] S. Oore. Learning advanced skills on new instruments.
In Proceeding Of The Conference on New Instruments
for Musical Expression (NIME),2 0 0 5 .
[33] B. Ostertag. Human bodies, computer music.
Leonardo Music Journal, pages 11–14, 2002.
[34] J. Rambusch. Situated learning and Galperin’s notion
of object-oriented activity. InProceedings of the 28th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
volume s. 1998-2003, pages 1998–2003, 2006.
[35] J. Rambusch and T. Ziemke. The role of embodiment
in situated learning. InProceedings of the 27th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
volume 1803-1808. the 27th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, 2005.
[36] J. Richards. Getting the hands dirty.Leonardo Music
Journal,1 8 ( 1 ) : 2 5 – 3 1 ,2 0 0 8 .
[37] B. Rogo↵. Observing sociocultural activity on three
planes: Participatory appropriation, guided
participation, and apprenticeship.Sociocultural
Studies of Mind,1 9 9 5 .
[38] W. A. Schloss. Using contemporary technology in live
performance: The dilemma of the performer.Journal
of New Music Research,3 2 ( 3 ) : 2 3 9 – 2 4 2 ,2 0 0 3 .
[39] K. K. Shelemay. Musical communities: Rethinking
the collective in music.Journal of the American
Musicological Society, 64(2):pp. 349–390, 2011.
[40] C. Stuart. The object of performance: Aural
performativity in contemporary laptop music.
Contemporary Music Review,2 2 ( 4 ) : 5 9 – 6 5 ,2 0 0 3 .
[41] D. Trueman. Why a laptop orchestra?Organised
Sound,1 2 ( 0 2 ) : 1 7 1 – 1 7 9 ,2 0 0 7 .
[42] T. Turner. The resonance of the cubicle: Laptop
performance in post-digital musics.Contemporary
Music Review,2 2 ( 4 ) : 8 1 – 9 2 ,2 0 0 3 .
[43] O. Vallis and A. Kapur. Community-based design:
The democratization of musical interface
construction.Leonardo music journal,2 1 : 2 9 – 3 4 ,2 0 1 1 .
[44] J. Waldron. Exploring a virtual music community of
practice: Informal music learning on the internet.
Journal of Music, Technology and Education,
2(2-3):97–112, 2009.
[45] J. L. Waldron and K. K. Veblen. The medium is the
message: cyberspace, community, and music learning
in the irish traditional music virtual community.
Journal of Music, Technology and Education,
1(2-3):99–111, 2008.
[46] G. Wang and P. R. Cook. On-the-ﬂy programming:
using code as an expressive musical instrument. In
Proceedings of the 2004 conference on New interfaces
for musical expression, pages 138–143. National
University of Singapore, 2004.
[47] G. Wang, D. Trueman, S. Smallwood, and P. R.
Cook. The laptop orchestra as classroom.Computer
Music Journal,3 2 ( 1 ) : 2 6 – 3 7 ,2 0 0 8 .
[48] A. Ward, J. Rohrhuber, F. Olofsson, A. McLean,
D. Gri ths, N. Collins, and A. Alexander. Live
algorithm programming and a temporary organisation
for its promotion. InProceedings of the README
Software Art Conference,2 0 0 4 .
[49] E. Wenger.Communities of Practice: Learning,
Meaning, and Identity. Cambridge University Press,
1998.
[50] M. Zbyszy´ nski. An elementary method for tablet. In
Proceedings of the International Conferences on New
Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME),2 0 0 8 .
312
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 