Rhythm Performance from a Spectral Point of View  
 
  
Carl Haakon Waadeland 
Department of Music 
Norw. Univ. of Science and Tech. 
7491 Trondheim, Norway 
carl.haakon.waadeland@ntnu.no 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Basic to both performance and experience of rhythm in music  
is a connection between musical rhythm and patterns of body 
movements. A main focus in this study is to investigate 
possible relations between movement categories and rhythmic 
expression. An analytical approach to this task is to regard a 
musician´s vario us ways of moving when playing an instrument 
as an expression of timbral aspects of rhythm, and to apply FFT 
to empirical data of the musician´s movements in order to 
detect spectral components that are characteristic of the 
performance.                                                                           
In the present paper we exemplify this approach by reporting 
some findings from empirical investigations of jazz drummers´ 
movements in performances of swing groove. In particular we 
show that perform ances of the groove in three different tempi 
(60, 120, 300 bpm) yield quite different spectral characteristics 
of the movements. This spectral approach to rhythm 
performance might suggest alternative ways of constructing 
syntheses and models of rhythm prod uction, and could also be 
of interest for the construction of interfaces based on detecting 
spectral properties of body movements.  
 
Keywords 
Rhythm performance, movement, gesture, spectral analysis, 
swing 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Most research on rhythm performance h as focused on 
investigating attack point rhythm, i.e. attack points (the 
temporal start point of the sound) and durations. However, for 
the performing musician attack points and durations are audible 
sounding consequences of continuous interactions between  the 
musician, a musical instrument and different physical/ social 
environments related to which the performance takes place. To 
obtain a more comprehensive understanding of various 
interactions of the parameters underlying the characteristics of 
a rhythm performance it is, therefore, necessary to take gestural 
aspects of the performance into account in addition to the study 
of attack point rhythm. It is interesting to know that this point 
was made already in 1929 by Bernstein and Popova. They 
carried out e mpirical investigations of movements in piano 
playing and stated:“One can say that, with the slow, middle and  
 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and /or a fee. 
NIME’11, 30 May–1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway. 
Copyright remains with the author(s).  
fastest paces, we are dealing with three totally different 
dynamical constructions, with 3 dissimilar movement 
mechanisms” (see [2]). In this paper we discuss to wh at extent 
the findings of Bernstein and Popova may be translated from 
investigations of piano performance to a situation where jazz 
drummers are playing the swing groove.  
1.1 The Swing Groove 
A swing groove, as played on a cymbal by a jazz drummer, is 
often written in the following way:  
 
 
 
 A jazz drummer may perform a swing groove in a number of 
different ways. Typically, the drummer will perform the rhythm 
by making various deviations from the exact note values in the 
notation above. Moreover, various perfor mances of the swing 
groove may in varying degree be musical appropriate (more or 
less “correct” related to various styles or traditions of 
performance), and may also in varying degree be swinging (i.e. 
make you want to “swing along with the music”).  
 Interesting studies of performances of swing groove in jazz 
are presented in [14], [13], [12], [4] and [8]. The main strategy 
in these investigations has been to measure to what extent live 
performances show deviations from exact note values, and to 
relate thes e deviations to various musical/ contextual 
parameters, such as individual preferences, musical style, 
tempo, and inter -ensemble relations (i.e. rhythmic deviations 
between the different musicians in an ensemble). Several 
empirical investigations detecting  various deviations in 
performances of music belonging to other traditions than the 
jazz tradition have also been carried out (e.g. [1], [10], [7], and 
for and overview, see [3] and [9]).  
 Studies of gestural aspects of rhythm performance have also 
been un dertaken, although not to the same extent as studies of 
attack point rhythm. With focus on the drummer´s movements, 
interesting results have been published by S. Dahl [5] and [6], 
and the author of this paper has also contributed to research in 
this direct ion through empirical studies of jazz 
drummers´movements (see [16], [17] and [18]). The present 
report is a continuation of these investigations.  
 Having established the background for our research, we will 
now address the following questions:  
(a) What information is given by studies of gestural aspects 
of rhythm performance? 
(b) How can spectral analysis of rhythmic movements 
contribute to new insight into gestural rhythm?  
And to be somewhat more specific:  
(c) To what extent can the findings of Bernstein and Popova 
(see above) be supported by analysis of a jazz drummer 
playing the swing groove? 
 
Parts of these investigations were also reported by the author in 
an oral presentation at ICMPC, 2006, see [19], but the results 
here presented have not been published elsewher e.  
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
248
2. METHOD 
The experimental method and the equipment used for the 
collection of empirical data are both described below, and are 
well known within empirical movement science.  
2.1 Subjects 
The subjects participating in this experiment are semi -pro/ 
professional drummers acquainted with jazz drumming. All of 
the drummers were, at the time of the experiment, students or 
teachers at Section of Jazz Education, Department of Music, 
Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU).  
2.2 Task 
The subjects were asked to  use one drumstick to play the swing 
groove restricted to various performance conditions. The 
performance conditions applied for the results to be presented 
in this paper, were the following:  
 Play the swing groove as natural as possible:  
(i) In tempo 60 bpm (beats pr. minute) 
(ii) In tempo 120 bpm 
(iii) In tempo 300 bpm 
Results related to other performance conditions (e.g. different 
placement of accent on the beats of the swing groove) are 
published in [18].  
2.3 Equipment 
The measurements were carried out assisted by Geir O terhals, 
Section of Movement Science, NTNU. Figure 1 illustrates how 
the experimental situation was constructed. The figure shows 
the drummer playing on a “force plate” using one drumstick. 
Markers were placed on the drummer´s arm and on the 
drumstick. 
    
  
Figure 1. Illustration of experimental set up for measuring 
kinematic and dynamic aspects of performance of swing 
groove 
 
For our set up we applied the following components:  
• 6 cameras (Proreflex camera system) transmitting 
infra red light were used to m easure movements of 
the arm and drumstick (kinematics). Sampling 
frequency = 240 Hz 
• 5 markers reflecting the light were placed on the 
drummer´s shoulder, elbow, wrist and hand, as well 
as on the tip of the drumstick  
• A force plate (Kistler) measuring force from the 
drumstick was used to give measurements of attack 
points. Sampling frequency = 960 Hz  
3. RESULTS 
We now outline some results to demonstrate how the spectral 
approach to movement analysis might give interesting 
information that complements insight int o gestural aspects of 
rhythm performance which is achieved from the more 
commonly used time domain analysis. The results here are 
taken from a case study that investigates the movements of one 
drummer playing swing groove in the three different prescribed 
tempi. 
3.1 Analysis in the Time Domain 
Figure 2 illustrates the vertical movement (height vs. time) of 
tip of drumstick, hand and wrist, respectively, of one 
representative cycle in a performance of swing groove for one 
drummer in the three tempi: 60 bpm, 120  bpm, 300 bpm. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Vertical movement of tip of drumstick, hand and 
wrist in a performance of swing groove in three different 
tempi (from top to bottom): 60, 120, 300 bpm  
 
From the illustration in Figure 2 we obse rve: 
In tempo 60 bpm: 
• Drumstick “drops” between attack points 
• Hand follows every drumstick movement  
• Wrist follows the largest hand movement  
In tempo 120 bpm: 
• No drumstick “drops” between attack points 
• Hand follows the two largest drumstick movements  
• Wrist follows the largest hand movement  
In tempo 300 bpm: 
• One large, two smaller drumstick movements in each 
cycle 
• Hand follows the one largest drumstick movement  
• Minor movement of wrist 
Thus, it seems quite obvious that for this particular drummer, 
tempo has a major influence on movement patterns and strategy 
of performance of swing groove.  
 It is, moreover, interesting to note that tempo also affects the 
timing of the swing performance. By calculating time 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
249
differences in the distribution of attack points in th ese three 
performances, we find that the drummer is performing with a 
triplet-close subdivision at 60 and 120 bpm, whereas the 
performance approximates eighth note subdivision at 300 bpm 
(cf. Friberg and Sundström  [8]  for a similar result). These 
differences in timing are also reflected in the movement 
trajectories, as shown in Figure 2.  
 As indicated above, analysis of gestural aspects of swing 
performance in the time domain yields interesting information 
of how tempo influences movements on a local (i.e. time 
specific) level. Categorical differences in movement patterns 
are further demonstrated when we examine the global spectral 
properties of the performances.  
3.2 The Spectral Approach 
Applying FFT (Fast Fourier Transform) to the movement data 
of the swing pe rformances, we get the results as shown in 
Figure 3 (the FFT-analysis was carried out in Matlab):  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Spectral analysis of movements of swing 
performance in three different tempi  
(from top to bottom): 60, 120, 300 bpm 
It is interesting to observe that the frequencies of the spectral 
components in Figure 3 correspond to note values in the 
different performances of the swing groove. Table 1 shows the 
relation between note values and frequencies for the th ree 
different tempi. 
 
Table 1. Relation between note values and frequencies  
 
 
 
With reference to Table 1, Figure 3 shows:  
• In all three performances, the largest spectral 
components for the hand and wrist movements are 
given at the frequencies correspondin g to the half 
note (0,5 Hz, 1 Hz, 2,5 Hz resp.). This reflects the 
fact that the swing pattern is cyclic with a cycle 
length equal to the duration of a half note, and the 
movements of the hand and wrist constitute a cyclic -
close trajectory. 
• One would expec t a similar result for the drumstick 
movements, and, indeed, this is very dominant for 
tempo 300 bpm, and is also the case for 60 bpm. In 
tempo 120 bpm, however, the largest component of 
the drumstick movement for this particular drummer 
is at 3 Hz, which corresponds to the quarter note 
triplet.  
• In both 60 and 120 bpm the components of drumstick 
movements corresponding to quarter note triplets and 
eight note triplets are among the largest in the 
spectral resolutions. This reflects that our calculation 
of t ime differences in the attack point distribution 
shows that the drummer is performing with a triplet -
close subdivision in these two tempi.  
• Overall, we see that the number of spectral 
components decreases with increasing tempo, i.e. 
when the tempo increases , the movements of 
drumstick, hand and wrist tend to be more sinusoidal.  
We now turn to a discussion of our findings.  
4. DISCUSSION 
Our approach in the study of gestural aspects of rhythm 
performance has here been to regard a musician´s movements 
as an expres sion of timbral aspects of rhythm, and to apply a 
combination of analysis in the time domain and spectral 
analysis of movements. There should be made some comments 
to the strategy of this study and to the way this experiment was 
set up: 
 (1) First of all i t should be noted that all together, 10 
drummers participated as subjects in this investigation. We 
have here presented only a case study involving one subject 
performing swing groove in different tempi. A natural further 
development would be to study whic h interactions of 
performance parameters are common among the drummers. All 
though it seems plausible that the results here reported show 
features of performance that are shared among several 
drummers, these matters should be investigated further in 
forthcoming studies of swing performance.  
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
250
 (2) In this experiment the drummers were asked to use one 
drumstick to play the swing groove on a force plate. Obviously, 
a more natural playing condition would be to ask the drummers 
to play the groove on a ride cymbal . The main reason for using 
the force plate is that this performance makes possible a more 
accurate detection of attack points needed for timing analysis 
than does a performance on a cymbal. At this point it should be 
mentioned that some of the subjects pa rticipating in the 
experiment commented that they would feel more comfortable 
playing the swing groove if they were allowed to use the whole 
drum set; “filling -in” on the snare, bass drum and hihat 
underneath the ride cymbal swing pattern. – All this said,  it is 
important to emphasize that we here make comparisons 
between different performances within the well defined 
experimental situation, - and we suggest that it is likely that 
characteristics of various performance parameters that are 
detected within th e experiment, will have validity also in the 
real “natural” world of music performance – outside the 
constraints given by the experimental setup.  
 (3) The study of gestural aspects of rhythm performance is 
important for the construction of continuous model s generating 
syntheses of rhythm performance that approximate reality. One 
such model is developed by the author, [15]. It seems likely that 
results derived from these experiments will be valuable in the 
further development of this model. – For instance, i t might be 
interesting to reverse the decomposition of movements given 
by the spectral analysis, in order to simulate rhythm 
performances on the basis of a given set of sinusoidal 
components. 
 (4) Our strategy in the study of swing performance is similar 
to the approach of Luiz Naveda in analyzing the relationship 
between samba dancing movement and music, [11]. In our 
future work it will be investigated to what extent analytical 
ideas in Naveda´s investigations can be applied to forthcoming 
studies of swing performance. 
 The findings reported in this paper show that when a 
drummer performs the swing groove in different tempi, the 
tempo is likely to affect the drummer´s movements in various 
crucial ways. In this respect, our analysis of a jazz drummer 
playing the swing groove clearly supports the statement made 
by Bernstein and Popova, [2], cited in 1.Introduction. As a 
consequence of the findings of Bernstein and Popova, as well 
as of the results here reported, a performance on the piano (or a 
performance of swing) in fast tempo is quite different from 
speeding up a performance on the piano (or a performance of 
swing) in slow tempo. These findings are likely to be valid for 
rhythm performance on a more general basis, and should be 
taken into account in musical  training. Moreover, this result is 
of interest for the constructions of models of rhythm 
performance.   
5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The author is very grateful to Geir Oterhals, Section of 
Movement Science, NTNU, for fruitful assistance and 
cooperation in the measure ments of rhythmic movements. 
Special thanks are also due to the drummers participating in the 
experiments. Moreover, the author would like to thank three 
anonymous reviewers for valuable comments on an earlier 
version of this paper. Economical support to t his project was 
provided by The Faculty of Humanities, NTNU.  
6. REFERENCES 
[1] Alén, O. Rhythm as duration of sound in Tumba Francesa.  
Ethnomusicology, 39(1), 55 -71, 1995. 
[2] Bernstein, N.A. and Popova, T. Untersuchung über die 
Biodynamik des Klavieranschlags. Arbeitsphysiologie, 1, 
396-432, 1929. 
[3] Clarke, E.F. Rhythm and timing in music. In The 
Psychology of Music, Second Edition,  D. Deutsch (ed.), 
San Diego (Academic Press), 473 -500, 1999. 
[4] Collier, G.L. and Collier, J.L. The swing rhythm in jazz. In 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Music 
Perception and Cognition, Montreal,  B. Pennycook and E. 
Costa-Giomi (eds.), Montreal: McGill University, 477 -
480, 1996. 
[5] Dahl, S. The playing of an accent – Preliminary 
observations from temporal and kinematic analysis o f 
percussionists. Journal of New Music Research, 29(3), 
225-234, 2000. 
[6] Dahl, S. Playing the accent – comparing striking velocity 
and timing in an ostinato rhythm performed by four 
drummers. Acta Acustica united with Acustica, 90, 762 -
776, 2004. 
[7] Danielsen, A. Presence and pleasure – a study of the funk 
grooves of James Brown and Parliament.  Dr.art.thesis, 
University of Oslo, 2001.  
[8] Friberg, A. and Sundström, A. Swing ratios and ensemble 
timing in jazz performance: Evidence for a common 
rhythmic pattern. Music Perception, 19(3), 333 -349, 2002. 
[9] Gabrielsson, A. The performance of music. In The 
Psychology of Music, Second Edition,  D. Deutsch (ed.), 
San Diego (Academic Press), 501 -602, 1999. 
[10] Kvifte, T. Fenomenet “asymmetrisk takt” i norsk og 
svensk folkemusikk. Studia Musicologica Norvegica, 25, 
387-430, 1999. 
[11] Naveda, L. Gesture in Samba. A cross -modal analysis of 
dance and music from the Afro -Brazilian culture. Doctoral 
thesis in Art Sciences. Ghent, Belgium, 2011.  
[12] Prögler, J.A. Searching for swing: Participatory 
discrepancies in the jazz rhythm section.  
Ethnomusicology, 39(1), 21 -54, 1995. 
[13] Reinholdsson, P. Approaching jazz performances 
empirically. Some reflections on methods and problems . 
In Action and perception in rhythm and music,  
A.Gabrielsson (ed.), The Royal  Swedish Academy of 
Music, 55, 105-125, 1987. 
[14] Rose, R.F. An analysis of timing in jazz rhythm section 
performance. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. 
Univiversity of Texas, Austin, 1989.  
[15] Waadeland, C.H. It don´t mean a thing if it ain´t got that 
swing – Simulating expressive timing by modulated 
movements. Journal of New Music Research, 30(1), 23 -37, 
2001. 
[16] Waadeland, C.H. Movements in rhythmic performance of 
swing in jazz. Report from an empirical investigation. In 
Dance Knowledge – Dansekunnskap, Proceeding s 6th 
NOFOD Conference, Fiskvik and Bakka (eds.), 
Trondheim, NTNU, 193-199, 2002. 
[17] Waadeland, C.H. Analysis of jazz drummers´ movements 
in performance of swing grooves – a preliminary report. In 
Proceedings of Stockholm Music Acoustics Conference 
2003 (Vol. II). R. Bresin (ed.), Stockholm, 573 -576, 2003. 
[18]  Waadeland, C.H. Strategies in empirical studies of swing 
groove. Studia Musicologica Norvegica, 32, 169 -191, 
2006. 
[19] Waadeland, C.H. The influence of tempo on movement 
and timing in rhythm performance. In Proceedings of the 
9th International Conference on Music Perception and 
Cognition, Bologna. M. Baroni, A.R. Addessi, R. 
Caterina, M. Costa (eds.), Bologna, 29, 2006.  
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
251