Designing for Style in New Musical Interactions
Michael Gurevich, Paul Stapleton, Peter Bennett
Sonic Arts Research Centre
Queen’s University Belfast
BT7 1NN
UK
{m.gurevich, p.stapleton,pbennett02}@qub.ac.uk
Abstract
In this paper we discuss the concept of style, focusing in par-
ticular on methods of designing new instruments that facili-
tate the cultivation and recognition of style. We distinguish
between style and structure of an interaction and discuss the
signiﬁcance of this formulation within the context of NIME.
Two workshops that were conducted to explore style in in-
teraction design are described, from which we identify ele-
ments of style that can inform and inﬂuence the design pro-
cess. From these, we suggest steps toward designing for
style in new musical interactions.
Keywords: expression, style, structure, skill, virtuosity
1. Introduction
Bill Verplank has deﬁned style using the following example:
Given a task of drawing a line from A to B, style accounts
for the individual variation with which a particular person
draws that line. 1 According to this deﬁnition, style is a
function of both the user and the tool with which they per-
form the task. With a red paintbrush, one can make thick,
textured, red strokes; with a black ballpoint pen and a ruler
one could make a thin, precise, straight, black lines. In using
this deﬁnition, we claim that designers can inﬂuence style in
new musical interactions.
Brand and Hertzman [1] created a machine learning sys-
tem for “stylistic motion synthesis” capable of generating
or transforming a set of recorded human motions to reﬂect
a certain style, in addition to interpolating and extrapolating
from the set of learned styles. They differentiate between
structureand style using a state space approach, along the
lines of Verplank: “We take the structure of bipedal loco-
motion to be a small set of dynamically signiﬁcant qualita-
tive states along with the rules that govern changes of state.
1 Unpublished personal communication
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists
requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee.
NIME09, June 3-6, 2009, Pittsburgh, PA
Copyright remains with the author(s).
We take style to be variations in the mapping from qualita-
tive states to quantitative observations. For example, shift-
ing one’s weight load onto the right leg is a dynamically-
signiﬁcant state common to all forms of bipedal locomotion,
but it will look quite different in running, trudging, etc.”
It is important to note that structure is not necessarily a
set of physical actions, as in the example of bipedal locomo-
tion [1], but may also be deﬁned as an abstract but realizable
concept. For example, the structure of a task may be to play
a C major chord; the styles of different realizations may be
reﬂected in timing, register, voicing, dynamics and choice
of instrument.
1.1. Scalability of Structure
Structure may be considered on different scales, relating to
the size of the set of states and transition rules in Brand
and Hertzman’s formulation. As the structure becomes in-
creasingly speciﬁc, the set of states and transitions becomes
larger and the possibility for stylistic variation decreases.
Structures such as “playing music”,“playing a piano”, “play-
ing the keyboard of a piano”, “playing a C major triad on a
piano with the right hand” are increasingly constrained, and
thus reduce the variations in style with which they can be re-
alized. This is not to say that larger, more speciﬁc structures
are a bad thing; in§4.2 we discuss the potential importance
of constraint in facilitating the recognition of style.
1.2. Structure and Style in the Context of NIME
Our conception of style follows those of Verplank, Brand
and Hertzman, but accounts for the fact that in NIME, the
structure is not always as easily deﬁned as drawing a line
from A to B, nor is it necessarily speciﬁed a priori (in a
score or performance instruction, for example) [2]. Thus,
unlike expression, which implies extra-musical content that
is added to pre-existing text [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8], this formula-
tion ofstyle/structure accounts for non-expressive, impro-
visatory and experimental practices as the ﬁrst author advo-
cated in [9], while maintaining a perspective of communica-
tion within the performance ecology.
1.3. Personal Style
That style arises as a product of both a performer and the
system with which they interact leads to the notion of per-
sonal style, which we can deﬁne as a pattern of stylistic
NIME 2009213
variations that may be uniquely attributable to a particular
performer-system interaction. Personal style may arise both
a result of intention (John Coltrane chose to play lots of
notes, Miles Davis didn’t) or inherent physical or cognitive
constraints in the interaction (Def Leppard’s Rick Allen’s
personal style of drumming is greatly inﬂuenced by his lack
of a left arm). Personal style may or may not translate from
one interaction to the next, due to the presence or absence
of common constraints (Rick Allen’s singing is likely less
personally identiﬁable with respect to his drumming than
John Coltrane’s tenor sax playing with respect to his so-
prano sax playing), along with the situational nature of the
realization of these interactions (Picasso’s early modernist
paintings may not appear to be the work of the same artist
as his analytic cubist works just a few years later).
Drawing from a discipline outside of the arts, the bas-
ketball slam dunk competition provides an example of a sit-
uation where personal style can be clearly identiﬁed. Un-
like many musical interactions in the context of NIME, the
slam dunk competition offers an unambiguous separation
between structure and style. The structure is simply to slam
dunk the basketball into the hoop. Players are then judged
on the complexity and innovation added, in the form of their
personal style, to the successful realization of this structure.
Although these subjective value judgments on style are de-
manded by the context of a competition, this event strongly
resembles many other forms of performance in that it is pri-
marily a spectacle of skill and creativity.
1.4. What WeDon’tMean by Style
Style is a potentially problematic term because it has a va-
riety of meanings in different contexts. We differentiate be-
tweenmaterial styleand interaction style, where the former
refers to the design of physical properties or decoration of
an object, such as colour, shape and texture. Material style is
found in the cut and fabric of a shirt. Our concern is rather
interaction style, which similarly represents variation on a
structure, but instead focuses on variations in the process of
realizing an instance of that structure. We are therefore more
interested in styles of interacting with the tools used to make
a shirt, rather than the material styles of shirts themselves.
We also distinguish between style and idiom or genre 2 ,
which we take to be a set of established conventions that
contribute to an increasingly speciﬁc structure. Although
one could say that Twisted Sister’s glam metal anthem “We’re
Not Gonna Take It” can also be performed in a ska idiom3 ,
we consider the constraints imposed by this genre to con-
tribute to the structure of this particular performance rather
than its style.
2 The relationship between different concepts of style and genre
is also a subject of discussion in musicology that is beyond the
scope of this paper. Instead we focus on our deﬁnition of style
arising from interaction design that is developed above.
3 As in Whole Lotta Milka’s “Twisted”
2. Style, Expression, Skill and Virtuosity
Expression is given as an explicit goal in NIME, but an
examination of the literature suggests that many are actu-
ally talking about what we call style, rather than expres-
sion [4, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. We therefore propose shifting
the NIME discourse from expression toward one of style
and structure. This acknowledges that each interaction be-
tween a performer and digital music instrument gives rise to
a unique performance, but liberates us from the concerns of
emotional content and its successful delivery to a spectator.
We differentiate between style on the part of a performer
and a spectator’s ability torecognize style, which for a given
performance requires them to formulate a distinction be-
tween its structure and style. That is, the very existence of
style does not guarantee that it is effectively communicated
to a spectator.
For many, assessing style is no doubt an important factor
when forming aesthetic judgments. In order for spectators
to recognize style, they must be able to formulate this struc-
ture/style separation, which necessitates their ability to form
a mental model of the interaction [15]. As we describe in
another paper [16] the spectator relies on this mental model
to assess error or success. Success (a continuous judgment
that can be considered the inverse of error), together with
an assessment of the degree of difﬁculty, forms the basis
for judgment of skill. From this perspective, in order for a
performance to be deemed skillful it must reﬂect both some
degree of success and difﬁculty.
The literature also demonstrates a desire for virtuosic per-
formances with new digital instruments [17, 18]. We pro-
pose that style is an important component of virtuosity, along
with a high degree of skill. A virtuosic performer does not
only successfully realize a highly demanding task, but does
so with stylistic variations on its structure. The demand
for virtuosity therefore creates a challenge to design inter-
actions that foster style as well as skill.
3. Workshops on Stylistic Interaction Design
Two workshops titled “Designing Stylistic Interactions” were
held with the aim of developing a model of style. We sought
to identify elements that contribute to both the recognition
and cultivation of style, and from these to abstract lessons,
principles or tactics that could inform the design of new mu-
sical interactions.
The ﬁrst day-long workshop took place as part of the
TWEAK festival of interactive art and electronic music in
Limerick City, Ireland. The workshop was structured around
two large-scale tasks. The ﬁrst involved going out into the
world and documenting an interaction that already had some
element of style. The participants prepared posters present-
ing their documentation of the observed interactions incor-
porating sketches, photographs, re-enactments and text. Par-
ticipants were encouraged to ﬁnd an interaction that was
214
repetitive and did not require a signiﬁcant amount of con-
scious thought on the part of the user. In addition, they were
steered toward interactions where they could observe more
than one person attempting to do the same thing.
The second task was to redesign the interactions that were
observed previously in order to encourage the development
of style by the user. This was introduced with a short pre-
sentation on physical sketching, along with the difference
between sketching and prototyping, illustrated by the de-
velopment of the BeatBearing instrument [19]. Participants
then used simple materials (e.g. paper, pipe cleaners, model-
ing clay, foam core, tape, pins) to physically sketch possible
ways of redesigning their chosen interaction.
The second workshop was given over two days as the ﬁrst
of this year’sAdventures in Interdisciplinaritythat make up
a part of Queen’s University Belfast’s Interdisciplinary Arts
MA program. An additional requirement imposed by the
context of the course was that the “Adventure” must lead
to a public presentation in the evening of the second day.
As a result, we implemented a second redesign task where
the participants were required to create a “living” physical
sketch of their improved interaction.
The living sketch was required to be human-scale but free
of digital technology; the participants had to devise ways
of demonstrating the functionality and stylistic variations of
their design to an audience using only their bodies and the
sketching materials that were available. All participating
groups based their redesign on the same observed interac-
tion in order to compare the effectiveness of different ele-
ments of design in facilitating style. The given interaction
was a means for a pedestrian to stop trafﬁc and safely cross
the street, a redesign of the highly problematic but ubiqui-
tous existing system involving a button, a trafﬁc light and a
walk/don’t walk sign.
4. Discussion
We discuss two different aspects of the outcomes of the
workshops. First, we highlight issues that arose as a result
of our methodology. Then, using reﬂection and critical anal-
ysis, we reﬁne our initial suppositions regarding style and
present some challenges and tactics for designing for style.
4.1. Methodological Implications
Although some of the language we used during the work-
shops may have clouded this important distinction, upon re-
ﬂection we are not concerned with quantitative comparisons
of style (i.e. an interface that affords “more” or “less” style).
Rather, we are looking to design interactions that facilitate
both stylistic diversity (a high degree of variation in differ-
ent realizations of the same structure), and the ability for a
spectator to recognize this diversity as stylistic variation on
a structure.
The emphasis on designing for stylistic diversity relates
strongly to Resnick’s [20] focus on “wide walls”. Where,
for a given design, conventional thinking considered the ﬂoor–
the ease with which a user can produce a reasonably suc-
cessful result–and the ceiling–the degree to which skill can
be developed–Resnick proposed examining also the walls–
the range of possible interactions.
Physical sketching aided the discussion of style in that
it allowed sketches to be used as props in order to demon-
strate or simulate stylistic variations. The “living sketch”
exercise of the second workshop took this a step further by
addressing the recognition of style by spectators. Although
the participants identiﬁed (implicitly or explicitly) some of
the design lessons we highlight below, particular styles were
difﬁcult to predict until the interaction was simulated. In the
living sketch exercise, one design featured a large piano key-
board embedded in the pavement that pedestrians could ac-
tivate while crossing the street. It was only when they began
acting out scenarios that this group realized the possibility
for interactions between two pedestrians crossing the street
simultaneously in both directions.
Participants at times could not resist the urge to redesign
the interactions to be more efﬁcient or effective, not nec-
essarily stylish. In our ﬁrst workshop, one group observed
ATMs. In the subsequent redesign, the group ended up ad-
dressing functional improvements in response to problems
they had found, rather than considering style. It was no-
table that in addressing these problems, the designs they
produced were remarkably similar, not only to each other,
but also to existing ATMs. These groups did not sufﬁciently
abstract the structure of the interaction, which could have
been something as simple as “securely getting cash from
your bank account at any time of day”. Upon further dis-
cussion, identifying this structure led to a variety of radical
redesigns that appeared to facilitate a much greater diver-
sity of styles. This suggested that considering interactions
in terms of their style and structure could lead to design in-
novations that diverge from existing realizations.
4.2. Design Implications
Designing for style in NIME presents a signiﬁcant chal-
lenge. In other domains, structural constraints imposed by
established traditions, including idiom and performance prac-
tice, can facilitate the communication of structure and style.
But as a largely experimental practice consisting of entirely
novel interactions, NIME tends to forgo traditions.
Lacking an established performance practice or commu-
nity of users, unique instruments must somehow commu-
nicate structure and style in the interaction. We don’t pre-
scribe a single way of accomplishing this, but we offer the
example of Henry Cowell’sRhythmicana. Alternatively ti-
tled Concerto for Rhythmicon and Orchestra, the piece fea-
tures the Rhythmicon, an electronic instrument invented by
Cowell and Leon Theremin in the 1930s [21, 22, 23]. The
Rhythmicon had a keyboard with 17 keys. Each succes-
sive key played a steady pulse at a frequency and tempo that
215
was an increasing integer multiple of the ﬁrst. Although the
piece has never been performed using the actual instrument
[21], had it been premiered as scheduled in 1932 it would
have been witnessed by an audience that had very little con-
cept of electronic instruments and virtually no idea how the
Rhythmicon worked. The ﬁrst movement ofRhythmicana is
clearly designed to demonstrate the Rhythmicon’s capabili-
ties. It begins without orchestra, the solo performer playing
ﬁrst the lowest key for four measures, then adding the sec-
ond, the third, and so on, at regular intervals until the entire
range of the instrument has been demonstrated, after which
different keys are played in combination before the orches-
tra enters. This has the clear effect of providing a sense of
structure to the audience, upon which they can subsequently
assess the style with which the instrument is played.
The concept of risk was identiﬁed as a valuable element
in facilitating style. An interaction can be structured to al-
low for stylistic variations that increase the risk of failure,
which was observed to be an effective means of communi-
cating style. During the TWEAK workshop, one group ob-
served employees of a smoothie shop using blenders. One
proposed redesign was a larger machine resembling a wood-
chipper with a hole into which the employees could toss
fruit, ice or other ingredients. In sketching the interaction,
it was noted that although the structure requires little skill
to perform successfully, it could lead to a variety of in-
teractions that elaborated upon its complexity. Much like
the aforementioned slam dunk competition, users could toss
the fruit from behind their back, from a great distance or
through their legs. This increased risk of failure had a pro-
found impact on style. It was noted that another element of
risk, the inevitable image of a user’s hand caught in the teeth
of the machine, also made the interaction appear to afford a
greater diversity of style.
We propose the existence of a “sweet spot” between an
overly loose or constrained structure in an interaction in or-
der to facilitate style and its recognition. The sweet spot
is admittedly more of an area than a point, and is highly
variable depending on a variety of conditions particular to
a given interaction. Nonetheless, we assert that both exces-
sively structured interactions and overly free ones can be
detrimental to style. A highly constrained structure can im-
pede stylistic diversity because it can suggest or allow an
excessively limited range of realizations: There are a very
limited number of techniques that will allow one to juggle
ten balls, but juggling three balls offers a large number of
stylistic possibilities [24].
Lack of constraints on structure can arguably afford a
greater diversity of styles, but they may be more difﬁcult
to recognize: The structure ofjuggling–tossing multiple ob-
jects from hand to hand–facilitates the differentiation of jug-
gling tricks (e.g. shower vs. cascade) as stylistic variations
on a common structure much more readily than a signiﬁ-
cantly looser structure such asthings I can do with 3 balls
(e.g. holding them in one hand vs. placing them on the
table). While these latter interactions could technically be
considered variations on this much looser structure, a spec-
tator would ﬁnd it nearly impossible to discern the structure,
and therefore the style, from these two observations.
The example of juggling also leads to the observation that
embodied knowledge of a physical system may aid specta-
tors in identifying structure. This can be considered as a
translation of Dourish’s [25] theory of embodied interaction
to the perspective of a spectator. Juggling relies on the spec-
tator’s embodied knowledge that dropping something is in-
herently wrong. The relative rigidity of the structure, degree
of observed effort and our ability to comprehend observed
actions in terms of our own [26], contribute to embodied
assessments of success, difﬁculty, skill and style.
A design tactic arising from this concept of a style sweet
spot is to consider adjusting the scale of the structure as a
part of the design process. Prototypes or sketches that vary
the number of parameters, features, degrees of freedom, al-
lowable actions or handles and buttons can help designers
locate structures where there is enough freedom for style to
emerge, but not too much that structure is not discernible.
A notable recent example [27] implemented this tactic in
seeking to create infrainstruments, devices with “restricted
interactive potential” by stripping away features of existing
instruments. Although the results may have been toward the
extreme of limiting the cultivation of style, the approach is
nonetheless quite revealing.
Even for a given physical interface, imposing structure
by varying other constraints of the interaction (through pro-
gramming, for example) can radically affect the facility to
develop style. The BeatBearing instrument [19] allows the
user to create a rhythmic pattern by placing ball bearings on
a grid. In multiple performances that move toward creating
the same beat, random access to the grid allows for varia-
tion in style through the choice of timing and sequence of
steps. A different programming of the interface that only
allowed a linear progression of states (e.g. kick drum ﬁrst,
then snare, then cowbell) would impose rigid constraints on
the structure that may impede the development of style.
Style and functionality are not mutually exclusive; in fact,
considering style sometimes suggested functional improve-
ments. In our living sketch exercise, one group used the
metaphor of a “touch lamp”, where the entire surface of a
structure at the intersection would activate a familiar trafﬁc
control system involving sonic (beeping) and visual (walk /
don’t walk) feedback. While maintaining a one-button inter-
face, simply changing the scale of that button from ﬁnger-
sized to body-sized led to a greater diversity of styles but
also a variety of potential functional improvements: the abil-
ity to activate the system with your hands full, improved
hygiene and increased accessibility. Of course, the actual
functional beneﬁts of these would ultimately have to be em-
pirically tested in light of potential trade-offs, but it is sig-
216
niﬁcant that these arose through the consideration of style.
The relationship between style and functionality led to
further observations about the interplay between design and
redesign. As in the ATM example above, the previous trafﬁc
control example demonstrates that the consideration of style
should not necessarily be relegated to a later stage of a linear
design process after needﬁnding, problem solving and form-
giving. The consideration of style can be conceived as a
creative method; a mental leap ahead that may propagate
backward to suggest new problems or functional solutions.
The workshops to date have played a signiﬁcant role in
the process of our research into the cultivation and recogni-
tion of style in performance. We aim to reﬁne future iter-
ations of the workshop with the goals of developing a rig-
orous language and set of principles for designers of new
musical interactions.
5. Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank all of the participants in
our workshops, as well as those who facilitated their orga-
nization: Anna Newell and Juliana Licinic from CETL at
Queen’s University Belfast, and Nora O’Murch´u from the
University of Limerick.
References
[1] M. Brand and A. Hertzmann, “Style machines,” in Proc. of
the Conf. on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques,
2000, pp. 183–192.
[2] U. Eco, “The poetics of the open work,” in Audio Culture:
Readings in Modern Music, C. Cox and D. Warner, Eds.
Continuum Press, 2004, pp. 167–175.
[3] S. Davies, “Philosophical perspectives on music’s expres-
siveness,” in Music and Emotion, P. Juslin and J. Sloboda,
Eds. Oxford University Press, 2001.
[4] C. Poepel, “On interface expressivity: a player-based study,”
in Proc. of the Conf. on New Instruments for Musical Expres-
sion (NIME), 2005, pp. 228–231.
[5] ——, “Formalized and non-formalized expression in musi-
cal interfaces,” in Transdisciplinary Digital Art. Sound, Vi-
sion and the New Screen, R. Adams, S. Gibson, and S. M.
Arisona, Eds. Springer, 2008, pp. 358–373.
[6] P. N. Juslin, “Emotional communication in music perfor-
mance: A functionalist perspective and some data,” Music
Perception, vol. 14, pp. 383–418, 1997.
[7] R. K. Scherer and M. R. Zentner, “Emotional effects of mu-
sic: production rules,” in Music and Emotion, P. Juslin and
J. Sloboda, Eds. Oxford University Press, 2001.
[8] R. Taruskin, Text and Act: Essays on Music and Perfor-
mance. Oxford University Press, USA, 1995.
[9] M. Gurevich and J. Trevino, “Expression and its discontents:
toward an ecology of musical creation,” inProc. of the Conf.
on New Instruments for Musical Expression (NIME), 2007,
pp. 106–111.
[10] A. Camurri, C. Canepa, and G. V olpe, “Active listening to a
virtual orchestra through an expressive gestural interface: the
orchestra explorer,” inProc. of the Conf. on New Instruments
for Musical Expression (NIME), 2007, pp. 56–61.
[11] A. Kn ¨orig, B. M ¨uller, and R. Wettach, “Articulated paint:
musical expression for non-musicians,” inProc. of the Conf.
on New Instruments for Musical Expression (NIME), 2007,
pp. 384–385.
[12] T. M. Lippit, “Turntable music in the digital era: designing
alternative tools for new turntable expression,” inProc. of the
Conf. on New Instruments for Musical Expression (NIME),
2006, pp. 71–74.
[13] E. Chew, A. Franc ¸ois, J. Liu, and A. Yang, “ESP: a driving
interface for expression synthesis,” in Proc. of the Conf. on
New Instruments for Musical Expression (NIME), 2005, pp.
224–227.
[14] E. Franco, N. Grifﬁth, and M. Fernstr ¨om, “Issues for de-
signing a ﬂexible expressive audiovisual system for real-time
performance & composition,” inProc. of the Conf. on New
Instruments for Musical Expression (NIME), 2004, pp. 165–
168.
[15] J. K. Doyle and D. N. Ford, “Mental models concepts for
system dynamics research,”Syst. Dynam. Rev., vol. 14, no. 1,
pp. 3–29, 1998.
[16] A. C. Fyans, M. Gurevich, and P. Stapleton, “Where did it
all go wrong? A model of error from the spectators perspec-
tive,” inProc. of the Conf. on New Instruments for Musical
Expression (NIME), 2009.
[17] C. Dobrian and D. Koppelman, “The ’E’ in NIME: musical
expression with new computer interfaces,” in Proc. of the
Conf. on New Instruments for Musical Expression (NIME),
2006, pp. 277–282.
[18] D. Wessel and M. Wright, “Problems and prospects for in-
timate musical control of computers,” Compututer Music
Journal, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 11–22, 2002.
[19] P. Bennett and S. O’Modhrain, “The BeatBearing: a tan-
gible rhythm sequencer,” in Proc. of NordiCHI 2008: 5th
Nordic Conference on Computer-Human Interaction (elec-
tronic proceedings), 2008.
[20] M. Resnick and B. Silverman, “Some reﬂections on design-
ing construction kits for kids,” inProc. of the Conf. on Inter-
action Design and Children, 2005, pp. 117–122.
[21] M. Schedel, “Anticipating interactivity: Henry Cowell and
the Rhythmicon,” Organised Sound, vol. 7, no. 03, pp. 247–
254, 2003.
[22] N. Didkovsky, “Recent compositions and performance in-
strument realized in the Java Music Speciﬁcation Language,”
inProc. of the Conf. on New Instruments for Musical Expres-
sion (NIME), 2004.
[23] L. Smith, “Henry Cowell’s Rhythmicana,” Anuario Inter-
americano de Investigacion Musical, vol. 9, 1973.
[24] M. Truzzi, “On keeping things up in the air,” Natural His-
tory, vol. 88, no. 10, pp. 44–54, 1979.
[25] P. Dourish, Where the Action Is: The Foundations of Embod-
ied Interaction. MIT Press, 2001.
[26] S. Blakemore and J. Decety, “From the perception of action
to the understanding of intention,” Nature Reviews Neuro-
science, vol. 2, no. 8, pp. 561–567, 2001.
[27] J. Bowers and P. Archer, “Not hyper, not meta, not cyber but
infra-instruments,” in Proc. of the Conf. on New Instruments
for Musical Expression (NIME), 2005, pp. 5–10.
217