Interactive Rainbow Score:  
A Visual-centered Multimodal Flute Tutoring System 
 
Daniel Chin Yian Zhang Tianyu Zhang Jake Zhao Gus G. Xi a 
Music X Lab 
New York University, Shanghai 
{ daniel.chin,  yian.zhang,  tz1201,  j.zhao,  gxia } @nyu.edu
ABSTRACT 
Learning to play an instrument is intrinsically multimodal, and we 
have seen a trend of applying visual and haptic feedback in music 
games and computer-aided music tutoring systems. However, most 
current systems are still designed to master individual pieces of music; 
it is unclear how well the learned skills can be generalized to new 
pieces. We aim to explore this question. In this study, we contribute 
Interactive Rainbow Score, an interactive visual system to boost the 
learning of sight-playing, the general musical skill to read music and 
map the visual representations to performance motions. The key 
design of Interactive Rainbow Score is to associate pitches (and the 
corresponding motions) with colored notation and further strengthen 
such association via real-time interactions. Quantitative results show 
that the interactive feature on average increases the learning efficiency 
by 31.1%. Further analysis indicates that it is critical to apply the 
interaction in the early period of learning. 
 
Author Keywords 
Visual interface, multimodal learning, adaptive learning.  
 
CCS Concepts 
• Human-centered computing → Visualization → Visualization 
design and evaluation methods; •Applied computing → Arts and 
humanities → Sound and music computing; •Applied computing → 
Education → Interactive learning environments 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
1.1 Background of Multimodal Music 
Learning 
 
Figure 1. A cognitive model of multimodal music learning. 
Learning to play an instrument is intrinsically multimodal [14].  It 
demands the human learner to incorporate multiple m odalities, 
including visual (e.g. to see and read the musical notes), motor (e.g. 
finger movements on a piano), and auditory (e.g. to listen to the music 
one is playing). These modalities interact with one another as one plays 
music. Figure 1 shows the three modalities and their interactions. 
 There are usually two types of music learning skills. Type I: to learn 
individual pieces. This means to memorize some of the three 
representations of a piece (the music notation, the finger movements, 
and the sound) Type II: to develop general musicality. This means to 
learn the mappings (indicated by the red arrows) am ong the 
representations.  
 The key difference between these two types of skills is that the latter 
can be easily generalized to learn new pieces of music, while the 
former cannot. For example, in order to sing a song, one has to at least 
memorize the auditory representation, but such a memory would not 
help with learning another piece unless they two sh are a long 
subsequence of notes. 
1.2 Interactive Multimodal Music Systems 
There exist many music games and computer-aided music 
tutoring systems using multimodal feedback. For example, 
Guitar Hero [5], Rock Bands [1], and Taiko no Tatsujin [12] 
apply real-time visual feedback to indicate the timing of 
rhythmic performances. More recently, we see haptic 
instruments [14, 15] and gloves [8, 11, 15] being used in flute 
and piano tutoring. However, most systems are designed to help 
practice Type I skills; it is unclear how much of musicality, the 
Type II skills, can be gained from interacting with multimodal 
interfaces. 
 We aim to explore the question above. In this study, we focus 
on sight-playing, the general musicality to read music while 
mapping the visual representations to performance motions. To 
improve the learning efficiency, we contribute Interactive 
Rainbow Score, an interactive and intelligent visual interface 
inspired by chromagram [2] and piano roll [13] representations. 
This current interface is customized for elementary flute 
performance and has three key design features. First, pitch is 
associated with both color and note height for easy and intuitive 
score reading. Second, real-time visual feedback is displayed on 
the interface to further strengthen the visual-motor association. 
Third, several learning modes (with different levels of guidance) 
are created, and learners can choose which mode to use based on 
their learning progress. The user study shows that adding 
interactive features increases the learning efficiency by 31.1%. 
 In the next section, we describe the interface design in detail. 
We present the learning strategy in Section 3, the user study in 
Section 4, discussion in Section 5, and finally come to the 
conclusion in Section 6.  
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
208
 
Figure 2. An illustration of the Rainbow Score visual interface. 
 
Figure 3. The corresponding modern staff notation.
2. INTERFACE DESIGN 
We first present the Rainbow Score interface in Section 2.1 and 
then discuss the multimodal interaction feature in Section 2.2. 
2.1 Rainbow Score 
The visual interface is shown in Figure 2, in which an example 
of Rainbow Score notation is shown on the main panel laid in 
the middle, a flute icon is drawn on the left, and the control panel 
is displayed on the right. Each page is split into two rainbow 
bands for better displays. Each band is analogous to a staff and 
contains 4 chunks, each representing a measure. For example, 
the piece shown in Figure 2 contains 8 measures in total. (For 
ease of interpretation, the corresponding modern staff notation is 
shown in Figure 3.) 
2.1.1 Rhythm 
Each note is represented by a colored rectangle, and the duration of a 
note is proportional to its width. The rhythm is also visualized using 
the stem-beam notation borrowed from modern staff notation. For 
elementary flute players, this design prepares them to later learn the 
modern staff notation. 
2.1.2 Pitch 
As the current design focuses on elementary-level sight-playing, we 
restrict the pitch range to a diatonic scale in C major. To be specific, 
the seven pitches (C, D, E, F, G, A, and B) are laid out in 7 rows (from 
low to high), each assigned a unique color (red, orange, yellow, green, 
blue, purple, and grey) [7]. Thus, we see a trinity of pitch, color, and 
height, in which any one determines the other two. 
 Such trinity is further associated with performance finger positions 
via the flute icon, which contains seven holes: one blowing hole on the 
top and six finger holes below. The blowing hole is always grey, and 
each finger hole has two states: 1) released, if it is grey, and 2) covered, 
if the color matches the corresponding row. For example, in Figure 2, 
the playhead (vertical white bar) in the 4th measure indicates that the 
note being played is D, an orange note on the second lowest row. Such 
color and height information is further reflected on the flute icon — 
only the lowest hole is grey, which means that to play D on the flute, 
the player should cover all holes except the lowest one. Notice that B 
is triggered by releasing all finger holes and the top row has transparent 
background. Hence the Rainbow Score can be perceived as 6 rows for 
note C - A with an extra space above for note B. 
 In summary, the Rainbow Score notation inherits the benefits from 
both the abstractness of sheet music and the direct ness of finger 
notations such as guitar tabs. This advantage is the most obvious when 
compared to some commercial interactive pianos with a vertical piano 
roll falling downwards and keys lighting up for the player to press [10]. 
Such piano tutoring system has been criticized as musical whac-a-
mole, in which the player remains passive and mechanical. Rainbow 
Score, on the other hand, requires the player to develop an abstract 
analogy between the visual representation and the motor movements. 
We believe this multimodal analogy is essential to sight-playing. 
2.2 Multimodal Interactivity 
To achieve better learning effect, we add interactivity to 
Rainbow Score, and name it Interactive Rainbow Score. 
2.2.1 Real-time Visual Feedback 
On the visual interface, we use white masks to indicate player 
performance in real time. The white masks are placed beneath 
the colored notes and above the rainbow canvas. As a result, a 
correctly played note will be outlined with white borders, while 
a mistake will yield a jarring white mask, accompanied with 
arrows pointing towards the correct pitch. For example, the 
Interactive Rainbow Score in Figure 4 shows that the first 5 notes 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
209
are played correctly but the 6 th note E is incorrectly played as a 
D. 
 
Figure 4. An illustration of the  
overall multimodal interaction. 
2.2.2 Offline Mistake Review 
When the player finishes a song, the entire performance history 
is displayed on the screen. The tutoring software then offers an 
option for the player to review the mistakes and toggle between 
the played version and the ground truth. 
2.2.3 Hardware and Synthesizer 
We adopt the hardware design in [14] and craft an electrical flute 
that reads the player’s finger position using capacitive sensors 
and sends the real-time performance data to both the visual 
interface and the sound synthesizer. Similar to [14], the breath 
velocity is not measured, and the sound synthesizer assumes a 
constant breath velocity that restrains the performance in a single 
octave.  
 Above all, our system adds interactive visual feedback for 
sight-playing training on top of auditory feedback in the 
traditional setup. It is also different from most music games such 
as Guitar Hero [5] and Rock Band [1] in that most audio-visual 
effect of Interactive Rainbow Score is determined by human 
performance rather than pre-programmed. In essence, the 
multimodal feedback helps the player learn the mapping between 
visual notation and performance motion, and that mapping is still 
valid even when the feedback system is turned off. 
3. LEARNING MODES 
The Interactive Rainbow Score interface enables four learning 
modes, which are summarized in Table 1. Here, we see two 
perspectives: 1) static vs. interactive, and 2) system leads vs. 
performer leads. Among the four learning modes, A & B fully 
take advantage of the interactive visual feature, while C & D are 
considered the baseline. 
Table 1. A summary of the 4 learning modes 
 Interactive Static 
System leads progression Mode A Mode C 
Performer leads progression Mode B Mode D 
3.1 Mode A: Frame-wise Feedback 
In this learning mode, the playhead moves at a constant speed 
(which the player can set beforehand on the control panel) 
accompanied with a metronome played in the background. The 
player is supposed to follow the playhead in real time by 
performing the indicated notes. In the meanwhile, real-time 
visual feedback (introduced in Section 2.2.1) is displayed on the 
interface frame by frame, showing the actual performance so that 
the player can supervise the precise performance timing. 
3.2 Mode B: Note-wise Feedback 
In this learning mode, the playhead waits for correct 
performance. If a note is played correctly, it will be outlined with 
white borders and the playhead jumps to the next note. 
Otherwise, the playhead does not move and a white mask 
representing the learner input appears, alongside with a pair of 
arrows indicating the direction for the player to correct the note. 
(Again, see the Rainbow Score in Figure 4) 
3.3 Mode C: Playhead Follower 
This mode mimics some mainstream music games such as Taiko 
no Tatsujin [12], in which the player is also advised to keep up 
the performance with the playhead (same as Mode A) but there 
is no visual feedback. 
3.4 Mode D: Free Practice 
In this learning mode, the Rainbow Score remains static, and 
there is no playhead. The player is free to play any section of the 
piece at any speed. This mode mimics traditional music learning. 
4. EXPERIMENT 
To validate the effectiveness of the interactive visual feature on 
assisting sight-playing learning, we conducted a user study that 
compares the interactive learning modes A & B with the static 
baseline, modes C & D. 
4.1 General Curriculum Design 
It is important to remark that sight-playing is a general musical 
skill gradually gained through practicing different pieces of 
music. Therefore, we need more training pieces than related 
studies that aim to master individual pieces [14, 15]. To this end, 
we design a curriculum which consists of 16 short pieces, all 
modified based on folk songs.  
 During the training, if 3 consecutive exams yield a sight-
playing accuracy equal or greater than 80%, we consider the 
learning goal achieved and the experiment is terminated. We first 
evaluate the difficulty of the pieces based on note density and 
pitch intervals [15] and make the curriculum alternates between 
easy and difficult songs. Such design avoids a “too early 
termination” caused by three consecutive easy exams. It also 
avoids a poor learning experience caused by three consecutive 
difficult ones. 
4.2 Music Pieces to Learn 
To better serve the task of elementary flute sight-playing using 
the Rainbow Score system, all 16 folk songs are modified to 
match three standards. First, pieces are rearranged to C major 
diatonic scale and within one octave, so that the fingering 
position can fully decide the pitch without measuring the 
breathing. Second, no two adjacent notes are of the same pitch, 
so that the hardware has no need to measure tongue movement. 
Finally, most pieces are eight measures to fit in a whole page of 
the Rainbow Score interface.  
Piece No. 1  
 
Piece No. 2 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
210
Piece No. 3 
 
Piece No. 4 
 
Piece No. 5 
 
Piece No. 6 
 
Piece No. 7 
 
Piece No. 8 
 
Piece No. 9 
 
Piece No. 10 
 
Piece No. 11 
 
Piece No. 12 
 
Piece No. 13 
 
Piece No. 14 
 
Piece No. 15 
 
Piece No. 16 
 
4.3 Participants 
18 subjects (12 males and 6 females, age range 18-25, age 
median 20) participated in the study. They are randomly 
assigned to two groups: interactive vs. static (the control group). 
The former has access to learning modes A & B, while the latter 
only has access to learning modes C & D. No subject has prior 
experience on flute performance or sight-playing. 
4.4 Task and Procedure 
For each song, the subject goes through 4 steps: pre-exam, listen 
to the ground truth, practice, and randomized pitch exam. The 
subject is allowed to quit the experiment at any time. 
Pre-exam: We test the subject to play the piece in learning mode 
C without any prior practice. If the performance score is equal or 
greater than 80%, the subject can choose to skip the song. The 
score of performance is computed as the number of correctly 
played notes divided by the total number of notes. A note is 
correctly played if the subject plays it correctly for ≥ 70% of its 
duration.  
Listen to the Ground Truth: We play the ground truth (the 
correct performance of the piece).  
Practice: The subject practices the piece using the modes 
available to him/her. The subject can request to listen to the 
ground truth again at any time. The practice time is limited  
to ≤ 15 minutes.  
Randomized Pitch Exam: We modify the piece by randomizing 
the pitch of all notes while keeping the rhythm unchanged, a nd 
use the modified piece as another sight-playing exam. The 
purpose of the randomized pitch exam is to enforce that the notes 
can only be retrieved from the visual information but not the 
musical context. Both the score of the pre-exam and the score of 
the randomized pitch exam are recorded. 
4.5 Results 
We analyze the overall performances of the two groups in 
Section 4.5.1, study how the performance evolves over the 
training process in Section 4.5.2, and further consider individual 
difference in music talents in Section 4.5.3. We collected 16 
valid results among the 18 invited subjects, 8 for each group. 
(Two quit too early so their learning curves are not informative.) 
4.5.1 Comparison of Average Learning 
Efficiencies 
We define learning efficiency  as the reciprocal of the total 
number of exams a subject takes before he/she passes the 
training. Since there are 16 songs in the curriculum, we have 32 
total exams (half pre-exams and half randomized pitch exams). 
Therefore, the minimum score is 1/32  and the maximum score 
is 1. 
  
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
211
Table 2. A comparison on average learning efficiency 
(1/Number of exams a subject took before success) 
Mode A & B Mode C & D 
(baseline) 
Improvements 
𝟎. 𝟎𝟓𝟗 0.045 31.1% 
Table 2 shows that the average learning efficiency using Mode 
A & B is 31.1% higher than that using Mode C & D,  
with 𝑝 =  0.084 in independent t-test. This improvement shows 
that the interactive visual feedback accelerates the learning 
process. 
4.5.2 Comparison of Learning Curves 
Figure 5 shows how the average exam score (over 8 subjects) of 
each group evolves during the learning process. For both groups, 
we see a general ascending trend and Mode A & B yields a 
better performance than Mode C & D for almost all exams.  
 Note that both curves go up and down because curriculum 
alternates between easy and difficult songs. When a subject 
succeeds and leaves the experiment, the remaining part of the 
score is filled with 100%; if the subject quits, the last valid score 
is copied to fill the remaining scores. 
 
Figure 5. A comparison on average exam scores  
throughout the learning process. 
 
Figure 6. Accumulated scores difference with p-value. 
Figure 6 further demonstrates the accumulated difference (green 
curve) between the two curves in Figure 5 and the corresponding 
p-value (orange curve) of t-test. It is interesting to see that, in 
general, the difference between the two groups is more 
significant in the first half of learning , which indicates that it 
is more critical to apply the interaction feature in the early period 
of learning. 
4.5.3 Individual Differences 
 
Figure 7. The relationship between initial  
and overall performance. 
One may argue that the huge difference between the two groups 
may be caused by individual differences in the music talents, and 
subjects using Mode A & B are by chance more musical.  
 To rule out this possibility, we further examine the relationship 
between the initial talent and the overall performance and show 
it in Figure 7. In each subfigure, one dot represents a subject, 
with its x-coordinate being the subject’s initial talent and its y -
coordinate being the subject’s overall performance. For the first 
row [(a) and (b)], the overall performance is measured by the 
accumulated score of the whole curriculum, while for the second 
row [(c) and (d)], overall performance is based on only the first 
half of the curriculum. Similarly, the graphs are divided into two 
columns based on what we use to represent the subject’s initial 
talent: (a) and (c) use the 1 st exam score, while (b) and (d) use 
the sum of the 1st and the 2nd exam scores.  
 We see that for all subfigures, blue dots are on average above 
the red ones, especially for lower initial scores. This result 
indicates that interactive visual feedback is especially helpful for 
the less talented people, making the learning of music less 
dependent on personal talent. Moreover, the two groups of dots 
are further apart from each other on the second row, which means 
interactive features are more effective in the early period of 
learning. 
4.5.4 Interview 
Here, we report several interview questions and some 
representative answers to help gain a deeper understanding of the 
interactive feature. 
Q1. What do you think the learning process would be like if 
the interactive feature was unavailable to you? (Only asked 
to the group using Mode A & B) 
- It would be more difficult, since I couldn’t adjust myself.  
- It would be slower. I wouldn’t be able to tell if I  played 
correctly.  
- I would learn slower, but maybe I would gain a more thorough 
understanding.  
  
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
212
Q2. What do you think the learning process would be like if 
the interactive feature was available to you? (Only asked to 
the group using Mode C & D. They try Mode A & B after the 
experiment) 
- It would be faster. I would be able to tell apart different notes 
sooner.  
- It would help me correct my mistakes. But I may be more 
nervous to sight-play.  
- It would help my rhythm. I would realize I played every note a 
little bit late. However, the white masks are a little messy. Too 
much stuff on the screen can be distracting.  
Q3. Do you have any other comments?  
- In Mode A, I can hardly keep up with the music, let alone to 
look at the white masks. In Mode B, however, there is more time 
for me to read the white masks.  
- I cannot hear my mistakes. I always have to spot them. Even 
when the interactive feature is off, I spot my mistakes by seeing 
that the color of the note does not match with the note I’m 
playing.  
- In the beginning, I translated the visual directly to my finger 
motions. Later, the translation acquired an intermediate step: 
the abstract musical note. From this point I could identify my 
mistakes using my ears.  
- The white masks help because it parallels with the finger 
positions. I immediately identify my mistakes when I make them. 
I use the white masks to know which direction to incrementally 
correct my mistakes. I can hear my mistakes.  
- I use height information to identify note C - F, and color 
information to identify note G - B.  
- I use color to remember that pink notes are A. The color helps 
on a subconscious level. 
5. DISCUSSION 
The remarks from the users confirm our hypothesis of why the 
interactive feature is effective. With the real-time feedback, the 
player learns the mapping between motion and visuals not only 
when he/she plays correctly, but also when he/she makes 
mistakes. This augments the learning material beyond the 
original piece and prevents the learner from ever losing track of 
what note he/she is playing. Moreover, the learner and the 
tutoring system form a loop where the learner tries to translate 
visual notations to motions and the system translates motions to 
visuals back for the learner to improve such translation ability. 
Furthermore, graphics are intrinsically less abstract than a time 
series of performance motions or pitches, which makes the visual 
channel suitable for displaying performance mistakes.  
6. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We have contributed Interactive Rainbow Score, an interactive 
visual interface to assist elementary sight-playing training. We 
found that the interactive visual feedback on average boosts the 
learning efficiency by 31.1%. Based on the observation of the 
learning curves, we conclude that the benefit of interactive visual 
feature is especially significant in the early stage of learning.  
 Above all, the new interface sheds some light on learning 
general musicality using interactive systems. 
 In the future, we will continue to investigate multimodal 
interactive strategies for music learning. Firstly, we plan to 
integrate the visual feedback feature with haptic-based systems. 
More generally, we would like to build a theoretical model that 
explains the interactions between various modal inputs and 
outputs of a learner. 
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We want to thank Larry Wasserman, Xingdong Yang, and Ziyu Wang 
for their feedback and recommendations.  
8. REFERENCES 
[1] Rock Band. www.rockband4.com. 
[2] Dan Ellis. Chroma Feature Analysis and Synthesis. 
labrosa.ee.columbia.edu/matlab/chroma-ansyn.  
[3] Katsuya Fujii, et al. ACM 2015. "MoveMe: 3D haptic support 
for a musical instrument." In Proceedings of the 12th 
International Conference on Advances in Computer 
Entertainment Technology. 
[4] Graham Grindlay. 2008. Haptic guidance benefits musical 
motor learning. In HAPTICS ’08: Proceedings of the 2008 
Symposium on Haptic Interfaces for Virtual Environment and 
Teleoperator Systems, pages 397–404, Washington, DC, USA, 
2008. IEEE Computer Society. 
[5] Guitar Hero. www.guitarhero.com/game.  
[6] Kevin Huang, et al. ACM, 2010. Mobile music touch: mobile 
tactile stimulation for passive learning. In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 
[7] K. Itoh, H. Sakata, I.L. Kwee, et al. Musical pitch classes 
have rainbow hues in pitch class-color synesthesia. Sci 
Rep 7, 17781 (2017). 
[8] Jeanine Mae Jacobson. 2006. Professional Piano Teaching: A 
Comprehensive Piano Pedagogy Textbook for Teaching 
Elementary-level Students. Vol. 1. Alfred Music Publishing. 
[9] O’Malley, M. K., & Gupta, A. 2008. Haptic Interfaces. Pages 
25–74, Morgan-Kaufman Publisher. 
[10] The One Smart Piano. www.smartpiano.com.  
[11] Cyber Glove Systems. www.cyberglovesystems.com. 
[12] Taiko no Tatsujin. www.nintendo.com/games/detail/taiko-
no-tatsujin-drum-n-fun-switch.  
[13] Larry Wang. Piano Roll. 
web.mit.edu/larryw/www/pianoroll.  
[14] Gus Xia, Jacobsen, C., Chen, Q., Yang, X. and Dannenberg, R. 
2018. ShIFT: A Semi-haptic Interface for Flute Tutoring. In 
The 18th International Conference on New Interfaces for 
Musical Expression. 
[15] Yian Zhang, Yinmiao Li, Daniel Chin, and Gus Xia. 2019. 
Adaptive Multimodal Music Learning via Interactive 
Haptic Instrument. Proceedings of the International 
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 
UFRGS, pp. 140–145. 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
213