Patchwerk: Multi-User Network Control of a Massive
Modular Synthesizer
Brian Mayton
MIT Media Lab
75 Amherst St.
Cambridge, MA 02139
bmayton@media.mit.edu
Gershon Dublon
MIT Media Lab
75 Amherst St.
Cambridge, MA 02139
gershon@media.mit.edu
Nicholas Joliat
MIT Media Lab
75 Amherst St.
Cambridge, MA 02139
njoliat@media.mit.edu
Joseph A. Paradiso
MIT Media Lab
75 Amherst St.
Cambridge, MA 02139
joep@media.mit.edu
ABSTRACT
We present Patchwerk, a networked synthesizer module with
tightly coupled web browser and tangible interfaces. Patch-
werk connects to a pre-existing modular synthesizer using
the emerging cross-platform HTML5 WebSocket standard
to enable low-latency, high-bandwidth, concurrent control
of analog signals by multiple users. Online users control
physical outputs on a custom-designed cabinet that reﬂects
their activity through a combination of motorized knobs
and LEDs, and streams the resultant audio. In a typical
installation, a composer creates a complex physical patch
on the modular synth that exposes a set of analog and
digital parameters (knobs, buttons, toggles, and triggers)
to the web-enabled cabinet. Both physically present and
online audiences can control those parameters, simultane-
ously seeing and hearing the results of each other’s actions.
By enabling collaborative interaction with a massive analog
synthesizer, Patchwerk brings a broad audience closer to a
rare and historically important instrument. Patchwerk is
available online at http://synth.media.mit.edu.
Keywords
Modular synthesizer, HTML5, tangible interface, collabora-
tive musical instrument
1. INTRODUCTION
Nearly every computer musician has interacted with some
form of modular software synthesizer, but relatively few
have had the opportunity to patch on a large, tangible ana-
log synth. Modular synths are bulky, expensive, and exceed-
ingly rare, conﬁned for the most part to music departments
and museums, or in the hands of a small number of enthu-
siasts and composers. Yet these instruments are coveted by
many musicians looking for tangible controls and a gritty
analog sound, and continue to fascinate general audiences
when displayed publicly. Popular websites like synthtopia
cater to enthusiasts, but new synths also appear regularly
on tech blogs with much broader audiences, like Wired and
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’12,May 21 – 23, 2012, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Figure 1: Paradiso’s modular analog synthesizer.
Engadget. At the same time, it is diﬃcult to create physical
installations that allow the general public to directly ma-
nipulate or patch these instruments; a steep learning curve
and delicate controls mean that visitors can watch and lis-
ten, but they can’t touch. We encountered that particular
issue when we were invited to install our massive modular
synth [3], one of the world’s largest, at the MIT Museum.
Built by Dr. Joseph A. Paradiso throughout the 1970s
and 80s, our synth consists of ﬁve large cabinets that to-
gether contain nearly 200 homemade modules, a number of
home-built and custom-modiﬁed keyboard interfaces, and a
pair of substantially augmented and fully integrated Moog
synths. To date, Paradiso has been its only serious com-
poser and player. In a typical installation, he assembles a
complex patch over many hours, creating an evolving and
often unpredictable, autonomous soundscape.
The synth has attracted a fair amount of public inter-
est over its lifetime, and has enjoyed renewed attention in
recent years. In 2011, we created an audio stream that al-
lowed an online audience to listen to a stereo mix of the
synth’s output in real-time, 24/7. As an online community
formed around the stream, we created a Twitter feed that
would provide regular listeners with news and updates, an-
nouncing new patches and live performances. Still, despite
all the interest from onsite and online audiences, the synth
remained a non-interactive instrument.
Figure 2: The Patchwerk web client: the knobs
highlighted in red are controlled by remote users.
To address these concerns, and to bring the Paradiso Syn-
thesizer closer to an interested worldwide audience, we de-
veloped Patchwerk, a networked synth module with tightly
coupled web browser and tangible interfaces. Patchwerk al-
lows online and physical audiences to concurrently control
motorized knobs, buttons, and switches to produce ana-
log signal outputs from a physical synthesizer module. De-
signed to match the aesthetics of Paradiso’s original synth
cabinets, our new, web-enabled cabinet uses an embedded
computer and custom hardware to drive the analog and dig-
ital outputs. The cabinet also contains a custom-designed
mixer and audio interface to produce a live audio stream
that is fed back to online users, who can also see each other’s
activity in the browser interface. Visitors to the physical
installation see the moving knobs and ﬂashing LEDs, hear
the eﬀects of remote users’ actions, and can use their smart-
phones to simultaneously control the module.
A web server keeps track of each client, allowing users
(both physical and remote) to take momentary control of
individual knobs and buttons. To support this kind of
cross-platform, multi-user interaction, we use the emerging
HTML5 WebSocket standard and the jQuery JavaScript li-
brary, enabling low-latency, high-bandwidth control from
nearly any modern computing device.
In its ﬁrst week of deployment, Patchwerk hosted more
than 40,000 unique visitors and almost 200 simultaneous
listeners. It was covered in Wired, Engadget, The Atlantic,
and numerous other blogs and publications, and played live
on several local radio stations. Thousands of users ampliﬁed
this coverage by tweeting and re-tweeting links and feed-
back. A number of users recorded the stream and shared
the results on Soundcloud and Youtube. After the initial
surge, a smaller but more committed community of approx-
imately 600 Twitter followers and others continued to listen
and control the module, becoming more adept at the con-
trols and driving the patch to new places. These listeners
would sign on as controllers when the patch got stuck in
one place, just to nudge it back into motion. A month on,
Patchwerk and the Paradiso Synth had become an ambient,
collaborative, and interactive internet radio station and mu-
seum installation.
1.1 Related Work
As far back as the 1970s, composers and researchers were
developing networked music systems that allowed multiple
players on separate instruments to collaborate in perfor-
Figure 3: The Patchwerk module
mance. We point interested readers to [1], a survey of this
history, and [4], which develops a rigorous framework for the
ﬁeld of interconnected musical networks. Patchwerk brings
a distributed, virtual interface into the physical world with
actuated controls, positioning it in a small category of single
instruments that support multiple remote players. In some
ways, our system is similar to performing robots like Hoﬀ-
man and Weinberg’s marimba player [2], in that it extends
an existing, physical instrument with external actuation.
At the same time, as an extension to a one-of-a-kind modu-
lar instrument, Patchwerk can transform dramatically with
new patches and interfaces.
The Patchwerk module is not the ﬁrst digital controller
for an analog synth. Traditionally, Control Voltage/Gate
(CV/Gate) and MIDI-to-Control-Voltage devices have al-
lowed performers to bring older analog synthesizers into
the digital domain, but these devices are designed for single-
user, local control, and don’t integrate aesthetically into the
synth or connect to the web like Patchwerk does. MOTU’s
Volta software plugin also allows users to drive control volt-
ages through their digital audio workstation, but it too rep-
resents one small part of the Patchwerk system. More than
anything, its recent release is an indication that consumer
interest in analog synthesis is still in resurgence. Patchwerk
capitalizes on that interest, bringing users together to col-
laboratively control live-generated music through a shared
physical resource.
2. SYSTEM DESIGN
The Patchwerk system consists of 3 parts: an HTML5 in-
terface for the browser, a web server, and a wooden synth
cabinet containing a low-power embedded computer and a
custom printed circuit board (PCB). The components are
designed to be modular and easily conﬁgurable; for each
new patch, the composer edits a conﬁguration ﬁle that sets
the numbers and types of each input and output, as well as
the analog voltage ranges on the outputs. Each component
reads that ﬁle from the server and sets itself up accord-
ingly. Because the physical knob positions are read by the
microcontroller in the cabinet, they can be decoupled from
the analog output; their ranges are scaled in software to
maximize the control resolution over the range given in the
conﬁguration ﬁle. The system can also be switched into
patching mode, in which the web interface becomes read-
only and the composer is given the full voltage range.
2.1 A Synth Interface for the Web
Patchwerk provides a web browser-based interface to re-
mote users, shown in Figure 2. The web client is built us-
ing HTML5 and the new WebSocket standard and is there-
fore available via any modern browser, including for mo-
bile phone and tablet users. The sockets are used for low-
latency interaction, so that controlling users can achieve
near-seamless control over the synth, and so that other users
can see the synth module updating in real time.
The web client is conﬁgurable such that the composer
using the modular synth can simply specify in a conﬁgura-
tion ﬁle which, and how many, control components should
be exposed on the web interface, selecting among knobs,
keyboards, buttons, switches, and triggers.
The web client interaction allows for ﬁne-grained concur-
rent control. Our server mediates between clients to assign
control of components like knobs and buttons, which can
only be directly controlled by one user at a time. When
a user tries to control a knob, the client requests owner-
ship from the server. Once the user is explicitly handed
control of a component, other users can see the compo-
nent updating in real time, and are not able to control it.
When multiple users try to take control of a single compo-
nent at the same time, the web client does not update the
view until the server has acknowledged one user’s owner-
ship; in this way we avoid giving misleading visual feedback
to the other user. Once the server has acknowledged owner-
ship, the client can update the component without waiting
for more server acknowledgments, thereby maintaining low-
latency UI responsiveness.
2.2 The Patchwerk Server
The Patchwerk server mediates between online clients, who
connect through their browsers using the HTML5 Web-
Socket standard, and the Patchwerk synth module, which
drives the physical hardware and I/O. The server system
can be conﬁgured in two ways: for small numbers of clients,
the low-power computer in the cabinet can act as the sole
server and controller; to support large numbers of clients,
an oﬀ-site middleware server acts as a buﬀer between those
users and the cabinet controller, managing the client list and
assignments, and relaying control messages to the cabinet
over a socket.
Our web server design is conﬁgurable and extensible, in
order to support diﬀerent synthesizer conﬁgurations and
back-end implementations. This means that while working
on a patch, the composer can, without editing any code,
choose how the I/O maps to diﬀerent behaviors (e.g. tog-
gles or triggers) and front-ends (e.g. knobs or keyboard
interfaces in the browser), and how the voltages scale with
control parameters. Switching to a new backend (e.g. from
the embedded server to the larger web server with a network
backend) can be done by implementing a new backend sub-
class and without editing the existing framework.
The Patchwerk web server mediates between concurrent
controlling users. To facilitate eﬀective collaborative con-
trol, we allow a small set of users to control the synth at
a given time, while maintaining a queue of users who have
requested to control it. The web server maintains this infor-
mation in shared data structures, and we use the Autobahn
and Twisted Matrix Python web frameworks to ensure se-
rial accesses of these structures. Users who request control
may enter their names, so that non-controlling observers
can see who is controlling the instrument.
2.3 The Patchwerk Synth Module
The Patchwerk module (Figure 3) is built around a low-
power embedded Intel Atom board running Linux and our
server software. Input and output functionality is handled
by a custom I/O board (Figure 4) that interfaces with the
Atom over USB. It is housed in a wooden cabinet with a
front panel that aesthetically matches the existing synthe-
Figure 4: The custom I/O board.
sizer.
Four analog outputs allow control of continuous parame-
ters in the patch. Each one is controlled both by a physical
knob on the front panel of the module and a virtual knob on
the web interface; turning either adjusts the output. The
potentiometers on the physical panel are motorized to re-
ﬂect changes from web users. The output voltage range can
be mapped anywhere within ±10 volt rails, enabling the
composer to constrain the parameter to appropriate values.
Each output can be separately conﬁgured; for example, one
could be driven from a virtual keyboard in the web interface
and output 1 volt/octave to drive a voltage-controlled os-
cillator (VCO), while another might output a linear voltage
to control the gain of a voltage-controlled ampliﬁer (VCA).
Voltage steps can be arbitrarily quantized via lookup tables,
enabling an output to play speciﬁc notes on a given scale,
for example.
Eight digital ports can be conﬁgured as either inputs or
outputs. As inputs, control signals in the synthesizer patch
can be visualized on the web interface. As outputs, they
can be conﬁgured as triggers (generating a short pulse when
pressed), momentary pushbuttons (on as long as the button
is held down), or toggles (switched between on/oﬀ each time
the button is pressed), with an appropriate representation
shown in the web interface for each mode.
The module also accepts quad-channel audio input which
is mixed down to stereo for the live audio stream to the
internet. The levels of each channel can be individually
adjusted by the composer to create the stereo mix. A stereo
VU meter on the front panel both aids in setting the levels
and provides an eye-catching visual representation of the
audio to exhibit visitors. The audio is digitized by a USB
audio codec on the I/O board and encoded to MP3 and Ogg
Vorbis by the Atom for live streaming to the internet.
3. FUTURE WORK
Patchwerk is new to us and the synth community, and we
have only begun to explore the space of applications for it.
Still, there are a number of steps we are planning to take
in the near future. In live performance, for example, Patch-
werk can be used in conjunction with the synth to allow
audiences or band members to patch outboard instruments
through live eﬀects, using mobile devices to control the as-
signments. In our experience performing as a band with the
synth, it can be challenging to coordinate parameters like
key and tempo with the keyboardist-patcher, who operates
in an extremely complex environment; as a system of many
parallel modules, the synth tends to have a lot of inertia. In
this context, Patchwerk could be used by band members to
tune parameters from across the stage without interrupting
Figure 5: The Patchwerk module integrated into the synth patch.
the performance.
Patchwerk’s open-ended design allows it to interface to
almost any device. We envision smartphone applications
that would map internal sensors to synth parameters, or
turn touchscreens into portable dynamic-phrase synth con-
trollers, mimicking Korg’s Kaosillator on an analog instru-
ment. Patchwerk could serve as a bridge to outboard sen-
sors of all kinds, or feed data from the web, like weather
patterns, into the physical patch.
On the client side, we are developing a JavaScript key-
board interface that allows multiple online users to play
monophonic synth voices. For the module itself, we imag-
ine a family of USB peripherals that would support in-
teractive installations. A camera would allow us to track
audiences and performers using the embedded computer.
A new, smaller cabinet could perform crosspoint switching
controlled over the web, exposing a simple patch bay on the
front and its own USB interface on the back.
We continue to be interested in using Patchwerk to de-
velop the online community around the synth, using Twitter
and other means to broaden audiences’ understanding and
engagement. Already, FM radio listeners have been encour-
aged to log on and control the stream, and popular blogs
have directed non-experts to play with the interface, but
many users still don’t realize that they are driving a phys-
ically actuated device. It is also diﬃcult to communicate
the sheer scale of the synth itself. As a result, we are plan-
ning to include a link to a live video stream of the physical
installation in the next version of the interface. Finally, we
have started to analyze our detailed logs to extract usage
patterns and determine where, when, and how users have
interacted with the interface.
4. CONCLUSIONS
We created Patchwerk, an extension to a one-of-a-kind mas-
sive modular synth that seamlessly brings the analog instru-
ment into the digital, networked domain, while integrating
functionally and aesthetically into the original. Our sys-
tem engages a global community of synth enthusiasts and
curious novices, many of whom have never seen, much less
interacted with anything like Paradiso’s instrument. It also
allows physical audiences to engage with the synthesizer in
a much more direct way than they typically can, and com-
posers to patch in dialogue with audiences. The Patchwerk
web interface serves as a hub for the growing online com-
munity that has formed around the synth’s live stream, and
its cross-platform HTML5 design means that it can run on
nearly any modern computing device. Tens of thousands of
listeners and controllers have connected through the inter-
face in its ﬁrst weeks of operation, directed there from social
networks and blogs. As a system of easily conﬁgurable com-
ponents, Patchwerk opens up a world of applications that
extend the reach of the massive modular synthesizer with-
out compromising its unique sound, tangible interface, or
aesthetics, bringing the historically important instrument
to an eager, global audience.
Patchwerk is available online at http://synth.media.
mit.edu.
5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to the MIT Museum for presenting the synthesizer
and providing a platform for engaging the public with this
work.
6. REFERENCES
[1] ´A. Barbosa. Displaced soundscapes: A survey of
network systems for music and sonic art creation.
Leonardo Music Journal, pages 53–59, 2003.
[2] G. Hoﬀman and G. Weinberg. Shimon: An interactive
improvisational robotic marimba player. Proceedings of
the 28th of the international conference extended
abstracts on Human factors in computing systems,
pages 3097–3102, 2010.
[3] J. Paradiso. Modular Synthesizer. Timeshift:
Proceedings of Ars Electronica, pages 364–370, 2004.
[4] G. Weinberg. Interconnected musical networks:
Toward a theoretical framework. Computer Music
Journal, 29(2):23–39, 2005.