Electric Slide Organistrum
Martin Piñeyro
Montevideo, Uruguay
martinpineyro@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
The Electric Slide Organistrum (Figure 1) is an acoustic
stringed instrument played through a video capture system.
The vibration of the instrument string is generated electro-
magnetically and the pitch variation is achieved by move-
ments carried out by the player in front of a video camera.
This instrument results from integrating an ancient tech-
nique for the production of sounds as it is the vibration of
a string on a soundbox and actual human-computer inter-
action technology such as motion detection.
Figure 1: Electric Slide Organistrum.
Keywords
Gestural Interface, eBow, Pickup, Bowed string, Electro-
magnetic actuation
1. INTRODUCTION
This paper features an instrument which combines the rich
sounds of acoustic instruments with the easy usage and en-
tertainment provided by the current motion detection inter-
faces. The performance of this instrument requires no phys-
ical contact between the player and the instrument since the
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’12,May 21 – 23, 2012, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
string vibrates by means of an electromagnetic ﬁeld and the
pitch varies depending on the position of the performer over
a video camera.
This research is not aimed at creating an instrument ca-
pable of competing with the versatility, expressiveness and
other attributes of traditional acoustic instruments. The
goal is to propose an attractive, easy and intuitive way of
making music with an acoustic stringed instrument.
2. BACKGROUND
There are mechanical stringed instruments such as the Or-
ganistrum (Figure 2), considered predecessor of the Zan-
fona and the Hurdy-Gurdy, which produce sound when the
player spins a rosined wheel (usually made of pear wood)
that rubs the strings continuously. The rosined wheel plays
a similar role to that of the bow used among the instruments
in the orchestral string family.
One of the interesting aspects of the rosined wheel is that
it enables a constant sound to be produced for as long as
the player desires since, unlike what happens with bows,
here the element used to rub the strings has no end. Even
though it is true that there are bowing techniques that allow
an expert performer to minimise the noise gap produced by
changes of direction of the bow, the rosined wheel performs
better for this purpose.
Figure 2: Organistrum.
2.1 Violano Virtuoso
When compared to the traditional bow, the rosined wheel
shows many mechanical advantages regarding the automa-
tion of the string friction of an instrument. While the move-
ment of a traditional bow requires at least incorporating
a mechanism that changes the movement direction when
reaching the ends (tip and frog), the wheel can be attached
to a motor that spins only in one direction to produce sound.
The Violano Virtuoso (Figure 3) patented in United States
in 1905 by Henry Sandell [9], is an instrument used to auto-
matically play the violin utilising rosined wheels to bow the
strings, and small mechanical ”ﬁngers” activated by electro-
magnets to stop the strings. The melodies of this instru-
ment were engraved in punched paper rolls made by the
same manufacturer of the instrument (Mills Novelty Com-
pany).
The Violano Virtuoso solved all mechanical and construc-
tive challenges presented by the creation of an automatic
string instrument, reason why it was inevitable to consider
it the ideal candidate to incorporate a gesture interface. Un-
fortunately, nowadays these instruments are very rare which
makes it very hard to access and even harder to intervene
one.
Figure 3: Mills Violano Virtuoso Standard Model
Considering this, it was decided to orientate this research
towards the search of an alternative method to provoke the
vibration of the strings and vary the sound pitch automat-
ically, preserving the sound eﬀect of bowed instruments.
2.2 Previous Work
The string excitation by means of electromagnetic ﬁelds has
been used to generate sounds for at least 40 years. The most
inﬂuencing antecedents of this work are mentioned below1.
The EBow[5] (Electronic Bow or Energy Bow) is an elec-
tronic device that is used for playing the electric guitar.
This device can cause the vibration of the strings without
the need for the player to touch them. The vibration is in-
duced electromagnetically and results in an inﬁnite sustain.
By the end of the 70’s, Nicolas Collins began to experi-
ment with electric guitars connected to an ampliﬁer’s out-
put and managed to electromagnetically induce the strings
to slightly vibrate in response to audio signals. Collins
named this connection scheme ”Backwards Electric Guitar”
and subsequently built other devices based on the same
work guidelines. In his article[4] Collins describes one of
these devices called ”Level Guitar” for which he assembled
the driver coils over rails enabling the performer to move
them through the strings to shift the overtone balance.
In their work named Electromagnetically-Prepared Piano
Berdahl, Bloland and Smith[3] study in depth the excitation
of certain strings of an acoustic piano using electromagnets
driven by software generated signals.
Subsequently McPherson and Kim [8] introduced an elec-
tromagnetic actuation system that embraces the whole range
of pianos at a reasonable cost and they also included a
feedback-based control strategy that aims at merging the
traditional technique for the creation of sound (hammer ac-
tuated) and the electronic control, resulting in a natural
1Only one subgroup of string instruments which use elec-
tromagnetic ﬁelds to provoke the string vibration will be
mentioned. This paper does not aim at a detailed review of
robotic string instruments created over the years; however
this is available in Ajay Kapur’s paper[7]
extension of the piano.
Shear and Wright [10] suggested an augmentation of the
Rhodes Piano based on electromagnetic actuation. Among
the parameters that this system enables to control are slow
attacks and inﬁnite sustain.
One of the robots built by Sergi Jord` a for the performance
“Afasia” [6] called The Violin Robot includes an Ebow to
cause the vibration of a string and a glissando ﬁnger con-
trolled by a stepper motor which can slide up and down
along the string. This instrument is played using an ex-
oskeleton equipped with multiple sensors.
2.3 Comparison with Previous Work
The Electric Slide Organistrum uses the same feedback loop
principle as Ebow to initiate and maintain the string vi-
bration. The main diﬀerence from the piano based works
mentioned before is that no external signals are used here
to provoke the vibration. In this instrument the signal of
the driver coil is the ampliﬁed output of a magnetic pickup.
Unlike The Violin Robot, this instrument does not use elec-
trical ampliﬁcation for the sound but uses a wooden sound-
box instead. In terms of interaction this instrument uses
motion detection based on the processing of images taken
with a video camera. Finally, another aspect that charac-
terizes this instrument is that it was built with hardware
from unused devices such as printers, scanners and relays.
3. ELECTROMAGNETIC ACTUATOR
As mentioned earlier the vibration of the instrument’s string
is achieved through an electromagnetic actuation system.
This system is based on a positive feedback audio ampliﬁer
circuit (Figure 4(b)). All the elements in the circuit are
standard except from the driver and pickup coils (Figure
4(a)). The movement of the string in presence of a mag-
netic ﬁeld induces electrical current the input coil which is
ampliﬁed by the audio ampliﬁer and fed to the driver coil.
This produces a varying magnetic ﬁeld on the driving coil
that drives the string at its resonant frequency, and sustains
the vibration. Because of the positive feedback, this system
is able to induce the vibration from rest.
While looking for adequate coils, experiments were made
with various windings taken from unused electronic devices
such as head-phones, telephone receivers, microphones and
transformers taken from compact ﬂuorescent lamps, how-
ever, none of these coils performed eﬀectively. Finally, a
test was done with coils of 12 V relays usually used in cars.
In order to adapt the impedance of these coils to the am-
pliﬁer, the amount of wire turns was reduced until reaching
an impedance of 50 Ohms in the pickup coil and 8 Ohms in
the driver coil. When the desired impedance was reached, a
permanent magnet taken from the stator of a DC motor was
incorporated to the base of each of the coils to provide the
magnetic ﬁeld required for the electromagnetic induction.
When bringing both coils closer to the strings of an acous-
tic guitar, the system was capable of inducing the vibration.
This test also showed that the gap between the coils has a
big impact on the production of sound. A gap of less than
5 cm quickly produces a high-piched sound comparable to
that of the audio feedback when a microphone points to a
loudspeaker. As the gap increases between the driver and
the pickup coils, the sound becomes low-pitched and the
”bowed string” eﬀect begins to be noticed. Moreover, as the
gap between the coils increases, the system takes longer to
cause the vibration of the string. The distance determined
to preserve the bow sound without compromising the string
excitation period was 8 cm.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4: 4(a) Driver and pickup coils mounted
on the instrument. 4(b) Electromagnetic system’s
schematic
4. DESIGN OF THE INSTRUMENT
4.1 Pitch variation mechanism
Sliding a metal pipe along a vibrating string (slide guitar or
bottleneck guitar technique) enables to vary the pitch with-
out stopping the vibration. Taking into consideration that
the electromagnetic actuation system needs approximately
one second to induce audible vibrations, it is desirable to
change the pitch without stopping the string. As an addi-
tional advantage, it is easier to implement a mechanism to
slide a metallic cylinder along a string, varying the contact
point, than a system capable of stopping a string against
a ﬁngerboard in diﬀerent spots (e.g. the one used in the
Violano Virtuoso).
The print head positioning mechanism of an inkjet printer
was adapted so that, instead of moving an ink cartridge
across a sheet of paper it moves a metal slide back and forth
along a guitar string. In order to accomplish this, the metal
slide was assembled on a wooden piece and this attached to
the stepper motor using the carriage belt. In this way the
movement of the stepper motor of the print head positioning
system determines the position of the contact point of the
metal slide and the string, hence varying the sound pitch.
A driver circuit based on an H-Bridge L293D was built to
control the stepper motor and an Arduino [1] board was
used to command the movement from a computer through
an USB port.
4.2 Body of the instrument
The design of the body of the instrument was determined
by two signiﬁcant factors:
• Interaction with the instrument
• Shape of the inkjet printer chassis
Due to the selected interaction model, designing the body
of the instrument to be hand held was not an option. Rather,
its physical design/morphology should allow the player to
move his/her hands in front of the video camera. For this
reason, it was decided to design a table top structure
The inkjet printer chassis (designed to be placed on a
desk) was used as the core element of the instrument to
Figure 5: Top view of the instrument
take advantage of its morphological and mechanical charac-
teristics. Figure 5 shows a top view of the instrument. In
order to make the user experience as intuitive as possible,
the chassis was placed in such a way that the movement
of the metal slide headed in the same direction than the
player’s hand in front of the video camera. The aim was
that the player perceived that the metal slide was following
the movement of his/her hand2.
4.3 Soundbox
A wooden cigar box was used to couple the vibration of
the strings to the surrounding air. The bridge transfers the
motion of the string to the top plate of the box, causing it
to vibrate at the same frequency. To achieve a reasonable
sound amplitude the side of the box built of thinner wood
was chosen as the top plate. Two sound holes were cut
longitudinally so the top plate can vibrate more easily and
to allow the exit of air displaced as a result of this move-
ment. Figure 6 shows the sound box, the sound holes and
the bridge.
Figure 6: Sound box, sound holes and bridge
5. INTERACTION
5.1 Expected user behavior
The user interface of the system was designed pursuing dis-
coverability. This means that through this interface a per-
son should be able to interact with the instrument without
receiving instructions. It is therefore important that the
user can establish a natural connection between the gesture
that is made and the system response.
Certain assumptions about how people would react when
faced with the instrument were made:
2A demonstration video can be found at:
http://vimeo.com/23871661
Visual exploration: Since this is an unfamiliar object it
was anticipated that the ﬁrst phase of the interaction would
consist on a visual evaluation.
Hand gestures: Supposing the exploration phase pro-
vides suﬃcient visual information and arouses interest, the
assumption is that the user would proceed to interact with
the instrument using his/her hands.
Figure 7 shows the expected behavior at the moment the
user faces the instrument.
5.2 Camera position
Placing the video camera and the instrument at the same
level and capturing the player from a very low angle reduces
the number of objects present in the scene and enables to
have no undesired moving objects in it. This fact certainly
simpliﬁes the image processing and, furthermore, allows the
system to shut down when no moving objects are captured,
meaning no user is intending to interact with the instru-
ment.
Because of the way in which the parts of this instru-
ment were laid out, the user was expected to move forward
his/her head to explore it visually from above. When that
happens, the head enters in the visual domain of the cam-
era. Consequently, the instrument starts producing sound
and the metal slide moves. This response from the system
intends to make the user understand in few seconds that
when an object enters the visual ﬁeld of the camera, sound
is produced, the metal slide follows the object’s position
and sound changes its pitch. Then the user can choose to
continue interacting by moving his/her head or proceed to
try another gesture (e.g. using his/her arms).
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Figure 7: Expected user behavior: 7(a) The user
is standing in front of the instrument. 7(b) Comes
closer to observe in detail and as a consequence en-
ters the camera ﬁeld of view. The instrument starts
producing sound and the metal slide moves. 7(c)
The user starts to interact using his/her arms.
5.3 Blob tracking
Images from the video camera (Logitech HD Webcam C910)
are processed by a blob tracking application developed in
C++ using OpenFrameworks [2] that allows obtaining the
moving object’s position within the scene. Every time an
object is detected on the scene the application determines
thex coordinate of the center of the object’s outer rect-
angle. That value is mapped in the range of values where
the stepper motor can move preventing the metal slide from
reaching the end of the chassis, and is subsequently trans-
mitted to the Arduino board through an USB port.
To ensure that the instrument produces sound only when
someone is using it, the application that processes the im-
ages sends a special character before each update of the de-
tected objects x coordinate. This character deﬁnes the state
of a relay that connects or disconnects the power of the elec-
tromagnetic action circuit depending on whether it detects
an object on scene or not. To avoid false positive detec-
tions, only blobs whose area exceeds a predeﬁned threshold
are tracked.
6. CONCLUSIONS
This paper proposes a method to establish a nexus between
the production of sounds through acoustic means and in-
terfaces based on motion detection technology. An elec-
tromagnetic actuation system capable of initiating the vi-
bration of the instrument string producing a bowed-string
eﬀect was built. The instrument was tested by users dur-
ing two exhibitions 3 4 where it was observed that the in-
teraction is intuitive and the experience results attractive.
Based on feedback from users and specialized reviewers, fu-
ture actions include the addition of more strings so as to
cover a wider range of tones and reach a greater intensity of
sound. Regarding the user interface, future work includes
extending the image processing software to be able to recog-
nize gestures. Those gestures will enable the user to trigger
predetermined sound eﬀects like vibrato and tremolo. The
electromagnetic actuation system can also be signiﬁcantly
improved since an important range of sound eﬀects can be
produced processing the electrical signal that is fed to the
driver coil.
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author would like to thank Gabriela Secco, Dolores
Irazabal and Federico Tricanico for their great help regard-
ing translation, illustration and photography.
8. REFERENCES
[1] www.arduino.cc.
[2] www.openframeworks.cc.
[3] E. Berdahl, S. Backer, and J. Smith. If i had a
hammer: Design and theory of an
electromagnetically-prepared piano. In Proceedings of
the International Computer Music Conference, pages
81–84, 2005.
[4] N. Collins. A brief history of the ’backwards electric
guitar’. pages 1–8, August 2009.
[5] G. Heet. String instrument vibration initiator and
sustainer, Feb. 28 1978. US Patent 4,075,921.
[6] S. Jord` a. Afasia: the ultimate homeric
one-man-multimedia-band. In Proc. NIME, 2002.
[7] A. Kapur. A history of robotic musical instruments.
In Proceedings of the International Computer Music
Conference (ICMC). Citeseer, 2005.
[8] A. McPherson and Y. Kim. Augmenting the acoustic
piano with electromagnetic string actuation and
continuous key position sensing. In Proc. NIME, 2010.
[9] H. K. Sandell. Electric self playing violin, Dec 1905.
[10] G. Shear and M. Wright. The electromagnetically
sustained rhodes piano.
3Matilde Perez Contest: Arts and Digital Technologies
(Santiago de Chile: Telefonica Foundation Art Gallery,
2011)
4Tenth Biennial of Video and Medial Arts (Santiago de
Chile: Contemporary Art Museum Parque Forestal, 2012)