Techniques and Circuits for Electromagnetic Instrument
Actuation
Andrew McPherson
Centre for Digital Music, School of EECS
Queen Mary University of London
Mile End Road, London E1 4NS, United Kingdom
andrewm@eecs.qmul.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
There is growing interest in the ﬁeld of augmented musical
instruments, which extend traditional acoustic instruments
using new sensors and actuators. Several designs use elec-
tromagnetic actuation to induce vibrations in the acoustic
mechanism, manipulating the traditional sound of the in-
strument without external speakers. This paper presents
techniques and guidelines for the use of electromagnetic ac-
tuation in augmented instruments, including actuator de-
sign and selection, interfacing with the instrument, and cir-
cuits for driving the actuators. The material in this pa-
per forms the basis of the magnetic resonator piano, an
electromagnetically-augmented acoustic grand piano now in
its second design iteration. In addition to discussing appli-
cations to the piano, this paper aims to provide a toolbox
to accelerate the design of new hybrid acoustic-electronic
instruments.
Keywords
augmented instruments, electromagnetic actuation, circuit
design, hardware
1. INTRODUCTION
Several recent augmented instruments have been invented
which use electromagnetic actuation to transform the sound
of traditional acoustic instruments. The Electromagnetically-
Prepared Piano [1, 3] and the Magnetic Resonator Piano
[11, 12] each use electromagnets inside a grand piano to
induce vibrations in the strings independently of the percus-
sive hammer mechanism. The Electromagnetically-Sustained
Rhodes Piano [16] applies a similar technique to the vibrat-
ing metal tines of a Fender Rhodes. The EMvibe [4] uses
electromagnetic actuators to create inﬁnite sustain and con-
tinuous timbre-shaping in vibraphone bars. The handheld
Ebow [8] for electric guitar uses feedback between a pickup
and an electromagnetic actuator to produce continuous vi-
brations in guitar strings; Berdahl [2] has extended these
concepts to allow active damping of guitar strings. A good
general overview of “actuated instruments” can be found in
[13].
Each instrument is based on the same fundamental tech-
nology: a solenoid electromagnet consisting of multiple turns
of wire around a ferromagnetic core. Electromagnets have
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’12,May 21 – 23, 2012, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
been used for well over a century, but they prove remark-
ably adaptable to the challenges of modern acoustic/digital
instrument design. This paper will present techniques and
design guidelines for creators of new electromagnetically-
actuated instruments. The material presented here partly
reﬂects the author’s own experience developing multiple
generations of the magnetic resonator piano, but the tech-
niques are broadly applicable to many acoustic instruments.
2. THEORY OF OPERATION
In this paper, an electromagnetic actuator (actuator for
short) is deﬁned to be a solenoid-conﬁguration electromag-
net which consists of multiple turns of wire around a cen-
tral core made of iron, steel or other ferromagnetic material.
The magnetic ﬂux density Ba within a solenoid actuator is
proportional to its current i:
Ba(t) = µN
ℓ i(t) (1)
where N is the number of turns of wire, µis the permeabil-
ity of the core, and ℓ is the length of the solenoid [7]. In
the context of musical instrument design, we use actuators
to exert time-varying force on an acoustic body, so we are
particularly interested in relationship between ﬂux density
Ba and force. We will consider two cases that commonly
occur in augmented instruments.
2.1 Force on a Magnetized Object
In the ﬁrst case, consider using an actuator to drive a per-
manent magnet attached to the instrument (Figure 1). Per-
manent magnets are useful in situations where the instru-
ment itself is not made of a ferromagnetic material: for ex-
ample, in the EMvibe, the aluminum bars of the vibraphone
do not respond to magnetic ﬁelds, so permanent magnets
are aﬃxed to each bar [4].
Instrument
Actuator
Distance r
Flux density B
Length L
Current I
T o amplifier
Area A
N turns
Magnet
Figure 1: Actuation of an instrument through an
attached permanent magnet.
A complete model of the force between two magnetized
objects is complex, depending on the shape, orientation
and magnetization of each object and the distance between
them. For our purposes, Coulomb’s Law, though it does
not accurately model the underlying physical processes for
real magnets, provides a starting point [7]. It gives the force
between two magnetic poles spacedr meters apart:
F = µm1m2
4πr2 (2)
where m1 and m2 are the pole strengths in Ampere-meters
and µ is the permeability of the intervening material (gen-
erally µ0 = 4π10−7N/A2 for air).
Classically, a permanent magnet is modeled with point
magnetic charges on either end. A solenoid electromag-
net can be represented similarly, with the pole strengthme
given as a function of current I, number of turns N, length
ℓ and area A:
me = NIA
ℓ (3)
We thus arrive at the force between a permanent magnet
with pole strength mp and an electromagnet:
F = mp
µNIA
4πℓr2 (4)
It is worth repeating that this is a simpliﬁed approxima-
tion of real-world systems. However, for purposes of musi-
cal instrument actuation, it demonstrates several important
results. First, force is linearly proportional to current and
number of turns (and hence to ﬂux density Ba), and in-
versely proportional to the square of the distance between
actuator and permanent magnet. It also suggests that coils
with larger area and shorter length will produce a stronger
force for the same current.
Since the goal is to induce vibrations in a musical instru-
ment, the minimum distance r will be constrained by the
need for the instrument to vibrate without contacting the
actuator. Equation 4 appears to argue for actuator design
favoring the largest possible number of turns, but we will
see shortly that this design choice comes with a cost.
2.2 Force on a Ferromagnetic Object
String
Actuator
Distance r
Flux density B
Length L
Current I
T o amplifier
Area A (string-magnet interaction)
N turns
Figure 2: Electromagnetic actuation of unmagne-
tized ferromagnetic string.
Figure 2 shows the case of an actuator driving a steel
instrument string. This is the conﬁguration used in the
magnetic resonator piano [11]. An important distinction
from the previous case is that the string is not magnetically
polarized. However, steel is ferromagnetic, with a perme-
ability µ≫µ0 signiﬁcantly larger than that of free space.
The complete system of actuator and string can be seen
as a magnetic circuit containing two air gaps of lengthr(the
distance between actuator and string). The system will try
to minimize the total stored magnetic energy, and the force
Fs on the string can be written as the derivative of stored
energy with respect to distance [15, p. 508]:
Fs = −∂Wm
∂r (5)
where the stored energy is a function of the ﬁeld strength
Hgap in the gaps and the area Aof each area of interaction:
Wm = 2[1
2µ0(Hgap)2Ar] (6)
Assuming a very high permeability core, [15] shows that
the ﬁeld strength in the gaps can be written as a function
of number of turns N, current I and distance r:
Hgap = NI
2r (7)
which gives
Wm = µ0N2I2A
4r (8)
and thus the force (the negative sign indicating direction):
Fs = −∂Wm
∂r = −µ0N2I2A
4r2 (9)
This is again an idealized system, but it shows that ig-
noring core saturation eﬀects, the force between actuator
and string is proportional to thesquare of the current. To
see the implications of this, let us rewrite Equation 9 for a
time-varying currenti(t) = Icos(ωt):
|Fs(t)|= i(t)2 µ0N2A
4r2 = I2 cos(ωt)2 µ0N2A
4r2 (10)
|Fs(t)|= I2 1 + cos(2ωt)
2
µ0N2A
4r2 (11)
This result shows that applying an AC actuator current
will result in a frequency-doubling eﬀect on the string. In-
tuitively, this can be seen as the result of both positive and
negative half-waves attracting the string, since ferromag-
netic objects are attracted to a magnetic ﬁeld regardless of
polarity. For augmented instrument designers, two solutions
are possible. One is to use permanent magnets placed im-
mediately next to the actuator to create an oﬀsetting ﬁeld as
Berdahl does with the Electromagnetically-Prepared Piano
[1]. The other is to drive the actuator with a single-ended
current (always positive or always negative):
i(t) = Ioff + Isig cos(ωt) (12)
i(t)2 = (Ioff )2 + 2Ioff Isig cos(ωt) + (Isig)2 cos(ωt)2 (13)
i(t)2 ≈(Ioff )2 + 2Ioff Isig cos(ωt), when Ioff ≫Isig (14)
The greater the oﬀsetting current Ioff , the more linear
the resulting system. Musically speaking, we have found
that perfect linearity is not necessary, and excessive oﬀset
current results in wasted power and heating of the actua-
tor. The magnetic resonator piano uses Ioff slightly greater
than Isig: in other words, the troughs of the signal ap-
proach ground but never go negative (Figure 7). A circuit
to achieve this result is presented in Section 3.2.
2.3 Actuator Design
Given the preceding discussion, how should the augmented
instrument designer choose an actuator? For the same cur-
rent, more turns of wire will produce a stronger ﬁeld (hence
more force). However, for musical signals, we need to be
able to modulate the current at audio frequencies, and changes
in current are limited by actuator inductance L [14]:
L= µN2A
ℓ (15)
∂I
∂t = V
L = Vℓ
µN2A (16)
where A is the area of the solenoid. Equation 4 shows that
∂F
∂t = mp
V
4πr2N (17)
In other words, the goal of strong force for a given cur-
rent and extended high-frequency performance are opposed.
Actuator selection should thus take into account the spe-
ciﬁc musical situation (the frequency range needed) and the
available ampliﬁer output voltage swing V.
2.4 Lorentz Force Actuation
For metal-stringed instruments, an alternative approach ex-
ists to solenoid electromagnetic actuators. TheLorentz force
describes the force on a charged particle due to a magnetic
ﬁeld. A special case of the Lorentz force gives the force on
a current-carrying wire from a magnetic ﬁeld:
F = IL ×B (18)
where F, L and B are vector quantities representing the
force, length of the wire as it interacts with the magnet,
and magnetic ﬁeld, andI is the current. To use Lorentz
force actuation in a musical instrument (Figure 3), strong
permanent magnets are placed next to the string and cur-
rent is passed through the string itself. Alvin Lucier’s 1977
pieceMusic on a Long Thin Wire 1 uses this form of actu-
ation. The Lorentz conﬁguration can also be used to mea-
sure string vibrations by monitoring current induced in the
string; this technique has been used for detailed studies of
the violin [10] and the piano [6].
StringMagnets
Flux density B
Length L
Current I
T o amplifier
Figure 3: Lorentz force actuation of a musical in-
strument string.
In comparison to solenoid electromagnetic actuation, Lorentz
actuation can have much better linearity and better high-
frequency performance since the string lacks the inductance
of a solenoid actuator. However, the maximum force exerted
on the string is limited by the amount of current that can be
passed through it: informal experiments with Lorentz actu-
ation on steel guitar strings showed that large currents heat
the string and cause its pitch to drop. String materials with
higher conductivity, such as brass, may be better suited to
this form of actuation, but in general, amplitude limitations
mean that it is best used with ampliﬁed instruments.
2.5 Case Study: Magnetic Resonator Piano
The magnetic resonator piano (Figure 9) uses electromag-
netic actuators to drive unmagnetized steel piano strings.
Lorentz force actuation is impossible on the piano because
the frame electrically connects both ends of all strings. The
ﬁrst generation magnetic resonator piano used hand-wound
actuators: 600 turns of 30AWG copper wire on a 3/8” steel
threaded rod. Actuators were approximately 0.6” in length,
0.8” in diameter, and had a resistance of 9Ω and an induc-
tance of 20mH.
We recently built a second-generation instrument, one of
the goals being to produce a design that can be replicated
in larger quantity. Prefabricated actuators were thus neces-
sary. Several actuators were evaluated from Magnetic Sen-
sor Systems2. The variables available to the designer are
1http://www.lovely.com/albumnotes/notes1011.html
2http://www.solenoidcity.com
overall size, number of turns and wire gauge, with two of
these parameters determining the third.
We found that small-diameter (0.38”) actuators performed
well on the highest strings of the piano (frequencies above
2kHz) but that the total available power was limited be-
fore the actuators overheated. Moreover, the ﬁeld from the
smallest actuators was too localized to simultaneously ac-
tivate the three strings of a given piano note. The best
compromise between size, power and high-frequency perfor-
mance was found to be an actuator of 0.82” diameter (0.77”
length). Within this size, we evaluated multiple choices of
wire gauge. The performance did not vary as strongly with
wire gauge as with size, and we settled on 28AWG as a com-
promise between number of turns and low inductance. The
actuators in the current magnetic resonator piano have an
average resistance of 5.3Ω and an inductance of 19mH.
2.6 Recommendations
Even the highly simpliﬁed models above show that many
factors aﬀect actuator design. With the caveat that ex-
perimentation is always important, we oﬀer the following
suggestions:
•Actuator size usually dictates power handling, regard-
less of wire gauge. Choose a size ﬁrst based on re-
quired output level, geometry and cost, then explore
winding parameters (wire gauge vs. number of turns).
•Choose winding parameters based on ampliﬁer capa-
bilities, especially maximum output voltage swing. Fewer
turns require less voltage swing but higher current to
achieve the same performance. Also consider the min-
imum load impedance the ampliﬁer can drive, espe-
cially when using ampliﬁers intended for speakers.
•Within reasonable limits, small variations in actuator
design (e.g. 20% change in size, 2AWG in winding)
do not appear to signiﬁcantly aﬀect musical results.
•Lorentz actuation can be useful where high-frequency
performance is more important than overall ampli-
tude, and it is the only option for non-ferromagnetic
strings (e.g. brass). None of these forms of actuation
will work with non-conductive strings.
•When a permanent magnet is used, actuator force
also depends on its strength. Neodymium (rare-earth)
magnets provide the highest ﬁeld strength per unit
mass; low mass minimizes any alteration to the in-
strument’s natural resonance.
3. CIRCUITS
Just as important as the actuator design is how it is driven.
This section presents circuits designed speciﬁcally for elec-
tromagnetic manipulation of acoustic instruments.
3.1 Power Ampliﬁer
Actuators require signiﬁcant amounts of power. While some
actuators can be driven with commercial audio ampliﬁers,
not all have suitable impedance to be used this way. Driving
a large number of actuators with a collection of pre-made
ampliﬁers can also become bulky and expensive. Moreover,
most modern audio ampliﬁers are voltage ampliﬁers: for
most of the audio range, the output voltage is proportional
to the input voltage.3 Equation 1, however, shows that the
ﬂux density of an actuator (and hence its force) is propor-
tional to thecurrent through its windings.
3Current ampliﬁcation is occasionally used in an audio con-
text. See, for example, http://www.firstwatt.com/pdf/
art_cs_amps.pdf (accessed 04/2012).
Figure 4: Transconductance ampliﬁer for driving
electromagnetic actuators.
Figure 4 shows a schematic for an ampliﬁer designed for
electromagnetic actuation. It is a transconductance ampli-
ﬁer: the output current is proportional to the input voltage.
This ampliﬁer design, repeated 88 times, powers the latest
version of the magnetic resonator piano.
Current-output ampliﬁers are used extensively in haptics
for the same reason they are valuable here: output actuator
force (or motor torque) is linearly proportional to current
[5]. Haptic systems often require strict feedback control but
lower bandwidth than audio systems [9].
3.1.1 Operation
The heart of Figure 4 is a National Semiconductor LM1876
integrated two-channel power ampliﬁer. Many similar am-
pliﬁer chips have become available in recent years, with
varying speciﬁcations on output power, supply voltage, and
number of channels. These chips oﬀer short-circuit, over-
current and thermal protection, and many oﬀer mute and
low-power standby modes as well. These features make
them highly robust in live performance where wires can
come loose and unexpected signals can arrive at the inputs.
The transconductance design works as follows: current
through the actuator produces a voltage across resistor Rsense.
IC2A, a standard op-amp in a diﬀerential ampliﬁer conﬁgu-
ration4, ampliﬁes this voltage by the ratio R 5/R4.The gain
of IC1A is set quite high (R 3/R2 = 122), which means that
for ﬁnite output voltage, the output of IC2A should be ap-
proximately equal to the input on pin 8 of IC1A (exactly
equal as R3/R2 approaches inﬁnity). Therefore,
Vin ≈Vref = R5
R4
(IoutRsense) (19)
Iout
Vin
≈ R4
R5Rsense
(20)
3.1.2 High-Frequency Performance and Stability
Equation 16 demonstrates that voltage swing, and not total
output power, determines the maximum change in current
(slew rate). The LM1876 is speciﬁed for supply rails up to
±32V, with an output swing within 3V of each rail. Other
integrated ampliﬁers are rated for even higher supply volt-
ages. The magnetic resonator piano uses±28V rails.
R2 and R 3 are necessary to limit the maximum gain
of the LM1876. Electromagnetic actuators are inductors,
4The diﬀerential conﬁguration is used so that power and
signal grounds can be separated; voltages induced in the
power ground by other ampliﬁers will be canceled out.
with increasing impedance with respect to frequency; as fre-
quency increases, it will take an ever-greater voltage swing
to achieve the same current output. The maximum gain of
IC1A is given as:
Gmax = 1 + R3
R2 (21)
Every actuator has both resistance and inductance. At
DC, only resistance is relevant. From Equation 20 we can
ﬁnd the DC voltage gain of IC1A:
GDC = (Vout
Vin
)DC ≈R4(Ra + Rsense)
R5Rsense
(22)
where Ra is the actuator resistance. By comparing Equa-
tions 21 and 22, we ﬁnd the maximum boost, or the extent
to which the gain increases with frequency (Figure 5).
Normally, the actuator acts as a lowpass ﬁlter with corner
frequency R a/2πLa. The ampliﬁer acts a shelving ﬁrst-
order highpass ﬁlter, with the result that theeﬀective corner
frequency of the actuator is pushed upwards:
frolloff = Gmax
GDC
Ra
2πLa
(23)
For the magnetic resonator piano, the actuators have a nat-
ural corner frequency of 1/(2π(L/R)) = 44Hz; with the
component values given, the gain at DC is 3.0 and the max-
imum gain is 122. This produces a theoretical closed-loop
corner frequency of 1800Hz (i.e. output transconductance
is ﬂat until 1800Hz). In practice the corner frequency is
measured closer to 3000Hz, which suggests that the appar-
ent inductance of the actuator drops at higher frequencies,
most likely due to losses in the steel core.
101 102 103 104 105 106 107
20
40
60
80
100
120Voltage gain (dB)
Frequency (Hz)
Figure 5: Voltage gain for open-loop (blue, short
dashes) and inverse feedback path (black, long
dashes). The closed loop voltage gain (solid red) is
the minimum of the two. Where the curves inter-
sect, the total phase oﬀset must be less than 180◦.
The stability criterion is shown in Figure 5. The open-
loop gain is derived from the LM1876 datasheet, showing
standard dominant-pole compensation. At the point where
the open-loop gain of IC1A intersects the (inverse) gain of
the feedback path, the total phase shift must be less than
180◦. This requires that the feedback gain be approximately
ﬂat before the point of intersection, placing an upper bound
on the ratio R3/R2 which is dependent on the speciﬁc prop-
erties of the actuator. The given component values produce
a stable design for most electromagnetic actuators, but not
for low-impedance purely resistive loads (e.g. Section 2.4)
where artiﬁcial high-frequency rolloﬀ must be added.
3.1.3 Current Monitoring
A useful feature of this ampliﬁer design is that the output
of IC2A (Vref ) provides a voltage proportional to the actua-
tor current, even in cases where IC1A saturates or distorts.
Additionally, by connecting R 2 to ground rather than to
the output of IC2A, the ampliﬁer can be converted into a
voltage-output (low output impedance) design while retain-
ing current monitoring capability.
Current monitoring is useful for interference cancellation.
When magnetic actuators and magnetic pickups are used
simultaneously, the actuator signal can bleed directly into
the pickup. By subtracting a scaled version of Vref , this
interference can be signiﬁcantly attenuated. However, core
saturation and hysteresis eﬀects prevent Vref from being an
exact measure of the magnetic ﬂux density in Equation 1.
3.1.4 Construction Notes
Schematics and board layouts are available from the author
online.5 The roles of R2-R7 have been previously discussed.
R1 and C 1 form an optional low-pass ﬁlter on the input
signal to reduce the output swing from high-frequency noise.
1% resistors should be used, particularly for R 4-R7 and (if
possible) Rsense. R sense should be rated for suﬃcient power
to handle the maximum possible load current. As with all
ampliﬁer designs, proper supply bypassing and heatsinking
are required.
Traditional or switching power supply designs are possi-
ble for the rails of IC1. If the rails exceed ±15V, a separate
supply is required for IC2. Both IC1 and IC2 are dual am-
pliﬁer parts, so a complete design consists of two ampliﬁers.
3.2 Polarity and Offset Adjustment
Section 2.2 showed that driving (unmagnetized) ferromag-
netic objects requires a single-ended output current. The
ampliﬁer in Section 3.1 can be used for either bipolar or
single-ended signals, as there is no DC blocking capacitor
at the input. The circuit in Figure 6 provides a compre-
hensive means of adjusting the oﬀset and polarity (phase
inversion) of an input signal.
Figure 6: Circuit for selecting single- or dual-
polarity inputs. Single-polarity signals are useful
for driving unmagnetized ferromagnetic objects.
3.2.1 Single-Ended Mode
When SW1 is closed, the output is single-ended: positive
on signal ‘out’, negative on ‘out
invert’. The troughs of
the shifted waveform approach but do not cross ground, as
shown in Figure 7. This is a superior conﬁguration to a ﬁxed
voltage oﬀset because the average DC value is never any
higher than needed, conserving output power (and heat).
5http://www.eecs.qmul.ac.uk/~andrewm/
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1−2
−1
0
1
2
3
Time (s)
Voltage (V)
 
 
Input
Level−Shifter Out
Figure 7: Output of level-shifter circuit.
IC1A and IC1B form a precision peak detector with de-
cay time set by the product R4C2. R 3 limits inrush current
to C2 and avoids op-amp instability. IC1D mixes the orig-
inal and peak-detected signals, meaning the troughs of the
waveform will always stay above ground. Optional R6 adds
a small voltage oﬀset ( Ioff in Equation 12). Since IC1D
is an inverting ampliﬁer, IC1C recovers the original non-
inverted (but still level-shifted) signal.
3.2.2 Dual-Ended Mode
When SW1 is open, the peak detector is disconnected from
IC1C. IC1C and IC1D now act as simple inverting buﬀers.
SW1 can be implemented as a physical switch or an analog
switch IC (e.g. 74AHC1G66).
Figure 8: Signal routing from DAC channels to am-
pliﬁers. Two shift registers support 3 multiplexers
(3rd not shown) and blocks can be daisy-chained to
support an arbitrary number of actuators.
3.3 Multi-Actuator Signal Routing
Each actuator requires its own ampliﬁer. However, for poly-
phonic instruments such as the piano, it is not feasible to
have an audio output channel for every string. Figure 8
shows a circuit which dynamically routes input signals to
ampliﬁers. Each ampliﬁer takes its input from a 16-channel
multiplexer. The control inputs of the multiplexers, as well
as the standby/mute pins on the ampliﬁers, are driven from
the outputs of a chain of shift registers. In this way, a micro-
controller can easily maintain a routing matrix between up
to 16 inputs and an indeﬁnite number of output ampliﬁers.
The circuit is tailored to work with the ampliﬁer of Sec-
tion 3.1. The logic is powered from ±5V to allow dual-
ended signals to pass (the audio inputs must be within the
multiplexer supply rails). P-channel MOSFETs are used to
convert standard 0-5V logic to this format. Schmitt-trigger
buﬀers (IC1) are used to provide clean edges on slow-rising
or noisy data lines. If multiple ampliﬁer boards are daisy-
chained through long cables, Schmitt-trigger buﬀers at the
input of each board are recommended.
4. PUTTING THE PIECES TOGETHER:
THE MAGNETIC RESONATOR PIANO
Figure 9: The magnetic resonator piano, showing
electromagnetic ampliﬁers over each string. Ampli-
ﬁers are inside the piano behind the actuators.
The magnetic resonator piano, an electromagnetically-
augmented grand piano, was ﬁrst designed in 2009 [11, 12].
It allows the performer to continuously shape the string vi-
brations for every note, with extended techniques including
inﬁnite sustain, crescendos, pitch bends, harmonics and new
timbres. The material presented here reﬂects a complete re-
design of the hardware. This redesign was fundamentally
musicalin motivation: composers and performers requested
features that could only be addressed by hardware changes.
Requests included:
1. Louder sound, especially in the bass: though the in-
strument was already quite loud, it had diﬃculty com-
peting with the traditional piano when playedforte
or fortissimo. Making the instrument louder required
higher-power ampliﬁers.
2. Brighter sound and upper harmonics: musicians
wanted the timbre of the electromagnetic sound to
more closely match the timbre of the traditional piano,
which contains many upper partials. The instrument
can also play individual harmonics on each string, but
the upper harmonics were quite soft. Addressing both
requests required a greater current slew rate and thus
an ampliﬁer with a larger voltage swing.
3. Faster speaking time: the actuators produce tones
that speak more slowly than hammer-struck notes.
Though this is inherent in the nature of electromag-
netic actuation, faster response was achieved through
a combination of higher-power ampliﬁers and a level-
shifting circuit (Section 3.2) with a rapid attack time
(deﬁned by R3C2).
4. 88-note coverage: the original instrument covered
48 strings. To cover the complete range of the piano,
both ampliﬁers and actuators needed to be machine-
produceable in quantity, which guided their design.
Figure 9 shows a picture of the current MRP design,
which places ampliﬁers next to the electromagnets inside the
piano. In addition to the electronic improvements described
above, a rapidly-adjustable bracket allows the horizontal
and vertical position of each actuator to be changed and
locked using a single wing nut, greatly reducing setup time
in an 88 note conﬁguration. The instrument was recently
used in performances of new music by six Philadelphia-area
composers; further musical discussion can be found in [11],
and videos are available online (see previous footnote).
5. CONCLUSION
This paper has presented a basic theory of electromagnetic
actuator design and several circuits intended for use in acous-
tic instrument actuation. The techniques presented form
the basis of the magnetic resonator piano, but they are
broadly applicable to any augmented instrument situation.
It is hoped that these ideas will accelerate the process of cre-
ating new augmented instruments by providing a procedure
and toolkit for designing actuation systems.
6. REFERENCES
[1] E. Berdahl, S. Backer, and J. Smith. If I had a
hammer: Design and theory of an electromagnetically
prepared piano. In Proc. ICMC 2005.
[2] E. Berdahl, G. Niemeyer, and J. Smith. Active
control of a vibrating string. In Proc. Acoustics ’08.
[3] P. Bloland. The electromagnetically-prepared piano
and its compositional implications. In Proc. ICMC
2007.
[4] C. Britt, J. Snyder, and A. McPherson. The EMvibe:
An electromagnetically actuated vibraphone. In Proc.
NIME, 2012.
[5] M. C. ¸ Cavu¸ so˘ glu, D. Feygin, and F. Tendick. A
critical study of the mechanical and electrical
properties of the PHANToM haptic interface and
improvements for high performance control. Presence,
11(5), 2002.
[6] D. E. Hall. The hammer and the string. In
A. Askenfelt, editor, Five Lectures on the Acoustics of
the Piano. 1990.
[7] P. Hammond. Electromagnetism for Engineers.
Pergamon Press, Oxford, UK, third edition, 1986.
[8] G. Heet. String instrument vibration initiator and
sustainer. U.S. Pat. 4,075,921, 1978.
[9] K. Kuchenbecker, J. Fiene, and G. Niemeyer.
Improving contact realism through event-based haptic
feedback. IEEE TVCG, 12(2), 2006.
[10] M. Mathews and J. Kohut. Electronic simulation of
violin resonances. JASA, 53(6), 1973.
[11] A. McPherson. The magnetic resonator piano:
Electronic augmentation of an acoustic grand piano.
Journal of New Music Research , 39(3):189–202, 2010.
[12] A. McPherson and Y. Kim. Augmenting the acoustic
piano with electromagnetic string actuation and
continuous key position sensing. In Proc. NIME, 2010.
[13] D. Overholt, E. Berdahl, and R. Hamilton.
Advancements in actuated musical instruments.
Organised Sound, 16(2):154–165, 2011.
[14] M. A. Plonus. Applied Electromagnetics.
McGraw-Hill, New York, USA, 1978.
[15] N. N. Rao. Elements of Engineering Electromagnets .
Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA, ﬁfth
edition, 2000.
[16] G. Shear and M. Wright. The electromagnetically
sustained Rhodes piano. In Proc. NIME, 2011.