Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-116
Designing, Playing, and Performing with a
Vision-based Mouth Interface
Michael J. Lyons
ATR Media Information Science Labs
2-2-2 Hikaridai, Seika-cho,
Soraku-gun, Kyoto, Japan 619-0288
mlyons@atr.co.jp
Michael Haehnel
Dept of EE and IT
RWTH Aachen University
Aachen, Germany
Nobuji Tetsutani
ATR M.I.S. Labs
2-2-2 Hikaridai, Seika-cho,
Soraku-gun, Kyoto, Japan
ABSTRACT
The role of the face and mouth in speech pr oduction as well as
non-verbal communication suggests the use of facial action to
control musical sound. Here we document work on the
Mouthesizer, a system which uses a headworn miniature
camera and computer vision algorithm to extract shape
parameters from the mouth opening and output these as MIDI
control changes. We report our experience with various
gesture-to-sound mappings and musical applications, and
describe a live performance which used the Mouthesizer
interface.
Keywords
Video-based interface; mouth controller; alternative i nput
devices.
1. INTRODUCTION
Articles on new interfaces for computer music often begin
with a call for greater embodiment in the way computers are
operated. This claim is sometimes backed up by citing
developments in cognitive science which stress the
importance of physical and physiological context for
understanding the mind [25]. Similar considerations may be
applied in the domain of machine-mediated human
interaction. Current ways of interacting with computers
neglect most of the physiology of human-human interaction
and are surely unsuitable for most forms of communication,
especially expressive forms such as music.
Working at McGill University half a century ago, Wilder
Penfield and his colleagues [19] mapped the sensory-motor
cortex by electrical stimulation of conscious patients
undergoing neurosurgery. Their pictorial summary of the
findings, the somatosensory and motor homunculi, are widely
known and their importance for human-machine interaction [2]
as well as musical interfaces [8] has been recognized. A
striking aspect of the motorhomunculus (see Figure 1) is the
relatively large area devoted to the organs critical for verbal
and non-verbal human communication: the lips, mouth,
tongue, larynx, and the face.
The importance of thef ace and especially the mouth in
communication inspired us to develop a musical contro ller
which takes input from facial actions. The f ace, espec ially the
moutha rea, is involved both in sound production, in speech,
singing, and in non-verbal emo tional commun ication, in facial
expression. It therefore seemed interesting to attempt to
design a musical interface making use of our expertise for
muscular action of the face.
Figure 1. The motor homunculus or representation of body
areas in the motor cortex (adapted from [19]).
This paper reports work using a video-based approach and
focuses on the area of the mouth. Preliminary results of the
study were previously published in brief format [13]. The
current article is intended as a more complete record of the
project in which we: (a) state the context of the work by
reviewing related studies (section 2); (b) describe the
implementation in detail including more recent developments,
discussing design considerations as well as lessons learned
(section 3); (c) report our experience with several mappings
and musical applications of the controller (section 4); and (e)
describe a public performance in which the controller was used
(section 5); and (f) conclude with general observations
(section 6).
2. R ELATED WORK
2.1 Mouth & Vocal Tract Controllers
The fact that oral cavity shape influences the human voice
means there are complex neural circuits relating for muscular
control the mapping of shape to sound effect. Use of the oral
cavity for modulating sounds other than those produced by
the vocal tract is probably as old as instrumental music itself,
evidenced by thep resenceo fi nstruments liket he mouthbow
in folk cultures around the world.
Functioning by the same principle as acoustic mouth
controllers, the TalkBox, which enjoyed popularity in the
1970’s, allows a player to directly filter an audio signal with
the acoustic transfer of the oral cavity. Holding a small speaker
in the mouth, the player modulates the signal by varying the
oral cavity shapea nd position of the t ongue. Since the actual
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-117
acoustic properties of the mouth modify the signal, the
TalkBox is intuitive to use. However the range of sound eff ects
is limited by the same acoustic possibilities. It is also requires
the player/singer to keep the device in their mouth.
The Vocoder [5] allows effective vocal tract control of
synthesized electronics ounds via audio signal processing
extraction of voice parameters to modulate synthesized
sounds. Using a Vocoder is more akin to speaking or singing
than to playing an instrument since it is activated by sounds
produced in the vocal tract itself.
By contrast, the interface developed by Orio [16] probes the
shape of the oral cavity by stimulation with an external
acoustic source. Shape parameters extracted from analysis of
the response are output as MIDI controls. Orio found that users
could easily learn to control two independent parameters by
varyingm ouths hape, but greater difficulty controlling three
parameters.
Vogt et al. [26] used ultrasound imaging to measure t ongue
position and movemen ti nr eal-time for s ound synthesis
control. With the Tongue ‘n’ Groove, an ultrasound device is
held below the jaw and animage of the tongue contour
reconstructed, or alternatively, optical flow due to tongue
motion is calculated. Several mapping metaphors were
explored;e.g. tongue position was used to play a physical
model of the singing voice.
2.2 Vi sion-Based Musical Interfaces
Several previous works have used computer vision
techniques for musical interaction.
Multimedia installation artist David Rokeby has
experimented for many years with his Very Nervous System
[22],o r VNS,w hich is now available for purchase. The VNS
webp ages do not give an explicit description of what it
computes, but VNS appears to be based primarily on pixel
calculations responsive to movement, such as temporal
differencing in user defined trigger zones.
TheB igEyes oftware[ 23], available commercially from
STEIM, allows tracking of coloured ob jects against a set of
definabler egions in thev ideo frame, with variables such as
relative position, size, and speed output as MIDI parameters.
The EyesWeb software platform [1,6], freely available from
the InfoMus group at the University of Genoa, includes several
computer vision modules allowing tracking of objects and
coloured blobs as well as modules for estimation of affective
and expressive qualities of movements, with several output
options including MIDI and OSC.
Some vision-based controllers adapt software developed for
non-musical purposes. The DanceSpace system [18] added to
the MIT Media Lab’s Pfinder vision-based person tracker, to
allow mapping of movements of tracked limbs, torso, and to
changes in musical parameters.
The Augmented Groove system [20] uses the University of
Washington HIT Lab’s Augmented Reality (AR) Toolkit which
supports tracking of high-contrast two dimensional patterns.
The AR Toolkit can extract translation, rotation, and tilt of
objects labeled with the patterns. The Augmented Groove
system maps tracking parameters to MIDI control changes,
allowing users to modulate sequencer loops by manipulating
physical objects.
Figure 2. Two miniature CCD cameras used in this work.
Those with the resources often prefer to develop specific
software for a project as this allows greater control over how
the solution is implemented.
The Iamascope’s vision-to-music subsystem [7] divides the
video input frame into detection zones mapped to notes of a
chord. A motion detection algorithm allows note triggering
with free gestures. The kaleidoscope subsystem mirrors the
video input to display intriguing visual feedback of the user’s
own gestures.
With the Imaginary Piano [24], video input from a camera
facing the player is analyzed with a motion detection
algorithm which responds to movement of the hands below a
vertical threshold to trigger piano notes having pitch
determined by the horizontal coordinate.
Ng [15] seems to be the only other work to s uggest using a
vision-based interface to transform facial gestures to MIDI
controls. A video demo of their prototype was shown at NIME-
02,but details of their implementation have not yet been
published.
3. DESIGN EVOLUTION
3.1 Fa ce Tracking System
At the outset, our aimw as to utilize actions from several
areas of thef acef or musical expression, including mov ements
of thee ye regions,e yebrows, mouth, cheeksa nd movements of
thew holeh ead. We started by building upon a vision-based
face tracking system developed in our group at ATR. The first
prototype was implemented on an SGI O2 computer, using the
O2’s built-in framegrabber and the IRIS video library. This
allowed acquisition of NTSC quarter-frame images (320x240
pixels) at 15 fps. This is the minimum useable frame rate for
most musical applications: latencies are noticeable but s till
tolerable.
We initially considered using a more sophisticated feature
shape representation [11,17], but experiments showed that the
shadow area of the mouth could be extracted by a very simple
colour and intensity thresholding algorithm. First, a region
large enough to include the mouth area with certainty is
chosen, based on the inter-ocular distance from the face
trackingm odule. Next,p ixels in this region satisfying the
following equation:
I<I min and R>R max
are segmented, where I is pixel intensity and R is its red
component and Imin and R max are set thresholds. With
appropriate values for the thresholds, under a large region of
lighting conditions most of the pixels satisfying this
condition belong to the shadow area of the mouth.
Segmentation by colour thresholding is widely used to track
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-118
objects in vision systems. For example skin colour is used as a
cue in many face detection algorithms, though it is widely
known to be affected by the intensity and colour of the
illumination. Thresholding of the mouth shadow area seems to
beconsiderably more stable to such illumination changes
because we are detecting the absence of a surface :t h e
appearance of the cavity is more robust than that of the
surrounding skin areas. Use of the automatic gain and colour
balance control on the cameras adds to the robustness of the
system to lighting changes.
Thes ystem hass ome limitations, for example, dark facial
hair near the mouth may also be s elected by the t hresholding
operation. With very dark skin, thresholds may need to be
changed or additional lighting used.
The pixels obtained by the thresholding operation were
analyzed using a principal components analysis [4] to find the
major and minor axis of the segmented area, which
approximates an elliptical blob. Use of an algorithm based on
colour segmentation and invariant statistics of the pixel
coordinates has the advantage that it is robust to translation
andi np lane rotation of the mouth region. Hence, mov ements
of the camera, unavoidable due to slight vibration of the beam,
do not strongly affect the shape parameters extracted from the
image. Higher level algorithms based on tracking loops for
position estimation, would not share this property.
The two shape parameters were mapped to two MIDI control
change values. These were used to control timbre of various
physically modelled instruments using the demos Perry
Cook’s Synthesis ToolKit [3] running on the same SGI O2.
Segmented pixels were displayed in red on a video output of
the players face. Experiments with this system quickly
convinced us that the mouth functions well as a controller of
synthesized sound and we next concentrated on developing a
mouth controller for use in actual musical performance
situations.
3.2 Headwo rn System
     When we began this research, the face tracking module was
limited to a video processing rate of 13 fps, and tracking was
interrupted by large speed or amplitude of head movements.
Tracking performance has since been increased to full frame
rate, but robustness it is still not adequate for live performance
situations. In addition, the apparent facial expression in 2D
projection depends on head orientation [12]. Finally,
experiments with the tracking system convinced us that a
wearable system would allow performers greater mobility and
comfort.
These considerations led us to concentrate research on a
system based on a head mounted camera pointed directly at the
mouth area (see Figure 3). Camera distance and focal length of
the lens were chosen so that that the input video frames
contained the facial region of the mouth, and excluded other
areas that are picked up by thresholding such as the nostrils
and, occasionally, a shadow below the lower lip. This
eliminates the need for a face tracking system.
Figure 3. The headset and a view from the camera.
The headset is a modified Shure SM10A with the
microphone and beam assembly removed and replaced with a
miniature video camera mounted on a homebuilt aluminum
arm. It is important to counterbalance the weight of thecamera.
Miniature, lightweight video cameras are now widely av ailable
(see Figure 2). Most of the work reported here used a Keyence
CK-200B miniature colour CCDcamera with standard NTSC
analog output. We also tried the expensive Elmo QN42H
camera pictured in the figure, which gave similar results. The
Keyence camera is economical and ideally suitable for use with
the Mouthesizer. A web site with more information on
obtaining the camera is listed with the references [10].
3.3 Machine-Vision Board
To demonstrate the feasibility of an inexpensive, portable,
and stable system we next implemented a hardware prototype.
We selected the Cognachrome 2000, made by Newton Labs
(Renton, WA), a dedicated machine vision board based on the
Motorola 68322 processor. The Cognachrome tracks the
position, size, aspect ratio, andorientation of several colour
blobs at 60 Hz anda spatial resolution of 200x250 pixels,
with a proprietary algorithm that uses colour and intensity
thresholding and connected region analysis. Video input and
output is NTSC format andd atac ommunication is via a serial
port. Mouth shadow blob dimensions as detected by the board
were remapped to two MIDI control changes via a program
running on a desktop program. The Cognachrome is
programmable allowing onboard implementation of MIDI
communications. However, it has several disadvantages, the
most important of which were that mouth shadow tracking was
more sensitive to illumination changes than with the software
algorithm we implemented and that the tracking algorithm
could not be easily modified.
3.4 Current Implementation
Flexibility considerations led us to return to a software
implementation, using Visua l C++ and Dir ect-X r unning under
Windows. The current Mouthesizer operates as a Direct-X f ilter,
allowing use of the system w ith any input video device for
which a driver is available.
Several improvements to the algorithm were made.
Connected region analysis is applied after the colour and
intensity thresholding operation. This removes thresholded
pixels outside of the mouth shadow area. Two types of simple
temporal filters were added to remove noise due to rapid
fluctuations in lighting or shadows, illustrated in figure 4.
Filter A discards any output that differs from the average of
the two most recent output values by more than a set
threshold.
Figure 4. Filters used with the Mouthesizer to remove noise.
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-119
Filter B temporally smoothes the data by averaging current
outputs with previous ones. The filters can be independently
turned on or off while the software is running.
Ad esktop system on a Pentium II with a Winnov Videum
capture cardr an at 30 fps, while on aP entium III notebook
with I-O Data PCCAP video capture card the system ran at 15
fps, both at a resolution of 320x240 pixels. The system now
also works with Firewire and USB cameras at full frame rate.
Some recent palmtops should now have sufficient processing
power to run the Mouthesizer algorithm at low resolution,
which would allow it to be used as a fully wearable device.
4. MAPPING & APPLICATIONS
Below we first report gesture-to-sound mappings which
were found to work well with the Mouthesizer. Then we
describe actual applications of the Mouthesizer to playing
music. Most of our experiments with mappings and
applications were made with the Nord Modular Virtual Analog
Synthesizer (from Clavia, Sweden). With the N ord Modular,
synthesis or audio effects patches are edited in software with
an intuitive graphical interface, but run on ded icated DSP
hardware. Patch variables were easily adjusted using control
panel knobs and driven by external MIDI controllers.
4.1 Mapping
In all cases the mouth shape parameters were mapped to two
MIDI control changes. The mappings discussed below were not
intended to be one-to-one mappings of shape to sound. Rather,
two principles guided our experimentation: the role of the
mouth as a filter in s ound pr oduction and the action of the
facial muscles in the facial expression of emotion. Our goal
was to try to create intuitive and compelling mappings from
action to sound by making use of existing motor expertise and
brain maps for sound production and emotional expression.
Musical interface mapping is a subtle issue [9] and there is
room for further exploration of the expressive poten tial of the
Mouthesizer. For example, for some vocal consonants the lips
and tongue act as sources of sound. Expression of certain
emotions such as surprise or mirth can have relatively rapid
onset dynamics, which may not be well modelled as
continuously changing controls. Cursory experiments
suggested that it should also be interesting to use the
Mouthesizer interface to trigger sound events such as samples,
but we have so far not pursued this line as a mapping strategy.
To encourage further experimentation with mappings, we are
planning to make a version of the Mouthesizer available in the
near future.
4.1.1 Mouth Height
One of the most is compelling and intu itive mappings we
found uses the height of the mouth opening to control the cut-
off frequency of a sweeping resonant low-pass filter. With this
mapping opening the mouth opens up the filter,letting higher
frequency components of the sound pass. This audio effect is
popularly known aswah-wah, an onomatopoeic term
describing the effect of opening and closing the mouth while
voicing the sound “ah”. This mapping mimics effects available
with mouthbow and jaw harp instruments, as well as the
TalkBox. Simple, intuitive effects also result from mapping
mouth height to volume control, sustain, or damping.
4.1.2 Mouth Width
We found interesting expressive effects by mapping mouth
width to distortion level of an amplifier. This was motivated
by the action of the mouth in expressions of pain, suffering, or
fear.O pening them outhi ncreases the non-linearity of the
response of an audio-amplifier which clips the guitar signal
waveform. Stretching the corners of the mouth apart in a
grimace increases the level of distortion.
We also tried mapping mouth width to the resonance of a
resonant low-pass filter. Stretching the mouth wide gives a
high-frequency chirp, expressing arousal without the negative
emotional valence of the distortion effect.
4.1.3 Mouth Aspect Ratio
Here the mouth aspect ratio or eccentricity was used to
control an audio morph between formant filters for three of the
fundamental vowel sounds [a], [i], [o]. [i]h as the greatest
eccentricity, [o] is the most rounded, having the least
eccentricity, [a] has intermediate eccentricity. An existing
formant filter module of the Nord was used to control the
morph. This givesa ni ntuitively natural mapping of mouth
shape to filter audio effect wh ich is similar to acoustic effects
playable with controllers like the TalkBox.
4.2 Applic ations
The Mouthesizer was played informally, with three main
musical applications, guitar effects, keyboard, and sequenced
loops.
4.2.1 Guitar Effects
Ichiro Umata, jazz guitarist and cognitive science researcher,
used the Mouthesizer to control guitar effects. Mouth height
controlled wah-wah as described above and mouth width
adjusted the amount of distortion. This experiment used an
early versiono ft he Mouthesizer running at 15 fps on an SGI
O2 computer. The guitarist had little prior practice using the
Mouthesizer.A fter as ession lasting approximately one hour,
he noted that the
Figure 5.C ontrolling guitar effects with the Mouthesizer.
Mouthesizer was easily learned and more natural to play
than a pedal controller. He also observed that changes of
mouth width and height are correlated for most movements,
making the controller more interesting to use than if the two
audio effects were independently adjustable. This agrees with
the findings of Huntet al. in their study of simple and
complex mappings.
4.2.2 Key board Synthesizer Demo
We experimented with several keyboard synthes izer patches
running on the Nord Modular, controlling patch parameters
with the Mouthesizer. We tried these at a live demo during the
ATR Open House exhibition. The mappings which easiest for
most visitors to understand were simple ones usually
associated with keyboard pedals such as volume control,
sustain, and damping.
Reactions to theM outhesizer varied greatly. Some visitors,
having conservative musical tastes, found the concept strange
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-120
or at least humourous. Others, sympathetic to electronic music,
found it more appealing.
4.2.3 Sequenced L oops
Inspired by the Augmented Groove system, we used the
Mouthesizer to control techno loops. This allows one to add
expression to an automatically played musical sequence.
Again, sweeping filters, resonance, distortion, and formant
filter morphs work well here.
5. LIVE PERFORMANCE
Jordan Wynnychuk gave a 30 minute solo live performance
of improvised electroacoustic music using the Mouthesizer at
the Kyoto Kyoryukan to audience of about 30 people. Figure
6, a picture of a rehearsal for the performance shows the
instrumentation used in the concert. Jordan used a touch-
sensitive MIDI control pad and STEIM’s LiSa (Live Samples)
software, to trigger and manipulate samples with the fingers of
both hands. The sounds used in this performance consisted of
glitches, squeaks, blips, bangs, buzzes, whirs, other “error”
sounds, as well as samples of percussion instruments.
Audio effects running on the Nord Modular were contro lled
using the Mouthesizer. Aesthetic considerations led us to
experiment with audio effect mappings less intuitive than the
ones described above, including a mix of extreme distortion,
high and low pass filtering, and panning between left and right
channels. One of the most interesting effects we discovered
panned high and low frequency filtered versions of the audio
signal between the two channels by opening and closing the
mouth.
Figure 6. Jordan Wynnychuk with controllers used for the
live performance.
Figure 7 shows a sequence of pictures from Jordan’s
performance in which a mouth gesture is being used to adjust
sound expressively. Not visible in these images are the
highlighted mouth shadow regions, which were projected on a
screen beside the stage.
In addition to the interest and originality of Jordan’s
performance, audience members’ attention seemed to be
captured by the novelty of the Mouthesizer interface and
concept. Many askeda fterwardsa bout how it worked or
suggested ways it could be used to play music. One or two
reported on their check for causality between mouth action and
aural effect: they found it sometimes easily visible but quite
obscure at other times. This appeared to be mainly a function
of the mapping.
6. CO NCLUSION
Experimentationw ith av ariety of mappings andm usical
applications, and use of the Mouthesizer in a live public
performance confirmed our hypothesis that facial gestures,
especially movements of the mouth, are suitable for expressive
musical control. Several lessons were learned in the design
process.
Abandoning the head-tracking system early in the project
later led us to avoid discrete classification of f acial
expressions forc ontrolo fm usical effects. This was fortun ate:
ac ontroller which categorized emotion discretely would have
limited responsiveness to movement quality and would reduce
expressiveness. Rather,w e captureda signal responsive to the
motiono ft he mouthw ith as imple vision algorithma nd relied
on carefully chosen mappings to enable expressive control of
sound production.
Av a l u able feature of the Mouthesizer is the visual feedback
provided by highlighting segmented pixels. This gives a
highly visible display mirroring the player’s actions.
Rizzolatti and colleagues [21] have discovered “mirror
neurons” in monkey frontal lobes which respond to specific
motor actions both when they are performed and when the
same or a similar action is observed. Such circuits are thought
to be important forl earning motorb ehaviours. Controllers
which mirror a motor action via visual display (and perhaps
also auditory display?) should strongly stimulate these
circuits. This may lend appeal to musical interfaces that mirror
the player’s gestures. A previous vision-based interface which
shares this property is the Iamascope [7].
Additionally, visual perception of lip movement is known
to affect auditory perception of speech [14] (the “McGurk
effect”). The Mouthesizer brings such cross-modal sensory
mappings into play for both performer and observer.
Such considerations lead us to conclude that video-based
and other new gestural controllers offer much more than a
visually engaging spectacle for the audience. They enable
news ways to use the body and its sensory-motor systems to
explore human expression and communication via sound.
Recently the Mouthesizer was integrated with an improved
face tracking system to create an interface which allows users
to point and click with facial gestures. Hence, work on a
musical interface led to a non-musical side product. Musical
applications seem to stimulate exploration of a very wide
range of interaction paradigms. In this way, the NIME
conference may have an important contribution to make to the
wider field of human-computer interaction.
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada
NIME03-121
Figure 7. Jordan Wynnychuk using the Mouthesizer in a live performance.
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
MJL thanks Christoph Bartneck, Rodney Berry, Palle
Dahlstadt, Sidney Fels, Steven Jones, Ivan Poupyrev, Ichiro
Umata, Jordan Wynnychuk, and Tomoko Yon ezawa for
stimulating and helpful interactions. This work was s upported
in part by the Telecommunications Advancement Organ ization
(TAO) of Japan.
8. REFE RENCES
[1] Camurri, A. and Trocca, R., Movement and Gesture in
Intelligent Interactive Music Systems, in Wanderley, M.,
and Baffier, M. (Eds.), Trends in Gestural Control of Music
CD-ROM, IRCAM, Paris, 2000, pp. 450-474.
[2] Card, S.K., Mackinlay, and Robertson, G.G., A
Morphological Analysis of the Design Space of Input
Devices, ACM Transactions on Information Systems 9(2):
99-122, 1991.
[3] Cook, P. and Scavone, G. P., The Synthesis ToolKit (STK),
in Proc. of the 1999 International Computer Music
Conference, Beijing, International Computer Music
Association.
[4] Duda, R.O. and Hart, P.E., Pattern Classification and Scene
Analysis. John Wiley & Sons, 1973.
[5] Dudley, H., Remaking Speech. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 11: 169-177, 1939.
[6] EyesWeb Project, http://www.eyesweb.org.
[7] Fels, S.S. and Mase, K., Iamascope: A graphical musical
instrument. Computers and Graphics, 2(23):277-286,
1999.
[8] Gillespie, B., Haptics in Music, in Cognition, and
Computerized Sound, P. Cook (Ed.). MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, 1999.
[9] Hunt, A., Wanderley, M.M., and Paradis, M., The
Importance of Parameter Mapping in Electronic
Instrument Design, in Proc of the 2002 Conference on
New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-02), 149-
154.
[10] Keyence Japan CK-200B miniature CCD camera:
http://www.keyence.co.jp/hobby/ccd/index.html.
[11] Lyons, M.J., Budynek, J., and Akamatsu, S., Automatic
Classification of Single Facial Images, IEEE PAMI 21(12):
1357-1362, 1999.
[12] Lyons, M.J., Campbell, R. et al., The Noh Mask Effect:
Vertical Viewpoint Dependence of Facial Expression
Perception, Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. B 267: 2239-2245,
2000.
[13] Lyons, M. J., and Tetsutani, N., Facing the Music: A Facial
Action Controlled Musical Interface. in CHI 2001
Extended Abstracts, ACM Press, 309-310.
[14] McGurk, H. and MacDonald, J., Hearing Lips and Seeing
Voices, Nature, 264:746-748, 1976.
[15] Ng, K., Interactive Gesture Music Performance Interfaces,
in Proc of the 2002 Conference on New Interfaces for
Musical Expression (NIME-02), 183-184.
[16] Orio, N., A Gesture Interface Controlled by the Oral
Cavity, in Proc. Of the 1997 International Computer
Music Conference, San Francisco, International Computer
Music Association, 141- 144.
[17] Pantic, M. and Rothkrantz, L.J.M ., Automatic Analysis of
Facial Expressions: The State of the Art , IEEE PAMI 22:
1424-1445, 2000.
[18] Paradiso, J. and Sparacino, F., Optical Tracking for Music
and Dance Performance, in "Optical 3-D Measurement
Techniques IV", A. Gruen, H. Kahmen eds., Herbert
Wichmann Verlag, Heidelberg Germany, pp. 11-18
(1997).
[19] Penfield, W. & Rasmussen, T., The cerebral cortex of man:
aclinical study of localization of function , Macmillan,
New York, 1950.
[20] Poupyrev, I., Augmented Groove: Co llaborative J amming
in Augmented Reality ,i nS IGGRAPH 2000 Conference
Abstracts and Applications, ACM Press, p. 77.
[21] Rizzolatti, G, Gadiga, L., Gallese, V, and Fogassi, L.,
Premotor Cortex and the Recognition of Motor Actions,
Cognitive Brain Research, 3: 131-141, 1996.
[22] David Rokeby, Very Nervous System:
http://www.interlog.com/~drokeby/vns.html
[23] STEIM, BigEye: http://www.steim.nl/bigeye.html
[24] Tarabella, L., Gestural and Visual Approaches to
Performance, in Wanderley, M., & Baffier, M. (Eds.),
Trends in Gestural Control of Music CD-ROM, IRCAM,
Paris, 2000, pp. 604-615.
[25] Varela, F.J., Thompson, E., and Rosch, E., The Embodied
Mind, MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 1991.
[26] Vogt, F., McCaig, G., Ali, M.A., Fels, S., Tongue ‘n’
Groove: An Ultrasound based Music Controller, in Proc of
the 2002 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical
Expression (NIME-02), 60-6.