Concept Tahoe: Microphone Midi Control
Dan Moses Schlessinger
Sennheiser Technology & Innovation
550 15th St. Suite 37
San Francisco, CA 94103
dschlessinger@sennheiser.com
ABSTRACT
We have developed a prototype wireless microphone that
provides vocalists with control over their vocal eﬀects di-
rectly from the body of the microphone. A wireless micro-
phone has been augmented with six momentary switches,
one fader, and three axes of motion and position sensors,
all of which provide MIDI output from the wireless receiver.
The MIDI data is used to control external vocal eﬀects units
such as live loopers, reverbs, distortion pedals, etc. The goal
was to to provide dramatically increased expressive control
to vocal performances, and address some of the shortcom-
ings of pedal-controlled eﬀects. The addition of gestural
controls from the motion sensors opens up new performance
possibilities such as panning the voice simply by pointing
the microphone in one direction or another. The result is a
hybrid microphone-musical instrument which has recieved
extremely positive results from vocalists in numerous infor-
mal workshops.
Keywords
NIME, Sennheiser, Concept Tahoe, MIDI, control, micro-
phone
1. INTRODUCTION
The microphone industry sometimes refers to the micro-
phone as the“vocalist’s instrument[1]”. While a vocal teacher
might disagree with this designation, there are many ways
in which an ordinary microphone can be manipulated for ex-
pressive control just like a woodwind or brass instrument.
For example, vocalists can expressively alter the angle of
the microphone and distance to the mouth in ways that,
depending on the proximity eﬀect and polar response of the
microphone, can strongly vary the timbre of their voice. In
this way a microphone has much in common with a tradi-
tional musical instrument. And when you add interactive
eﬀects such as live looping into the signal chain, the entire
signal chain becomes a type of musical instrument.
1.1 Vocal Effects as a Paradigm Shift
A growing number of vocalists are using eﬀects pedals. Al-
though some eﬀects such as the phase vocoder [8] have been
used by a few vocalists for decades, the eﬀects pedal has pri-
marily been a tool for guitarists. However, in the last few
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’12,May 21 – 23, 2012, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
years this has been changing, and there are now compa-
nies such as TC Helicon devoted solely to eﬀects for vocal-
ists. One extremely popular eﬀect pedal for vocalists is the
live looper, which allows vocalists (and instrumentalists) to
loop and overdub their voice or instrument over and over
to achieve highly orchestrated songs. This is becoming in-
creasingly popular, with new live looping hardware available
every year (for example the Boss RC50, Digitech Jamman,
and Looperlative LP1, just to name a few) and multiple
worldwide festivals dedicated to this practice. Live looping
pedals are typically operated by foot, and they require a
great deal of interaction in order to start, stop, and play
diﬀerent tracks on the ﬂy. In this way a live looping pedal
could be considered an instrument on its own.
1.2 Concept Tahoe
In order to improve the interaction with loopers and other
eﬀects pedals, we have developed what we call the Con-
cept Tahoe prototype microphone (ﬁgure 1). We have
augmented a wireless microphone with buttons, faders, and
motion/position sensors in order to give users obvious, in-
tuitive and intimate control over their sound and looping
eﬀects.
Figure 1: Concept Tahoe: A wireless microphone
augmented with buttons, faders, and motion sen-
sors.
2. BACKGROUND
There are many examples of what Miranda and Wander-
ley refer to as “augmented instruments” [10], where sen-
sors are placed onto existing musical instruments to en-
hance musical interactivity. Examples of this phenomenon
are Cook/Morrill’s augmented trumpet and Tod Machover’s
hyper-violin[10]. There has also been much recent work
done in the ﬁeld of motion controlled gestures over musi-
cal performance, again detailed by Wanderley and Miranda
[10]. Due to the recent ubiquity of accelerometers and other
motion sensors, there have been many recent implementa-
tion of gestural musical control, from mobile phones [7] [11]
to commercial devices such as the Source Hot Hand MIDI-
EXP. [4]
2.1 Other Examples of Mic Control
We are not the ﬁrst people to put buttons on a microphone.
Many microphones made for karaoke systems, for example,
have buttons located on the microphone body for navigat-
ing through diﬀerent songs. To our knowledge karaoke ma-
chines are the earliest instance of microphone control.
In the mid 1990’s John Popper, the lead singer and har-
monica player for the band Blues Traveler, used duct tape
to fasten buttons to his microphone in order to turn his
eﬀects pedals with his hand while playing harmonica [9].
As we were developing the Tahoe microphone, two more
examples of microphone control cropped up. The I am
TPain microphone [2] (2011) uses buttons to control an au-
totune eﬀect. Also, in 2011 TC Helicon released the MP-75,
a wirebound microphone with a button on it used for con-
trolling parameters of TC Helicon eﬀects pedals [5].
2.2 Problems with pedal control
For the project we interviewed and observed multiple vo-
calists who use live loopers or other interactive eﬀects and
thus were able to identify what many vocalists describe as
shortcomings of foot-to-pedal interaction. The three most
common issues we observed were lack of eye contact, poor
expressive control, and sight-to-sound connection.
2.2.1 Pedal Issue 1: Eye Contact
The ﬁrst primary problem with pedal control is that it pulls
the audience’s focus onto the user’s feet, instead of their
face. As one of our vocal workshoppers put it, if the per-
former is looking at their feet, the audience is looking at
their feet. Users reported that this can really distract from
the performance, especially if there is a great deal of inter-
action with the pedal.
2.2.2 Pedal Issue 2: Expressive Control
Another problem with pedal control is the lack of accurate
expressive control over the sound. Continuous expression
pedals, such as those used for volume sweeps or wah-wah
eﬀects, are diﬃcult to control with your feet simply due to
the mechanics of moving one’s feet.
2.2.3 Pedal Issue 3: Sight-Sound Connection
Another issue with pedal interaction is the diﬃculty for au-
dience members to connect what they see with what they
hear. When a violinist pulls the bow across the violin
strings, the audience members can connect the bow gesture
with the sound of the violin and more easily understand
what the artist is doing to produce the sound. This connec-
tion between what the the audience members see and what
they hear is an important part of the performance, and most
pedal interaction that we observed was too diﬃcult to see
to make these connections.
3. CONCEPT TAHOE
The Concept Tahoe microphone addresses the problems with
pedal control by oﬀering controls that you operate right on
the microphone. The prototype microphone is based on the
Sennheiser Evolution Wireless 500 series microphone, with
modiﬁcations made to extend the length of the body to al-
low for the added electronics. In this prototype the data
line is communicated over a 2.4ghz signal. The overall ﬂow
of control can be seen in ﬁgure 2. The audio and sensor
states are sent wirelessly to the receiver, which converts the
sensor data to MIDI signals. Audio and MIDI data are then
sent into an eﬀects processor.
3.1 Buttons
We placed ﬁve buttons on the front panel mic (see ﬁgure 3)
in order to solve the eye contact problem. The buttons
function just as buttons on a pedalboard would. Users can
start, stop, and overdub their loops, toggle their reverb or
distortion on and oﬀ, toggle through full eﬀect presets and
jump to the next section of a song. The buttons are par-
ticularly eﬀective for live looping, as well as for controlling
section-based software such as Ableton Live.
Figure 3: Buttons On Front Panel: Five buttons on
the front panel substitute for buttons on a pedal.
They oﬀer on-oﬀ, toggle, or other instantaneous
control over eﬀects.
The buttons were placed mid-way down the mic so that
the vocalist can hold the mic in one hand and works the
button controls with the other, maximizing agility. Three
of the buttons are located lengthwise along the mic, with
two smaller buttons that can be operated by the pinky ﬁn-
ger. There are also LEDs beneath each button to provide
visual feedback. These are controlled by MIDI in signals
from the eﬀects processor, and the mappings are entirely
conﬁgurable.
Figure 4: Continuous Control: Fader on back panel
allows for continuous control over volume levels,
wah-wah, etc.
3.2 Continuous Control
To address the expressive control issue we added a fader to
the back panel of the microphone (see ﬁgure 4). The fader is
operated with the user’s thumb, and feels very similar to the
fader on a mixer. Using the fader for even simple controls
Figure 2: Concept Tahoe Data Flow: Audio and sensor information is sent wirelessly to the receiver,
which sends the audio to the eﬀects unit and translates the sensor data into MIDI. This allows the sensor
information to be conﬁgured ﬂexibly.
such as volume can be surprisingly expressive and eﬀective.
It can also be used for wah-wah eﬀects, pitch shifting, or any
other eﬀect that uses MIDI continuous control messages.
3.3 Gestural Control
For improved connection between sight and sound, we have
added motion and rotational position sensors to the Tahoe
microphone, in the form of a 3-axis gyro and 3-axis ac-
celerometer. Computations are made on the gyro sensors in
the form of quaternion rotations [6] to allow the microphone
to calculate which direction it is facing and send this data
in the form of conﬁgurable continuous control messages. In
order to avoid unintentional gestures we placed a sixth but-
ton called an activation button, on the back of the mic near
the fader (see ﬁgure 4). The position and acceleration data
is only sent when the button is depressed. Typically the
activation button is operated by the user’s thumb of either
hand. The gestural control really opens up new possibilities
for vocal performance. For example, the user could map the
vertical direction to a pitch bending eﬀect, so that sweeping
pitch changes can be communicated by lowering and raising
the mic. A very popular implementation of gestural control
is the ventriloquist, or panning eﬀect. In the ventriloquist
eﬀect, the user can pan the location of their voice simply
by pointing the mic. So, as in ﬁgure 5(a), if the vocalist
is pointing directly forward and there are 2 stereo speakers,
his/her voice is projected forward equally by the two speak-
ers. But if the vocalist wants to ”move” their voice to one
side of the room, he (or she) just depresses the activation
button and points to the left as in ﬁgure 5(b). Many of
the vocalists who tested the mic identiﬁed this as his/her
favorite eﬀect.
4. DEVELOPMENT
For the early design stages, we created an ultra-rapid pro-
totyping system consisting of a microphone extension with
sensors and related PCBs attached with movable putty (see
ﬁgure 6) in order to allow artists to quickly try out diﬀer-
ent sensors in a variety of diﬀerent positions. The sensors
were connected to an Arduino microcontroller which com-
municated the sensor states with Max/ MSP for instant
implementation of simple eﬀects control. We then work-
shopped these prototypes with a variety of diﬀerent artists
and had them experiment with eﬀects and move the sen-
sors to where they were most comfortable. We tried many
diﬀerent sensors, including buttons, sliders, squeeze/force
sensors, proximity sensors, accelerometers, rotary dials, ca-
pacitive touch sensors, gyros, accelerometers, LEDs, and
touchscreens for visual feedback.
4.1 Initial Design Results
In general the users gravitated towards a clarinet-like lay-
out, as implemented in our later prototype. Users with wind
(a) When the user is pointing the mic to the center, the sound
is panned equally between the speakers.
(b) When the microphone is pointed to one side the sound
can be panned in that direction.
Figure 5: Gestural Panning: The rotational sensors
inside the microphone turn simple panning into a
gestural eﬀect.
instrument experience were (not surprisingly) faster at de-
veloping agility with the prototype. Most artists prefered
simple buttons over other sensors, although enough people
wanted an easy continuous controller that we went with the
single-fader design.
We found that while people loved the gestural control,
users found it intimidating to suddenly be concerned with
the way that they were holding the mic. The use of a dedi-
cated activation button alleviated user fears of accidentally
triggering eﬀects.
Overall, response has been extremely positive, and most
of our test users were eager to add the Tahoe mic to their
arsenal of musical tools.
Figure 6: Early Tahoe Prototype: Early prototypes
of the Tahoe mic were tested using sensors attached
to the mic with blue putty, allowing for rapid pro-
totype iterations and mutability, even during user
testing.
4.2 Effects Mapping
Choosing what each sensor should control has been a major
challenge of this project, since every user has diﬀerent needs,
and every pedal has diﬀerent functions. Thus, choosing the
mappings is an ongoing process, and there is no one-size-
ﬁts-all setting, which is why we opted to use a MIDI output
instead of dedicated eﬀects. For later testing we patched the
audio and MIDI output of the microphone into a Muse Re-
ceptor [3] which hosted many conﬁgurable VST eﬀect plug-
ins, and had the users specify how they wanted the various
sensors to be operated. We have found that there are a few
types of functionality that are popular. When optimizing
for loopers, for example, we settled on a 4-button, three
track looping setup (see ﬁgure 4.2). When conﬁguring the
system for a more generalized audience users, we settled on
using 2 buttons for looping and the rest for reverb, pitch
bend, or other interesting eﬀects. The panning/gestural
mapping has also proven to be very popular.
4.3 Video
We demonstrated the microphone at the NAMM conference
in January 2011, and video of this can be found at http:
//www.youtube.com/watch?v=9dYdWrbhUNI. We have video
footage of master beatboxer Ekips (ﬁgure 8) athttp://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=C1WY3jkw4js.
4.4 Conclusion / Next Steps
By adding buttons, a fader, and motion sensors to a wire-
less mic, we feel we have created a new instrument which
allows vocalists more performative, intimate, and connec-
tive control over their eﬀects. We should stress that Con-
cept Tahoe is not a product on the market yet, but rather
a patent-pending proof-of-concept. There is much work left
Figure 7: Eﬀects Mapping: An example of
multitrack-looping mappings, using buttons 1, 2,
and 3 as general track buttons and button 4 for
mute, multiply, undo, and reset. The ﬁfth button
is still reserved for eﬀects changes.
Figure 8: Eklips With Tahoe: Master French beat-
boxer Eklips provided great feedback on the speciﬁc
needs of looping beatboxers.
to do, and we are continuing to reﬁne the Tahoe mic as we
get more feedback. We are hoping to continue shaping it
into a tool that can be used by vocalists and musicians of
all kinds.
5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to acknowledge all the hard work from Peter
Kuric, Heiko Zeuner, Dan Harris, Daniel Sennheiser, Achim
Gleissner, Gabriel Gomez-Schulz, Tom Ituarte, Tad Rollow,
and all my colleagues at Sennheiser who contributed to this
project.
6. REFERENCES
[1] Based on conversations with achim gleissner and the
sennheiser microphone team.
[2] I am t-pain review. http://www.iamt-painmic.com/.
[Online; accessed 03-Feb-2012].
[3] Muse receptor. http:
//www.museresearch.com/products/index.php/.
[Online; accessed 16-Apr-2012].
[4] Source hot hand midi exp controller. http://www.
sourceaudio.net/products/hothand/midi_exp.php.
[Online; accessed 015-Apr-2012].
[5] Tc helicon mp 75.
http://www.tc-helicon.com/products/mp-75/.
[Online; accessed 03-Feb-2012].
[6] E. R. Bachmann. Inertial and Magnetic Tracking of
Limb Segment Orientation for Inserting Humans into
Synthetic Environments. PhD thesis, Defense
Technical Information Center OAI-PMH Repository
[http://stinet.dtic.mil/oai/oai] (United States), 1998.
[7] G. Essl, D. T. Laboratories, and M. Rohs. Shamus – a
sensor-based integrated mobile phone instrument. In
Proceedings ofthe International Computer Music
Conference, volume 40, pages 1–4. Citeseer, 2007.
[8] J. L. Flanagan and R. M. Golden. Phase vocoder.
Bell System Technical Journal, 45:1493–1509, 1966.
[9] D. Gershuny. John popper and blues traveler, til
death do us part...? Gig Magazine, National,
December 1999. [Online; accessed 02-Feb-2012].
[10] E. Miranda and M. Wanderley. New Digital Musical
Instruments: Control And Interaction Beyond the
Keyboard. A-R EDITIONS, INC., Middleton, WI,
2004.
[11] G. Wang, G. Essl, and H. Penttinen. Do mobile
phones dream of electric orchestras? In Proceedings
ofthe International Computer Music Conference. Ann
Arbor, MI: Scholarly Publishing Oﬃce, University of
Michigan Library, 2008.