FabricKeyboard: Multimodal Textile Sensate Media as an 
Expressive and Deformable Musical Interface  
Irmandy Wicaksono∗† 
∗Wearable Computing Lab
D-ITET, ETH Zurich
Gloriastrasse 35
Zurich 8092
 irmandy@mit.edu
Joseph A. Paradiso†
†Responsive Environments
MIT Media Lab
75 Amherst Street
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139
joep@media.mit.edu
ABSTRACT 
This paper presents FabricKeyboard: a novel deformable 
keyboard interface based on a multi-modal fabric sensate 
surface. Multi-layer fabric sensors that detect touch, proximity, 
electric field, pressure, and stretch are machine-sewn in a 
keyboard pattern on a stretchable substrate. The result is a 
fabric-based musical controller that combines both the discrete 
controls of a keyboard and various continuous controls from 
the embedded fabric sensors. This enables unique tactile 
experiences and new interactions both with physical and non-
contact gestures: physical by pressing, pulling, stretching, and 
twisting the keys or the fabric and non-contact by hovering and 
waving towards/against the keyboard and an electromagnetic 
source. We have also developed additional fabric-based 
modular interfaces such as a ribbon-controller and trackpad, 
allowing performers to add more expressive and continuous 
controls. This paper will discuss implementation strategies for 
our system-on-textile, fabric-based sensor developments, as 
well as sensor-computer interfacing and musical mapping 
examples of this multi-modal and expressive fabric keyboard.  
Author Keywords 
Keyboard, multimodal, fabric sensors, e-textiles, continuous 
and discrete controls, tangible computing, deformable interface, 
musical expression 
ACM Classification 
Hardware ~ Sensor applications and deployments, Sensor 
devices and platforms, Human-centered computing ~ Sound-
based input / output 
1.INTRODUCTION 
Textiles are soft and conformable materials that could also be 
stretchable, as opposed to standard electronics which are built 
on rigid structures or flexible substrates. The fact that textiles 
are omnipresent in our environments and that there has been a 
significant effort in making them more intelligent present many 
novel applications, including in the physical interaction media 
[1-3,8]. Post et al. initially explored the concept of e-broidery 
to develop several fabric-based musical interfaces [3]. These 
interfaces include The Media Lab’s 1997 Musical Jacket, that 
consists of an embroidered conductive thread keypad and is 
connected to a wearable MIDI synthesizer and speaker circuits, 
and  The  Embroidered  Musical  Balls,  which are composed of  
 
Figure 1: The FabricKeyboard being stretched  
sewn conductive electrodes, acting as pressure sensors for 
modulating sound. 
New electronic textile materials and integration techniques also 
triggered several new developments of deformable musical 
interfaces such as Zstretch, a stretchy fabric musical controller 
[4], the Fabric Piezoresistive Multitouch Pad [5], and the xOSC 
Musical Glove [6]. Giovanni et al . performed user studies on 
how musicians interact with deformable interfaces, including 
some of the aforementioned controllers [7]. The main results of 
the studies showed that most of the musician used these 
deformable interfaces as an expression, particularly to 
manipulate and filter sound, rather than playing discrete notes. 
Fabric-based ‘pianos’ or keyboards also exist within the maker 
community; however, they are only discrete, touch sensitive, or 
simple textile switches [3,8].  It is therefore interesting, to 
incorporate both discrete and continuous controls into one 
deformable musical controller. 
Inspired by the current developments of textile sensors and the 
stretchable nature of knitted fabrics, we envision a multimodal, 
textile-based, musical interface with a familiar layout of an 
existing instrument. We therefore designed and implemented a 
fabric-based keyboard as pictured in Figure 1. The fabric 
keyboard allows discrete controls with conventional keystrokes 
and rich continuous controls with unique physical interactions 
enabled by the fabric (e.g. squeezing, pulling, stretching, and 
twisting). Additionally, we explored further by integrating 
expressive, non-contact gesture sensing and developing fabric-
based ribbon-controller and trackpad. 
348
1.1. Related Work 
The evolution of electronic keyboards dates back over a 
century ago when Elisha Gray, invented the Musical Telegraph 
in 1876 [9]. This instrument is composed of an array of self-
tuned vibrating reeds activated by mechanical switches. 
Inspired by Leon Theremin’s non-contact gestures instrument, 
Maurice Martenot developed the Ondes Martenot (1928), 
which contains a ring that pulls a string to continuously vary 
the pitch of a sound and a left-hand keyer to control the 
volume. Later versions included a monophonic keyboard with 
lateral pressure for vibrato effects. In 1940, Hugh LeCaine built 
the Electronic Sackbut [10], which is a great example of early 
expressive keyboard instruments. The expressive left-hand 
controls in this keyboard nicely illustrate the still dominant 
concept of a “left-hand controller”, which is a set of knobs, 
sliders, touchpads, joysticks, and other input devices that the 
performer can use to articulate the produced sound.  
Don Buchla used capacitive touchpads as input devices in his 
modular synthesizers dating to the mid/late 1960s. As 
electronics further advanced, capacitive contact sensing 
keyboards appeared in commercial synthesizers such as EMS 
Sythi AKS and EDP Wasp in the early 70s. Moog and Rhea 
subsequently designed a Multiply-Touch Sensitive Keyboard 
that incorporated a new layer of sensors on the key surfaces to 
detect XY finger gestures and pressure with 4-point capacitive 
sensing and force-sensitive film respectively [11].  Haken et al. 
constructed The Continuum, an indiscrete keyboard that 
measures finger slide position and pressure on a flat continuous 
surface; the keyboard had experienced several design 
alterations, but in the end used hall-effect sensors to sense 
proximity of magnets [12].  Instead of turning the knobs or 
moving sliders, these controllers allow expressive and fluid 
controls of the pitch and timbre of the sound generated by 
applying various gestural inputs from the same hand right on 
the keyboard surface. 
There are also recent efforts in integrating discrete and 
continuous controls of the keyboard. McPherson’s TouchKeys, 
for example, integrated a new capacitive multi-touch sensing 
layer on each key to map finger positions and contact area [13]. 
Grosshauser and Tröster also explored the same principle, but 
developed an FSR pressure sensor matrix instead, giving 
additional pressure variations [14]. These techniques allow 
users not only to augment, but also to evaluate keyboard 
performances. Another remarkable example is the Seaboard, 
which transformed typical keyboard surface using silicone in a 
wavy pattern beyond an FSR layer to enable expressive, 
continuous finger gestures as polyphonic modulations [15]. 
Note that most of the expressive keyboard interfaces till date 
rest on a rigid and heavy structure; a keyboard made out of 
fabric, besides providing new interactions and tactile 
experiences for musical expressions, can be easily folded, 
rolled up, and packed in our luggage like a pair of socks or a 
scarf [16 ]. It can also be wearable, which extends the 
functionality of such fabric-based musical controllers. 
2. FABRIC KEYBOARD DESIGN AND 
IMPLEMENTATION 
Figure 2a) illustrates the structure of the fabric keyboard, 
whereas Figure 2b) and c) show the working prototype. The 
keyboard is a textile-based sensate surface, consisting of one 
octave of keys with multi-modal sensing capability. Multi-layer 
fabric sensors in a keyboard pattern were embedded and 
machine-sewn on a stretchable, base knit fabric. The outermost 
layer of each key consists of a fused conductive fabric that acts 
as a floating electrode to detect proximity, touch, or induced 
electric field. Below this layer, a fabric pressure sensor was 
embedded in a sandwich configuration. The configuration 
includes a mesh and piezo-resistive fabric in between two 
conductive fabrics, one of which is a common ground. Below 
the base fabric, fabric stretch sensors were attached: one at the 
right side, one at the left side, two at the bottom side, and a 
long one in the middle and in-between the keys with a zebra 
configuration (conductive/piezo-resistive fabric) to avoid 
parasitic influence from the other sensors.   
All of these fabric sensors were then connected to the circuitry 
through conductive thread interconnects. To ensure firm 
connections, especially upon stretching, stretchable routings 
were machine-sewn using serpentine or zig-zag sewing patterns 
on all of the stretch sensor interconnects. There is a main hub at 
the edge of the fabric that separates the soft circuits (e-textiles) 
from the rigid circuits (PCBs). This hub is pluggable and can be 
connected by using the fabric-based ribbon cables.  This 
separation not only allows fluid interaction between the 
performer and the fabric keyboard, but also enables 
customizable hardware for sensor processing. The fabrics that 
we used to construct the fabric keyboard are: 
• Non-conductive fabric: Knitted 75% Nylon, 25% 
Spandex fabrics. 
• Mesh fabric: Knitted 100% Polyester mesh fabric. 
• Conductive fabric: Knitted Ag-coated fabric with 76% 
Nylon and 24% Elastane and surface resistivity of <0.5 
Ω/sq. 
• Piezo-resistive fabric: Knitted Eeontex fabric with 72% 
Nylon and 28% Elastane (LTT-SLPA) in a proprietary 
conductive coating and surface resistivities of 10 4-107 Ω/
sq upon request. 
Figure 2: a) Multi-layer structure showing the fabric 
materials and sensing modalities. b) Top and c) bottom view 
of the fabric keyboard 
Note that all of the fabrics used here, either electro-active or 
not, are knitted to keep the stretchability of the fabric keyboard. 
The conductive threads used in this project are made of purely 
stainless steel fibers. Even though they are relatively hard to 
solder and sew as a top thread, compared to silver-coated nylon 
core threads, these threads have a relatively low resistance, are 
robust, and can withstand high temperatures and multiple 
washings. We found consistent results in using them as bobbin 
threads. To connect them to the rigid main hub, we developed a 
(a)
(b) (c)
349
customized connector with stripped metal loops. These threads 
were then tightly tied to these loops before applying a low 
temperature solder and encapsulation to ensure firm 
connections with low contact resistances. 
3. SENSING ELEMENTS 
Based on our multi-layer structure in Figure 2a), we propose 
multiple sensing modalities: proximity, touch, and electric field 
(Layer 1), pressure (Layer 3-6), stretch (Layer 7), and position, 
which is from the additional modular fabric-based interfaces 
such as the trackpad and ribbon-controller. A more detailed 
explanation of design, implementation, and characterization of 
each sensor can be seen in [17]. 
3.1. Proximity and Touch 
A single electrode mechanism with one layer of conductive 
fabric was constructed for near-proximity and touch sensing 
where there is a capacitive coupling between the finger as a 
virtual ground and a charged electrode with specified charging 
time and current. The MPR121 Proximity Touch Controller, 
with 12 floating inputs, high sensitivity, and proximity/touch 
threshold detection feature, is used for this in the one-octave 
keyboard [18 ]. The proximity and touch data from this 
controller can be differentiated by the threshold detection, 
meaning that the off-state of a touch event represents the 
capacitance value of our hand’s proximity. 
Several tests were conducted to observe the influence of the 
sensing area on the sensitivity of readings. It was found that as 
the pad size represents a typical piano key’s area (2x12 cm), the 
controller can sense hands approach or hover of up to 12 cm 
over the surface. Increasing the pad size to 12x12 cm further 
improves the sensitivity to up to 18 cm. Another interesting 
modality is to enable the ‘multiplexed sensing’ or the “13th” 
electrode feature of MPR121. By combining all of the floating 
electrodes to form a single large sensing surface, this option 
produced an observed improvement of sensitivity of up to 25 
cm. Since this feature is accessible through programming , we 
can also automatically transform the sensing mechanism from 
poly to multiplex mode and vice versa as our hand comes 
within the sensor’s reach. 
3.2. Electric Field Sensing 
Our body can act as either a shunt, disrupting an electric field 
between a transmitter and a ground, as a transmitter, by 
coupling our body to the transmitter itself, or as both when 
crossing over between these modes [19]. In this work, we 
exploited the electric hum or noise strength coming from the 
AC mains power that gets coupled to our body as the “antenna” 
in transmit mode. This electric hum typically ranges from 
50-60 Hz. A passive electric field sensing circuit based on [20] 
and comprising trans-impedance amplifier, band-pass filter, and 
envelope detector, was designed for each individual key as 
shown in Figure 4. The voltage output from each sensing circuit 
is then fed to an analog multiplexer for sequential ADC voltage 
readings by the micro-controller. 
The passive electric field sensing circuit can detect touch as 
well as proximity by carefully setting both trans-impedance and 
band-pass filter gains to improve the sensitivity. However, the 
most interesting scenario of using electromagnetic coupling is 
when our body acts as a receiver antenna. After our fingers 
strike the keys, the conductive fabrics connect our body to the 
sensing circuits, forming a network. The electromagnetic noise 
coupled into our body is then picked up by these sensing 
circuits and can be controlled by moving the other hand 
towards an electromagnetic source, which in this case is a 
minimally-shielded device connected to the main power. The 
sensitivity scales with the field strength of the source. However, 
in our case, it can detect proximity from 60cm to up to 1m. The 
output reveals the relative distance as our hand approaches the 
transmitter, resulting in an instrument that exhibits similarity to 
a Theremin. This enables us to continuously control certain 
sound parameters by performing non-contact gestures with one 
hand, while the other hand is in contact with the keyboard. 
3.3. Pressure 
The pressure-sensing element is a multi-layer structure made 
out of piezo-resistive fabric and mesh fabric sewn in between 
two conductive fabrics. The piezo-resistive fabric is a knit 
fabric coated with PPy, a conductive polymer in concentrations 
that can be requested. In this case, we used Eeonyx LTT-
SLPA-20k, with surface resistivity of 20kΩ/sq. Since it is 
piezo-resistive, the resistance of this fabric sensor changes in 
correlation to the applied force. The decision to include mesh 
fabric in the structure manifested from the non-uniformity of 
the resistance baseline value on each key. The mesh layer 
solves this problem, as it physically separates the conductive 
fabric from the piezo-resistive fabric, avoiding tensions as well 
as accidental contacts between them. Nonetheless, introducing 
a mesh layer as a part of the pressure sensing element could 
possibly reduce the sensitivity of the pressure sensor to low 
finger pressures. We then experimented and characterized 
different types of mesh fabric to test the relationship between 
the gap size and thickness with each sensor’s sensitivity and 
found that polyester knit mesh fabric gives the best sensitivity 
and pleasant tactile feel, as it has a relatively large gap size, is 
rather thick, and also squishy [17]. 
3.4. Stretch 
Knitted spandex fabrics, due to their high elasticity, are good 
textile substrates for coated stretch sensors. The coated fabric 
can be cut to different sizes in order to engineer its base 
resistance and durability. Not only seamless, coating the fabric 
itself with conductive polymers also eliminates the necessity of 
an interfacial layer or complex transfer process in the case of a 
printed or cured carbon-elastomer composite strain sensor. 
Their ability to be sewn also makes it possible to integrate them 
to any fabric.  
In this work, we are interested to see how the complex 
interlocked structures of knitted fabrics influence their response 
to strain, both mechanically and electrically. The Instron testing 
machine was used to study the response of several fabric stretch 
sensors with various strain elongations. This machine is 
universally used to evaluate mechanical properties of various 
materials. We compared PPy-coated fabric for stretch sensors in 
different cuts (course and wale), surface resistivities (coating 
concentrations), and maximum allowable strain (elastane 
compositions). The results showed that stretch sensors cut in 
the wale direction with low surface resistivity and high 
percentage of elastane, give the best performance both 
mechanically in terms of structural integrity and electrically in 
terms of dynamic range. The Instron test also proved that the 
fabric stretch sensor is repeatable when stretched back and 
forth 100 times with 40% and 80% strain. Hysteresis and 
relaxation behaviors can also be observed to some extent, but 
this is mainly caused by the structural property of knitted 
fabrics. In addition, we found that transferring this ribbon strain 
sensor onto another fabric as a substrate improves its reliability 
and durability, as the substrate provides additional support to 
recover the fabric stretch sensor back to its original length. The 
placement of the stretch sensors that are embedded in between 
the keys and on the edges of the fabric, as previously shown in 
Figure 2c), enables the keyboard to distinguish  between 
stretching or expanding the keys, pulling specific sides of the 
fabric, and stretching the entire fabric. 
350
3.5. Additional Fabric Interfaces 
The additional fabric interfaces, which are ribbon-controller 
and trackpad, were designed to be modular. Silver or nickel-
coated snaps were sewn as shown in Figure 2b) at the up right 
corner of the fabric keyboard, allowing performer to add these 
additional fabric controllers as necessary by snapping them. 
Figure 3 shows the final look of these fabric controllers. In 
order to develop these, we used: 
• Non-conductive fabric : Woven 100% cotton denim 
fabric. 
• Mesh fabric: 100% Nylon Tulle netting fabric. 
• Conductive fabric: Woven Soft&Safe fabric with 70% 
Bamboo fiber and 30% Ag fiber, Copper Polyester 
Taffeta with 100% Cu fiber, and Cobaltex fabric with 
100% Ni fiber. Their surface resistivities are <1 Ω/sq, 
0.05 Ω/sq, and <0.1 Ω/sq respectively. 
• Resistive fabric: Woven Exstatic fabric with 87% 
Polyester and 13% BSAF Resistat and surface resistivity 
of 105 Ω/sq. 
3.5.1. Fabric Ribbon-controller 
The fabric ribbon-controller is a long sensate surface that 
measures position along one axis for continuous expression by 
sliding our finger. We compared two methods of single axis 
location sensing as shown in Figure 3b) and c). The first 
method in Figure 3b), is based on a voltage gradient between 
two lines at both ends of a piezo-resistive/resistive fabric layer. 
When a finger strikes the pad, a connection is made between 
the resistive fabric and bottom conductive fabric through a 
mesh fabric. The bottom fabric is connected to an ADC, in 
which the voltage value directly correlates to the position of the 
finger in respect to Vcc and Gnd, If a piezo-resistive layer is 
used, we can implement current-steering circuits as discussed 
in [21] to calculate both position and pressure of the finger 
simultaneously. The second approach, as illustrated in Figure 
3c), is based on the total resistance of a resistive fabric from 
one edge to the contact point. It requires external reference  
resistor to form a potential divider configuration. The latter 
approach was chosen because of its simplicity in hardware, as 
linearization can be easily be done through software, providing 
a prior knowledge of the reference resistor. 
3.5.2. Fabric Trackpad 
Based on the maturity of current resistive touchscreen 
technologies, we tested two main approaches: 5-wire and 4-
wire configurations in our fabric trackpad design. The first 
approach, the 5-wire configuration, was realized by sewing a 
conductive fabric on top of a fabric substrate followed by mesh 
and resistive fabric. Four conductive connections were then 
embroidered onto each corner of the resistive layer, as 
illustrated in Figure 3d). To measure the coordinate of the 
finger, the corner points are periodically set to either represent a 
low or high. The bottom conductive fabric is then used to 
measure the voltage gradient of the axis as our finger strikes the 
pad. The 4-wire configuration in Figure 3e) consists of a mesh 
layer in between two resistive fabrics. Conductive threads were 
sewn through the two opposing sides of each resistive fabric 
orthogonally to each other. In this approach, one of the 
conductive thread lines on each resistive fabric becomes an 
ADC line, while the other is set to high-impedance. The upper 
resistive fabric provides a voltage gradient by setting each 
conductive line to either Vcc or Gnd. This mechanism occurs 
alternately, hence the voltage read by the other fabric pair as an 
ADC contact represents either the x or y-position value 
We performed drawing tests to evaluate the performance of 
these two configurations. In the case of 5-wire, there is a non-
linear behavior on the patterns drawn closer to the edges. The 
non-equipotential voltage distribution across the edges is the 
reason behind this. As the touch point is further away from the 
corners, the voltage starts to drop due to the resistance 
distribution across the layer. To solve this issue, a linearization 
pattern can be applied by sewing conductive thread in certain 
patterns across all sides. The 4-wire configuration, however, 
performed better compared to the previous configuration. It did 
not have issues in voltage distribution, since in this 4-wire 
technique, two resistive layers are required and the voltage 
gradient in both cases now becomes unidirectional. The fabric 
trackpad could read several simple to complex stroke patterns 
satisfactorily. The advantages of this method over the grid-
based technique is that it has a high resolution (depending on 
ADC bits), seamless look, smooth tactile feel, and low 
complexity; however, the trackpad could only detect a single 
touch and is not as sensitive, as it needs a small amount of force 
to break through the mesh layer. 
4.HARDWARE DESIGN 
Based on the modular design of our fabric keyboard, we 
fabricated two different boards with their own features as 
shown in Figure 4 below. The first board ( FabricKeys) consists 
of MPR121 proximity and touch controller channels as well as 
pressure, stretch, ribbon-controller, and trackpad channels, 
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 3: a) The fabric trackpad and ribbon-controller. 
 b) Voltage gradient and c) total resistance approaches of 
measuring finger location with ribbon-controller. d) 5-wire 
and e) 4-wire configurations of the resistive fabric trackpad
piezo-/resistive fabric 
mesh fabric 
conductive fabric
resistive fabric 
mesh fabric 
conductive fabric
piezo-/resistive fabric 
mesh fabric 
conductive fabric
(a)
(b) (c)
(d) (e)
resistive fabric 
mesh fabric 
resistive fabric
Figure 4: System interface of the multimodal array of fabric 
sensors, showing a) Feather M0 Wi-Fi, b) FabricKeys, and c) 
ThereminKeys
351
whereas the second board ( ThereminKeys) comprises passive 
electric field sensing, pressure, and stretch channels. 
Both of these boards have configured pin-headers for stacking 
the main hub and connecting it to the fabric musical controller 
through a customized fabric ribbon connector. We used an 
Adafruit Feather M0 Wi-Fi as the main hub, giving us 
flexibility in adopting either wired (Serial or MIDI) or wireless 
(OSC) protocols. We chose Wi-Fi because of its direct approach 
to interfacing with OSC through UDP. These headers are also 
compatible with other Feather modules, such as BLE or RF, 
enabling us to change communication protocols as necessary. 
5.SENSOR-COMPUTER INTERFACES 
AND MUSICAL MAPPINGS 
We tested three different protocols in this work: direct serial 
communications with a customized data structure, MIDI, and 
OSC. The hardware USB data-rates, with 115200 bps for 
reading all of the sensor data, are 53 Hz and 62 Hz, while the 
maximum possible latencies are 19 ms and 16 ms respectively 
for FabricKeys  and ThereminKeys. With the ribbon-controller 
and trackpad attached, the maximum latency increases to 20.6 
ms. If, instead of USB, the wireless approach is used, as the 
calculated round-trip delay was ~8.5ms, the maximum latency 
when using OSC through UDP is 23 ms. Note that the 
maximum latency here only applies to the multiplexed sensing 
elements; some of the continuous controllers, such as ribbon-
controller and trackpad, have a lower latency (~2ms).  The 
effective latency however could be a little bit higher than this, 
as we have not considered the latency after the data is 
transferred and converted into sound. We finally focused on the 
MIDI implementation, taking into an account its 
interoperability, simplicity, and wide software support. In this 
example, we used Ableton Live 9 as our audio workstation. 
Table 1: Example of MIDI message mappings 
Table 1 shows the on-board mapping of each sensor into MIDI 
messages. It can be seen that these are customizable and could 
change, depending on the intended sonic interactions. The 
stretch sensors can be set to MIDI CC messages that will 
correspond to certain timbral, dynamic, and temporal variations 
(filter resonance, frequency, glide, reverb, amp, distortion, et 
cetera), as well as pitch-bend. The additional controls, such as 
the ribbon-controller or trackpad, can be mapped as 
independent instruments, since they are integrated with touch 
as well as near-proximity sensing, or as a keyboard 
complement with CC or pitch-bend messages.  
Figure 5 below demonstrates several examples of the gestural 
interactions performed with the fabric keyboard and its 
extension fabric interfaces. In this work, we explored several 
possible mappings based on the underlying sensing modalities. 
A performer can use the multiplexed proximity mode for 
sensing high-range hand approach. Amplitude modulation can 
be mapped into this non-contact parameter as our hand gets 
closer to the surface, giving an ambient sound effect before the 
performer starts playing physically with the keyboard. Another 
possibility is to map this as a pitch modulation, getting stronger 
as our hand approaches towards the surface. In addition, as 
each key on our fabric keyboard is also able to sense near-
proximity, we can map our hand’s presence on each key as an 
individual note, and its distance in respect to it as a modulation. 
For the electric field sensing, we mapped the non-contact 
gesture control to filter frequency and expanding of the keys to 
tremolo effects. Indeed, another novel interaction enabled by 
the fabric keyboard is stretching. We also demonstrated this 
physical gesture by correlating pitch modulation as we stretch 
multiple keys against each other, as well as vibrato intensity as 
we pull a specific side of the fabric subsequently. Lifting and 
stretching the fabric after playing with it can also be mapped to 
modulate an echo. Furthermore, one can twist the whole fabric, 
which will ground all of the keys and trigger them to turn on, as 
well as contracting some of the stretchable fabric sensors 
simultaneously, giving a new style of performance to the users. 
Figure 5: Several interactions demonstrated include a) 
Expanding the keys with fingers b) Pulling left side c) 
Pulling bottom side of fabric d) Expanding specific side 
with fingers while playing the keys e) Squeezing the keys f) 
Stretching the fabric g) Sliding on the trackpad h) on the 
ribbon-controller while playing the keys i) Hovering around 
and approaching towards the surface j) Playing the keys 
with one hand while the other waves towards/against an 
EMI source k) Lifting and stretching l) Twisting the whole 
fabric 
There are evidently many possible mappings that can result 
from this fabric keyboard as we explore its modalities and their 
relationships to one another. Refer to [17] for more  
information of our mappings. Video demonstrations of several 
performances with the keyboard, including the ribbon-
controller and the trackpad can also be accessed at the link of 
this project, provided in the Appendix of this paper. 
6.EV ALUATIONS 
We have discussed the design and implementation of multi 
sensory fabric surface as a keyboard interface and demonstrated 
Sensing 
Modality Data
No of 
Sensing 
Elements
Channel Message Type Converted Data
Touch Bool 12 1 Note Off/On Note Number
Pressure Int 
Int 12 1 
1
Note Off/On 
Polyphonic/
Channel Pressure
Velocity (0-127) 
Pressure (0-127)
Proximity Bool 
Int 12 2 
2
Note Off/On 
CC
Note Number 
Value (0-127)
Stretch Int 5 1 CC/Pitchbend Value (0-127)/MSB 
(0-127)
Ribbon-
controller 
Position 
Touch/
Proximity
Int 
Bool/
Int
1 
1
1 
3
Pitchbend 
Note/CC
MSB (0-127) 
Note Number/  
Value (0-127)
Trackpad 
Position 
Touch/
Proximity
Int 
Bool/
Int
2 
1
4 
4
CC 
Note/CC
Value (0-127) 
Note Number/  
Value (0-127)
(a) (b) (c)
(d) (e) (f)
(g) (h) (i)
(j) (k) (l)
352
a working prototype. However, there are still several limitations 
in this work that need further work. Using bare conductive 
threads has been proved to cause several complications such as 
parasitic capacitances and short-circuits, affecting the sensor 
response especially upon extreme movements of the fabric. 
Thus, it is recommended to use insulated conductive threads, as 
developed in [1], or more effectively, to fabricate the shielded 
version of them. Even though the strain sensors worked reliably 
when stretched around their allowable range, stretching outside 
their range could influence their base resistance. Calibrating 
each sensor baseline value is therefore necessary to compensate 
this offset.  
In terms of the usability, we found that it is relatively hard to 
play chords with the keyboard, due to the gap in between each 
key for the stretch sensor’s placement. This gap is required so 
that we can expand the keys comfortably with our finger. 
However, choosing a more stretchable base fabric and reducing 
this gap distance could possibly solve this design issue. Finally, 
since our current maximum possible latency would not be 
suitable for staccato keyboard performance s, further efforts in 
hardware are required by reducing the multiplexing load and 
the ADC processing time of each sensing modality. 
7.CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we presented FabricKeyboard: a novel, multi-
modal, fabric-based keyboard controller comprising a multi-
layer of fabric sensors patterned on a stretchable fabric 
substrate. Each key, as well as the bulk fabric, could detect 
touch, proximity, pressure, stretch, and coupled electric field 
simultaneously, resulting in rich discrete and continuous 
gesture sensing. To complement this fabric keyboard, other 
fabric interfaces such as ribbon controllers and trackpads were 
also built. These fabric interfaces are modular and can be 
snapped to the main keyboard controller. Our seamless design 
separates the soft-circuits (smart fabrics) from the rigid-circuits 
(circuit boards), allowing the performers to fully explore the 
fabric and express themselves. This enhances the relationship 
between the physical interaction and the music, as the fabric 
deeply embodies the sound it resonates. Supported by MIDI 
protocol, the fabric keyboard can be connected to any audio 
synthesis or sequencer software and mapped to essentially any 
instrument, sound, or effect.  
There is much work that can be done in the future to further 
extend this project. Firstly, we would like to continue our 
reliability tests and perform washability tests on the fabric 
sensors. It is also interesting to extend this fabric keyboard to 
two or three octaves and incorporate haptic feedback by 
integrating fabric-based actuators. We would like to conduct in-
depth user studies with musicians and sound artists to improve 
our device’s ergonomics and to study the rich multimodal and 
sonic experiences that can result from this keyboard. In the end, 
we would like to collaborate with them for a musical 
performance. We hope that this work not only contributes 
towards fabric-based musical controllers, but also to other new 
physical interaction media involving electronic textiles. 
8.ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We would like to thank Lyle Mays for the original inspirations, Nan-
Wei Gong for the initial discussions of this work, the Responsive 
Environments Group at the MIT Media Lab, and the Zeno Karl 
Schindler Foundation. 
9.REFERENCES 
1.Poupyrev, I., Gong, N.W., Fukuhara, S., Karagozler, M.E., 
Schwesig, C. and Robinson, K.E., 2016, May. Project 
Jacquard: Interactive Digital Textiles at Scale. In Proc. 
CHI (pp. 4216-4227). ACM. 
2.Berzowska, J., 2005. E-textiles: Wearable computers, reactive 
fashion, and soft computation. Textile, 3(1), pp.58-75. 
3. Post, E.R., Orth, M., Russo, P.R. and Gershenfeld, N., 2000. 
E-broidery: Design and fabrication of textile-based 
computing. IBM Sys, 39(3.4), pp.840-860. 
4.Chang, A. and Ishii, H., 2007, June. Zstretch: a stretchy fabric 
music controller. In Proc. 7th NIME (pp. 46-49). ACM. 
5.Roh, J.S., Mann, Y ., Freed, A. and Wessel, D., 2011, June. 
Robust and Reliable Fabric, Piezoresistive Multitouch 
Sensing Surfaces for Musical Controllers. In NIME (pp. 
393-398). 
6.xOSC Glove. http://dev-blog.mimugloves.com 
7.Troiano, G.M., Pedersen, E.W. and Hornbæk, K., 2015, April. 
Deformable interfaces for performing music. In Proc. 33rd 
CHI (pp. 377-386). ACM. 
8.Perner-Wilson, H., Buechley, L. and Satomi, M., 2011, 
January. Handcrafting textile interfaces from a kit-of-no-
parts. In Proc. 5th TEI (pp. 61-68). ACM. 
9.Paradiso, J.A. American Innovations in Electronic Musical 
Instruments, http://www.newmusicbox.org/articles/
american-innovations-in-electronic-musical- instruments/  
10.Young, G., 1989. The Sackbut Blues: Hugh Le Caine, 
Pioneer in Electronic Music, National Museum of Science 
and Technology Press, Ottawa CA.  
11.Moog, R.A. and Rhea, T.L., 1990. Evolution of the keyboard 
interface: The Bösendorfer 290 SE recording piano and 
the Moog multiply-touch-sensitive keyboards. CMJ, pp.
52-60. 
12.Haken, L., Tellman, E. and Wolfe, P., 1998. An indiscrete 
music keyboard. CMJ, 22(1), pp.30-48. 
13.McPherson, A., 2012, May. TouchKeys: Capacitive Multi-
Touch Sensing on a Physical Keyboard. In NIME. 
14.Grosshauser, T. and Tröster, G., 2013, May. Finger Position 
and Pressure Sensing Techniques for String and Keyboard 
Instruments. In NIME (V ol. 13, pp. 27-30). 
15.Lamb, R. and Robertson, A., 2011. Seaboard: a New Piano 
Keyboard-related Interface Combining Discrete and 
Continuous Control. In NIME (pp. 503-506). 
16.Paradiso, J.A. and Borque, L. L., A Fabric Keyboard for 
Composing on the Road. (Unpublished manuscript) 
17.Wicaksono, I., 2017. Master Thesis. Multisensory Fabric as 
Deformable Musical Interface. 
18.MPR121 Datasheet. http://www.nxp.com/pages/proximity-
capacitive-touch-sensor-controller:MPR121 
19.Zimmerman, T.G., Smith, J.R., Paradiso, J.A., Allport, D. 
and Gershenfeld, N., 1995, May. Applying electric field 
sensing to human-computer interfaces. In Proc. CHI (pp. 
280-287). ACM. 
20.Gong, N.W., Steimle, J., Olberding, S., Hodges, S., Gillian, 
N.E., Kawahara, Y . and Paradiso, J.A., 2014, April. 
PrintSense: a versatile sensing technique to support 
multimodal flexible surface interaction. In Proc. 32nd CHI 
(pp. 1407-1410). ACM. 
21. Freed, A., 2009, June. Novel and Forgotten Current-steering 
Techniques for Resistive Multitouch, Duotouch, and 
Polytouch Position Sensing with Pressure. In NIME (pp. 
230-235) 
10.APPENDIX 
Demonstrations of this project can be accessed at https://
www.media.mit.edu/projects/FabricKeyboard/overview/ 
353