A Mobile Music Museum Experience for Children
Mikkel Helleberg Jørgensen1,4, Aske Sønderby Knudsen1,3,4, Thomas Michael
Wilmot1,4, Kasper Duemose Lund1,4, Stefania Seraﬁn1, Hendrik Purwins1,2
1Sound and Music Computing Group,2Audio Analysis Lab, Aalborg University Copenhagen;3EduMode;4Danish App Lab
{mhja11,twilmo14,klun11}@student.aau.dk,askeknudsen@gmail.com, {sts,hpu}@create.aau.dk
ABSTRACT
An interactive music instrument museum experience for chil-
dren of 10-12 years is presented. Equipped with tablet de-
vices, the children are sent on a treasure hunt where partic-
ipants have to identify musical instruments by listening to
samples; when the right instrument is located, a challenge
of playing an application on the tablet is initiated. This ap-
plication is an interactive digital representation of the found
instrument, mimicking some of its key playing techniques,
using a simpliﬁed scrolling-on-screen musical notation. A
qualitative evaluation of the application using observations
while interacting with the application and a focus group in-
terview with school children revealed that the children were
more engaged when playing with the interactive application
than when only watching a music video.
Author Keywords
music education, interactive museum, educational games
ACM Classiﬁcation
H.5.5 [Information Interfaces and Presentation] Sound and
Music Computing, J.5 [Arts and Humanities], K.3.1 [Com-
puter Uses in Education] Computer-assisted instruction.
1. INTERACTIVE MUSEUM EXPERIENCE
In a traditional museum setup, the interaction between vis-
itor and installation is often limited to observing the exhibi-
tion passively. But especially children beneﬁt from further
interaction.([3] p. 22) In order to engage children more, we
created a musical game in which children interact with a
tablet.1 The interaction is simple enough to be learned im-
mediately and the required resources for the game are just a
tablet computer. We qualitatively assess the experience of
the children when interacting with the tablets in a setting
that sketches out the actual museum space, where images of
the instruments serve as space holders for the actual phys-
ical instruments.
2. MUSEUM AND MUSIC APPLICATIONS
The inherent paradox of a traditional music instrument mu-
seum is that the instruments can be looked at, but the
1Video: http://youtu.be/cGX0J10d59s
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’15,May 31-June 3, 2015, Louisiana State Univ., Baton Rouge, LA.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
visitor cannot listen to them, although the production of
acoustic stimuli is usually the main function of a musical
instrument. Moreover historical instruments are usually
too fragile and precious to be used by unexperienced vis-
itors. In [2], principles (e.g. somatic learning) are proposed
to support engagement, sociality, and active interpretation
in ubiquitous computing in museums for children. A tablet
provides a cheap, handy, mobile, ﬂexible and widely avail-
able platform. In [1], a mobile augmented reality guide for
a museum is presented. We will review some music applica-
tions on the tablet.GuitarPad2 simulates playing a guitar
in a very simpliﬁed manner, by using large areas where to
strike the desired notes. InMagic Piano3, users play a song
by touching displayed bubbles as they pass by a horizontal
line. Points are given as a reward. InGuitar, the fretboard
moves from left to right, indicating which strings to pluck
in a vertical swap gesture. We adopt these ideas.
In order to increase engagement particularly for children,
we chose a treasure hunt format as it provides a goal and still
allows for freedom.([2], p. 240-1) The goal in the treasure
hunt is to ﬁnd a particular musical instrument, given the
acoustic samples of that musical instrument. In order for
the application to identify a particular instrument, an image
of that instrument is attached to the showcase containing
the instrument, so that the image can be captured by the
built-in camera of the tablet and recognized by a computer
vision software tool.
3. INTERACTION DESIGN
The physical museum experience consists of three parts,
the search phase, the virtual instrument interaction phase
and the composition review phase. As the experience be-
gins, the children are presented with the choice to pursue
one of three instruments: the harpsichord, the double bass,
and the viola. As the right instrument is located, with the
camera pointing at it, the instrument interface of the cur-
rent instrument appears on the screen of the tablet, and
visitors are required to play it. The interactions with our
musical tablet instruments are simpliﬁcations of the inter-
actions with the corresponding physical instrument. When
the challenge is completed, a new instrument to pursue is
suggested and the activities are repeated. After locating
and completing all instruments, the application plays back
the entire performance of all instrument interactions simul-
taneously, revealing that the instruments in collaboration
constitute a harmonic composition.
Compared to traditional music notation, dynamic music
score does not read from left to right, but from bottom to
top (Fig. 1). In this way, the di↵erent pitches in the notation
are aligned with positions on the keyboard and the ﬁnger
2http://youtu.be/Y2qiIQEnNYk3http://www.smule.com/apps
36
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
!
Figure 1: Dynamic score notation for harpsichord (left), double basss (center), and viola (right). See text
for a description.
board. For the harpsichord, the keys extend into vertical
columns, in which notes (rectangles in the same color as
the key) descend (Fig. 1,left). At the moment when a
key is hit, the key darkens, thereby simulating the visual
experience of touching the key of a physical harpsichord.
For the double bass and the viola, the notes’ position
on the ﬁnger board extends into a vertical column of the
musical score. The colors of the descending squares match
the string on which they are to be played (Fig. 1,center
and right). For the double bass (Fig. 1,center), on the
right half of the notation screen, the color of the circle in-
dicates which string should be plucked. For the viola, a
bow icon appears that needs to be swiped vertically to sim-
ulate bowing (Fig. 1,right). The colored rectangular note
symbols keep scrolling downwards. When passing through
a horizontal bar above the keyboard/string instrument, the
participant is supposed to play that note. Correct/incorrect
timing will be indicated by a color change of the horizontal
bar to green/red respectively.
The application is programmed inJava using Android
Developer Tools(ADT).4 Vuforia5 is used for image recog-
nition. Pure Data6 and LibPd7 are employed for sound
processing.
4. EVALUATION
We evaluated the app at a primary school in Copenhagen
with children aged 10-12 years. Children were divided into
6 experimental groups that were using our application, and
5 control groups, who were provided only with videos of
performances of the instruments. For all groups, we recre-
ated a setup similar to a museum experience, where chil-
dren were allowed to freely interact with the application
provided, while the test conductors were observing them
interacting. We noticed that children exposed to the con-
dition with the complete app were more keen to interact
with each others, help each others, and were interested in
successfully completing the games. The results of the focus
group interview where participants were allowed to discuss
4http://developer.android.com5http://developer.vuforia.com6http://puredata.info7http://libpd.cc
freely and informally among themselves, conﬁrmed our ob-
servations. Four experimental groups showed signs of hav-
ing had a very positive experience. Two groups seemed
to only have had a relatively positive experience, however,
more positive than the typical control group. According
to observations during the experiment and verbalisations
during the focus group interview, it appears that the test
participants in the experimental group were more engaged
than the test participants in the control group, conﬁrming
earlier ﬁndings.[2] When the interviewer asked: ’... Would
you like to play it [the piano] yourself or see a professional
playing it on a video?’, one among several similar answers
was: ’I’d rather play it myself.’
5. CONCLUSION
The musical tablet instruments presented in this paper com-
prise an interesting enjoyable musical experience for pri-
mary school children, letting them grasp the gist of playing
the physical instrument through interaction. Further test-
ing and possible adaptation is necessary to assess how well
the application integrates into the physical space of the mu-
seum[1], without diverting the focus from the exposed arte-
facts, and encouraging discovery learning.[2]
6. REFERENCES
[1] A. Damala, P. Cubaud, A. Bationo, P. Houlier, and
I. Marchal. Bridging the gap between the digital and
the physical: Design and evaluation of a mobile
augmented reality guide for the museum visit. In
DIMEA ’08, pages 120–127. ACM, 2008.
[2] T. Hall and L. Bannon. Designing ubiquitous
computing to enhance children’s learning in museums.
Journal of Computer Assisted Learning,2 2 ( 4 ) : 2 3 1 – 2 4 3 ,
2006.
[3] B. Piscitelli, M. Everett, and K. Weier. Enhancing
young children’s museum experiences: A manual for
museum sta↵.The QUT Museums Collaborative.
Australian Research Council.,2 0 0 3 .
http://eab.ed.qut.edu.au/activities/projects/
museum/manual/QUTMCManualfor MuseumSta↵.
pdf.
37
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 