The Electromagnetically Sustained Rhodes Piano
Greg Shear
Media Arts & Technology (MAT)
University of California
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
gshear@mat.ucsb.edu
Matthew Wright
CREATE/MAT
University of California
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
matt@create.ucsb.edu
ABSTRACT
The Electromagnetically Sustained Rhodes Piano is an aug-
mentation of the original instrument with additional con-
trol over the amplitude envelope of individual notes. This
includes slow attacks and inﬁnite sustain while preserving
the familiar spectral qualities of this classic electromechan-
ical piano. These additional parameters are controlled with
aftertouch on the existing keyboard, extending standard
piano technique. Two sustain methods were investigated,
driving the actuator ﬁrst with a pure sine wave, and second
with the output signal of the sensor. A special isolation
method eﬀectively decouples the sensors from the actuators
and tames unruly feedback in the high-gain signal path.
Keywords
Rhodes, keyboard, electromagnetic, sustain, augmented in-
strument, feedback, aftertouch
1. INTRODUCTION
The motivation behind this project comes from composi-
tional experiments in the recording studio editing Rhodes
piano samples in Pro Tools to create swelling and sustain-
ing eﬀects impossible to play on the original instrument. We
desire these new aﬀordances in a live performance setting
controlled through the existing keyboard interface, extend-
ing standard piano technique all while leaving the original
functionality of the instrument intact.
We present a novel system that oﬀers limited control over
the amplitude envelope of a Fender Rhodes electric piano,
including inﬁnite sustain, controlled by aftertouch on the
existing keyboard interface. A primary design goal was to
preserve the timbral qualities of the original electromechan-
ical instrument, which rely on both the tone source (the
vibrating tine) and the sensor (the magnetic pickup). With
the addition of some circuitry and electromagnetic actua-
tors to the existing electronics, we have extended the aﬀor-
dances of the instrument without compromising its original
functionality.
2. EXISTING INSTRUMENTS
2.1 The EBow
The EBow is a device designed for sustaining vibrations in
ferromagnetic guitar strings through positive feedback [2]
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’11,30 May–1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
and is controlled simply by moving the device toward or
away from the strings. The EBow uses one sensing coil to
generate a signal that drives a second coil which in turn ex-
erts a time-varying magnetic force on the string supporting
its oscillation. Permanent magnetic cores in each coil tem-
porarily magnetize the ferromagnetic string greatly increas-
ing eﬃciency of the actuator and allowing for both attrac-
tive and repulsive forces between the actuator and string.
Without this magnetization, the actuator would exert only
an attractive force on the string, eﬀectively rectifying the
actuator signal and adding undesirable high frequency dis-
tortion.
We found that direct magnetic coupling between the sen-
sor and actuator coils leads to uncontrollable feedback in our
system. There appears to be no compensation for this eﬀect
in the referenced EBow patent so we assume the EBow did
not suﬀer from the same complications given the position
and orientation of the coils and the amount of gain in the
feedback circuit. Besides the compensation for this direct
magnetic coupling, our electronics system is most similar to
that of the EBow.
2.2 The Electromagnetically-Prepared Piano
The Electromagnetically-Prepared Piano [1] is an acoustic
piano with electromagnetic actuators placed above certain
strings. Each actuator is driven with an arbitrary audio sig-
nal (the creators suggest pure sine waves, orchestral sam-
ples, noise, etc.) through a standard audio ampliﬁer and
the strings ﬁlter the signal before acoustic ampliﬁcation via
the soundboard. Control is achieved through software such
as Cycling 74’s Max/MSP [8] and the original key/hammer
action is left unaltered.
This diﬀers from our system in that we drive the actuators
with a signal generated by the vibrating mechanism thus
completing a feedback loop. Furthermore, we control the
system through pressure sensors retroﬁtted to the existing
keyboard interface.
2.3 The Magnetic Resonator Piano
Andrew McPherson’s Magnetic Resonator Piano [4] inspired
our project and this is apparent in the similarity of our de-
sign goals. He also uses mechanical-electrical feedback to
drive the piano strings but his actuator signals are gener-
ated through a much more complex system. A single piezo-
electric sensor placed on the soundboard is the source for
all of the actuators. This signal is distributed to a series of
individually tuned bandpass ﬁlters that then drive phase-
locked loops with adjustable delay to compensate for the
propagation time through the soundboard. He achieves con-
trol through continuous sensing of each key with a modiﬁed
Moog Piano Bar [5] and a complex mapping scheme of this
control data to amplitude and spectral parameters for each
note.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
14
3. THE FENDER RHODES
The Fender Rhodes piano [6] is an electromechanical in-
strument that uses a steel cantilever beam (the tine, seen
in Figure 1) as its primary tone source. In each piano there
is one tine per note with fundamental vibrating frequencies
ranging from 27 Hz to 4.2 kHz on the 88-key model, and
41 Hz to 2.6 kHz on the 73-key model. Each tine is sensed
by a dedicated passive magnetic pickup: vibration in the
tine disturbs the magnetic ﬁeld through a coil of wire thus
generating an electrical signal. The average1 of the signals
from each sensor is present at the output jack of the instru-
ment for ampliﬁcation. Similar to an acoustic piano, the
tine is struck by a hammer and damped by a felt pad. The
tuning springis a stiﬀ wire wrapped around the free end of
the tine that adds mass and allows for adjustment of the
fundamental frequency.
3.1 The Tine and Tonebar
Figure 1: Tone generator assembly [6].
Each tine is paired with a tonebar and together they be-
have as an asymmetrical tuning fork. Although their funda-
mental frequencies are diﬀerent, the tonebar stores energy
from the initial hammer strike and helps to sustain vibra-
tions in the tine [6].
Unlike a piano string, which is ﬁxed at both ends and
vibrates with overtones at near integer multiples of the fun-
damental, the tine is free at one end and has a decidedly
inharmonic overtone series with the ﬁrst overtone at a non-
integer multiple several times higher than the fundamen-
tal (depending on the physical parameters of the tine) [7].
These inharmonic overtones give the Rhodes piano a some-
what bell-like timbre.
The tine itself is cylindrical (except near the base) with a
diameter of 1.5 mm and lengths ranging from 18 mm to 157
mm. The free end of the tine swings up and down reaching
a displacement of up to 50 mm for the longest tine, while
shortest tine reaches a displacement of less than 1 mm.
3.2 The Pickup
The sensor (pickup) and vibrating tine behave nonlinearly,
adding harmonic distortion to the sensor signal. The spec-
trum changes with their orientation: as the equilibrium
point of the tine approaches the sensor axis, the fundamen-
tal and all odd harmonics are reduced, leaving the second
harmonic as the strongest frequency in the series. Verti-
cal adjustment of the tine (in the direction of oscillation)
is known asvoicing and the eﬀect is consistent with the
ﬁndings in [3] where a modeled guitar string oscillates per-
pendicularly to the axis of its pickup (motion similar to that
of our vibrating tine with respect to the sensor). Figure 2
compares the spectra of two diﬀerent tine alignments - one
on the sensor axis (as seen in Figure 1) and the other 5 mm
above the axis.
1Given all passive electrical components.
Figure 2: Variation in harmonic distortion due to
sensor/tine alignment. Fundamental at 196 Hz.
4. ACTUATION
Driving the tine with electromagnetic actuators is straight-
forward given the large body of prior art, but in our case the
magnetic pickups sense the driving magnetic ﬁeld in addi-
tion to the tine thus directly coupling the actuation system
with the sensing system. There are no obvious alterna-
tives for either the sensor or the actuator: a piezo element
in direct contact with the tine would change its resonant
properties, and optical sensors are prohibitively expensive
and would not add the same harmonic distortion described
in Section 3.2. With these constraints we investigated two
methods, driving the actuator ﬁrst with a pure sine wave,
and then with the signal generated by the sensor thus cre-
ating a feedback loop.
4.1 Synthesized Sine Wave
Driving the actuator with a pure sine wave at the tine’s fun-
damental frequency initiated and sustained oscillations, but
this strong driving signal completely dominated the signal
generated by the tine as the pickup is sensitive to both. The
actuator-sensor signal path introduces a scaling factor and
phase shift that varies with frequency. This can be com-
pensated for at a single frequency with a relatively simple
circuit allowing us to subtract the pure sine wave and iso-
late the tine signal. Unlike ﬁltering, this will not aﬀect the
signal when the actuator is inactive.
4.2 Feedback
We assume that actuation with a pure sine wave at the
tine’s fundamental frequency will not excite any of the non-
harmonic overtones described in Section 3, whereas the me-
chanical hammer introduces energy over a wide range of fre-
quencies exciting many of these overtones in addition to the
fundamental. Once the tine has been struck, these overtones
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
15
Figure 3: Sustainer circuit with feedback.
Table 1: Variable key.
Velocity of tine v
Electromotive force E
Voltage across sensor, output amp Vs,Vo
Current through actuator Ia
Complex impedance of output stage ZOut
Circuit gain G
Phase shift φ
Magnetic ﬁeld produced by sensor, actuator Bs,Ba
Magnetic ﬂux through sensor coil Φ B
Magnetic moment of tine m
Force on tine F
Distance from actuator of point on axis x
Number of turns of wire in sensor, actuator Ns,Na
Cross-sectional area of actuator A
should be present in the output signal and will self-sustain
in the feedback loop.
4.2.1 Theory and Basic Equations For Control
We assume the vibrating tine is a damped harmonic oscil-
lator that experiences a damping force proportional to its
velocity v. To compensate for this and sustain oscillations
indeﬁnitely, the actuator must exert a force on the tine pro-
portional to −v. The following equations (with variables
deﬁned in Table 1) show how the feedback system achieves
this goal.
d
dtΦB ∝v·∇Bs (1)
Vs = E= −Ns
d
dtΦB (2)
Vo = GVs (3)
Ia = Vo
|ZOut|ejφ (4)
B ∝ NaIaA2
2(x2 + A2)
3
2
(5)
F = ∇(m·Ba) (6)
Equation (1) represents the relationship of magnetic ﬂux
rate of change to velocity of the tine traveling through the
non-uniform magnetic ﬁeld imposed by the sensor core. Equa-
tion (2) is the special case of Faraday’s law for the EMF
produced in a coil of wire. This also equals the voltage pre-
sented at the op-amp input assuming inﬁnite input impedance.
Equation (3) shows the voltage gain through the circuit.
Equation (4) shows the phase relationshipφ between actu-
ator current and voltage. Equation (5) shows the magnetic
ﬁeld produced by a current through a coil of wire, simpliﬁed
for the diﬀerent magnetic permeabilities of the core and the
air gap between the actuator and the tine. Equation (6)
shows the force on the tine due to the magnetic ﬁeld pro-
duced by the actuator.
The phase shift φintroduced at the output stage reduces
actuator eﬃciency, and with a shift of more than 90 ◦ the
actuator begins to damp the tine. A constant current ampli-
ﬁer (seen in Figure 3) is used to minimize this phase shift
and Figure 4 shows the phase response curve. The theo-
retical calculations ignore the ampliﬁer’s output impedance
and this may account for some of the discrepancy with the
experimental data.
Figure 4: Phase response of constant current output
ampliﬁer.
4.2.2 Implementation
Again, direct magnetic coupling complicated early exper-
iments as the high electrical signal gain far exceeded the
attenuation of the magnetic ﬁeld due to physical separa-
tion between actuator and sensor. Subtracting the actu-
ator signal out of the sensor signal was necessary to con-
trol feedback; a second sensor with similar phase response
placed near the ﬁxed end of the tine (Figure 5) was used
to provide the subtraction signal. In this conﬁguration, the
movement of the tine is detected by only one sensor, but
the driving magnetic ﬁeld is present at both sensors. Tak-
ing the diﬀerence of the two signals substantially removes
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
16
the actuator component and isolates the tine component.
Please note that the distortion described in Section 3.2 is
an eﬀect of the physical vibration of the tine with respect
to the stationary sensor; therefore, since the actuator is also
stationary, no such distortion is imposed on the magnetic
signal emitted by the actuator and received by the sensor.
Both sensors are original Rhodes piano pickups. The ac-
tuator is approximately 600 turns of 30 AWG copper wire
wound around a plastic sewing machine bobbin mounted on
a steel core. DC resistance is about 170Ω for the sensors
and 11Ω for the actuator.
Figure 5: Actuator, two sensors, and tine.
5. PHYSICAL INTERFACE
Straightworward aftertouch control is achieved with a pres-
sure sensor (variable resistor) placed on the keybed. This
sensor has a resistance inversely related to applied pressure
and is the input resistor on the second gain stage in the
feedback circuit (Figure 3). This conﬁguration maps after-
touch pressure to the rate of gain increase, within certain
limits. Indeed, high pressure will quickly increase the sig-
nal through feedback to where the output ampliﬁer clips
severely and distorts. Decay time can be prolonged, but
because our system (currently) lacks active damping the
lower limit is governed by the natural decay of the tine.
6. RESULTS AND FUTURE WORK
Considering its simplicity, the control system is surprisingly
eﬀective. A wide range of arbitrary amplitude envelopes can
be performed, including a slow attack achieved by exciting
the tine with ampliﬁed noise in the system. Removing pres-
sure against the keybed while still holding the damper away
from the tine turns oﬀ the actuator and allows the note to
decay naturally. See Figure 6 for a few examples of am-
plitude envelopes performed with this system. Subjective
listening tests are also favorable - the perceived spectral
quality of the electronically sustained note is the same as
the naturally decaying note, though it is diﬃcult to hear
the diﬀerence between the two sustain methods. Driving
the tine with a pure sine wave achieves reasonable sustain
with a simple system, though we suspect the more compli-
cated feedback method will be necessary if active damping
is desired.
The actuator eﬃciency depends on the harmonic series of
each note described in Section 3.2. We observe signiﬁcant
reduction in eﬃciency as the tine’s equilibrium is adjusted
towards the sensor axis and the second harmonic becomes
the prominent frequency. Again, this voicing adjustment is
important part of the instrument but we currently have no
solution to the problem.
Figure 6: Amplitude envelopes of several notes pro-
duced by our instrument: (a) is a standard hammer
attack with natural, unsustained decay; (b) also de-
cays naturally, but reaches peak amplitude only by
electromagnetic actuation; (c) is a standard ham-
mer attack followed by tremolo and shortened decay
by the felt damper.
Finally, the pressure sensor in the second gain stage (Fig-
ure 3) unsurprisingly adds a lot of noise to the signal path.
Here a FET variable resistance would protect the signal
while the pressure sensor provides a ﬁltered control voltage.
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Les Schaﬀer for his encouragement
and patience while explaining the physics involved in this
project, and Edgar Berdahl for his insights and ideas when
we were coming up short on both.
8. REFERENCES
[1] E. Berdahl, S. Backer, and J. Smith. If I had a
hammer: Design and theory of an electromagnetically-
prepared piano. In ICMC Proceedings, 2005.
[2] G. Heet. String instrument vibration and sustainer,
1978. U.S. Pat. 4,075,921.
[3] N. Horton and T. Moore. Modeling the magnetic
pickup of an electric guitar. American Journal of
Physics, 77:144, 2009.
[4] A. McPherson and Y. Kim. Augmenting the acoustic
piano with electromagnetic string actuation and
continuous key position sensing. InNIME Proceedings,
2010.
[5] PianoBar. Products of interest. Computer Music
Journal, 29(1):104–113, 2005.
[6] Rhodes Keyboard Instruments USA. Rhodes Service
Manual, 1979.
[7] S. Whitney. Vibrations of cantilever beams: Deﬂection,
frequency, and research uses, 1999.
[8] D. Zicarelli. An extensible real-time signal processing
environment for Max. In International Computer Music
Conference, pages 463–466, Ann Arbor, Michigan,
1998. International Computer Music Association.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
17