McBlare: A Robotic Bagpipe Player
Roger B. Dannenberg, Ben Brown, Garth Zeglin, and Ron Lupish 
Carnegie Mellon University 
School of Computer Science 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA 
+1-412-268-3827 
{rbd, hbb, garthz}@cs.cmu.edu
ABSTRACT 
McBlare is a robotic bagpipe player developed by the 
Robotics Institute at Carnegie Mellon University. McBlare 
plays a standard set of bagpipes, using a custom air 
compressor to supply air and electromechanical “ fingers”  to 
control the chanter. McBlare is MIDI controlled, allowing 
for simple interfacing to a keyboard, computer, or hardware 
sequencer. The control mechanism exceeds the measured 
speed of expert human performers. On the other hand, 
human performers surpass McBlare in their ability to 
compensate for limitations and imperfections in reeds, and 
we discuss future enhancements to address these problems. 
McBlare has been used to perform traditional bagpipe 
music as well as experimental computer generated music. 
Keywords: bagpipes, robot, music, instrument, MIDI 
1. INTRODUCTION 
In 2004, Carnegie Mellon University’s Robotics Institute 
celebrated its twenty-fifth anniversary. In preparing for the 
event, it was suggested that the festivities should include a 
robotic bagpiper as an entertaining acknowledgement of 
Carnegie Mellon’s technical reputation and Scottish 
connection.1 We set out to build a robotic system that could 
play an ordinary, off-the-shelf traditional set of Highland 
Bagpipes with computer control. The system is named 
McBlare.  
Mechanized instruments and musical robots have been 
around for centuries. [6] Although early mechanical 
instruments were usually keyboard-oriented, many other 
electro-mechanical instruments have been constructed, 
including guitars and percussion instruments. [7, 8, 10] 
Robot players have also been constructed for wind 
instruments including the flute [9] and trumpet [1, 11]. 
We are aware of two other robotic bagpipe projects. Ohta, 
Akita, and Ohtani [5] developed a bagpipe player and 
presented it at the 1993 International Computer Music 
Conference. In this player, conventional pipes are fitted to a 
specially constructed chamber rather than using the 
traditional bag. Their paper describes the belt-driven 
“ finger”  mechanism and suggests some basic parameters as 
a starting point for the design: 
· 4 mm finger travel; 
·  20 msec total time to open and close tone hole; 
· 100 gf minimum closing force for tone holes. 
 
Sergi Jorda also describes bagpipes used in his work, 
consisting of single pitched pipes that can only be turned on 
and off. [2] In a separate email communication, Jorda 
indicated that “ Pressure is very tricky”  and may depend on 
humidity, temperature and other factors. In contrast to 
previous efforts, we decided to use off-the-shelf bagpipes to 
retain the traditional bagpipe look and playing 
characteristics. 
Additional basic information was obtained by meeting with 
Alasdair Gillies, CMU Director of Piping, and Patrick 
Regan, a professional piper. We observed and videotaped 
their playing and tried to learn what we could about the 
instrument and playing techniques. From slow-motion video 
(25% speed) we estimated the fastest fingering to be about 
15 Hz. Required finger pressure on the chanter appeared to 
be very light. We noted breathing cycle periods of about 4 
seconds, and measured the time to exhaust the air from the 
bag playing a low A: 12 seconds; and a high A: 8 seconds. 
This gives a rough indication of the air flow requirement to 
be between 0.045 and 0.07 cubic meters per minute (1.6 
and 2.5 cubic feet per minute), based on a measured bag 
volume of 0.0093 cubic meters (0.33 cubic feet). Alasdair 
said he maintains a pressure of 32" water column (7.9 kPa 
or 1.15 PSI) in the bag.  Soshi Iba, experienced piper and  
then PhD candidate in Robotics, also provided substantial 
input and was our primary test subject. 
We give an overview of McBlare, beginning with a brief 
description of bagpipes and how they work. There are two 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
Nime’05, May 26-28, , 2005, Vancouver, BC, Canada. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
Nime’05, May 26-28, , 2005, Vancouver, BC, Canada. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
__________________________ 
1 Andrew Carnegie, who founded Carnegie Mellon (originally 
the Carnegie Institute of Technology) was born in Scotland. 
The University has an official tartan, the School of Music 
offers a degree in bagpipe performance, and one of the student 
ensembles is the pipe band. 
 
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
80
major robotic components of McBlare: the air supply, and 
the chanter control, which are described in Sections 3 and 
4. One of the major difficulties we encountered has been 
properly setting up the bagpipes and coaxing them into 
playing the full melodic range reliably. Section 5 reports on 
our findings and current status. 
2. Bagpipes 
Bagpipes are some of the most ancient instruments, and 
they exist in almost all cultures. There are many variations, 
but the most famous type is the Highland Bagpipes (see 
Figure 1), and this is the type played by McBlare. There are 
three long, fixed pipes called drones. Two tenor drones are 
tuned to the same pitch, which is traditionally called A, but 
which is closer to B4. The third drone (bass drone) sounds 
an octave lower. Drones each use a single reed, 
traditionally, a tongue cut into a tube of cane, more 
recently, a cane or artificial tongue attached to a hollow 
body of plastic or composite material. The fourth pipe is the 
chanter, or melody pipe. The chanter is louder than the 
drones and uses a double reed, similar in size to a bassoon 
reed, but shorter in length and substantially stiffer.  Like a 
basson reed, however, it is constructed around a small 
copper tube, or “ staple” .  
 
Figure 1. Traditional Highland Bagpipes. 
The chanter has sound holes that are opened and closed 
with the fingers, giving it a range from G4 to A5 (as 
written). All four pipes are inserted into the bag, a leather or 
synthetic air chamber that is inflated by the player’s lung 
power through a fifth pipe, or blowstick. This tube has a 
one-way check-valve, so the player can take a breath while 
continuing to supply air to the pipes by squeezing  the bag 
under his or her arm to regulate pressure.  
Reeds at rest are slightly open, allowing air to pass through 
them. As pressure increases and air flow through the open 
reed increases in response, the Bernoulli effect decreases 
the pressure inside the reed, eventually causing the reed to 
close. The resulting loss of airflow reduces the pressure 
drop inside the reed, and the reed reopens. When things are 
working properly, the pressure fluctuations that drive the 
reed are reinforced by pressure waves reflected from the 
open end of the pipe, thus the oscillation frequency is 
controlled by the pipe length. The acoustic length of the 
chanter is mainly determined by the first open sound hole 
(i.e., the open sound hole nearest to the reed), allowing the 
player to control the pitch. 
Pressure regulation is critical. It usually takes a bit more 
pressure to start the chanter oscillating (and more flow, 
since initially, the reeds are continuously open). This initial 
pressure tends to be around 8.3 kPa (1.2 pounds per square 
inch). Once started, the chanter operates from around 5.5 to 
8.3 kPa (0.8 to 1.2 psi). The drone reeds take considerably 
less pressure to sound than does the chanter reed, and 
drones operate over a wider pressure range, so it is the 
chanter reed that determines the pressure required for the 
overall instrument. Unfortunately, the chanter tends to 
require lower pressure at lower pitches and higher pressure 
at higher pitches. At the low pitches, too high a pressure 
can cause the pitch to jump to the next octave or produce a 
warbling multiphonic effect (sometimes referred to as 
“ gurgling” ). If insufficient pressure is maintained on the 
chanter reed for the higher pitches, it will cease vibrating. 
Thus, there is a very narrow range in which the full range of 
the chanter is playable at a fixed pressure. Furthermore, 
pressure changes affect the chanter tuning (much more than 
the drones), so the chanter intonation can be fine-tuned with 
pressure changes.  Typically, this is not done; rather, 
experienced pipers carefully attempt to adjust the stiffness 
and position of the reed in the chanter so as to be able to 
play the full 9-note range of the chanter with little or no 
pressure variation. 
In some informal experiments, we monitored air pressure 
using an analog pressure gauge while an experienced player 
performed. We observed that air pressure fluctuated over a 
range from about 6.2 to 7.6 kPa (0.9 to 1.1 psi), with a 
tendency to use higher pressure in the upper register. 
Because of grace notes and some fast passages, it is 
impossible to change pressure with every note, and we 
speculate that the player anticipates the range of notes and 
grace notes to be played in the near future and adjusts 
pressure to optimize their sound and intonation. 
Whether pressure should be constant or not is not well 
understood. For example, Andrew Lenz’s “ bagpipejourney”  
web site described how to construct and use a water 
manometer. He says “ Theoretically you should be playing 
all the notes at the same pressure, but it's not uncommon for 
people to blow harder on High-A.”  [3] 
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
81
3. The Air Supply 
McBlare uses a custom-built air compressor. A 1/16 HP, 
115VAC electric motor drives a gearbox that reduces the 
speed to about 250 rpm. Two 76 mm (3” ) diameter air 
pump cylinders, salvaged from compressors for inflatable 
rafts, are driven in opposition so that they deliver about 500 
pump strokes per minute. (See Figure 2.) The radius of the 
crank arm driving the cylinders is adjustable from 15 mm to 
51 mm (0.6”  to 2.0” ); we found that the smallest radius 
provides adequate air flow, calculated to be 0.034 cubic 
meters per minute (1.2 cubic feet per minute).1 A small air 
storage tank sits between the pump and the bagpipes. The 
bagpipes are connected with a rubber hose that slips over 
the same tube that a human performer would blow into. By 
blowing in air more-or-less continuously, we can achieve a 
fairly steady pressure without squeezing the bag. (Earlier 
designs called for a mechanical “ squeezer”  but at 7 kPa (1 
psi), a squeezer in contact with many square inches would 
have to be very powerful, adding significantly to McBlare’s 
weight and complexity.) 
 
Figure 2. The McBlare air compressor. Electric motor (not 
visible) drives eccentric (center) through a gearbox. Eccentric 
drives two air pump cylinders (right and left) in opposition. 
Pressure regulation is very simple at present. First, the 
stroke length of the pump cylinders is adjustable to set the 
flow rate just above what is needed by the bagpipes. 
Second, a relief valve, which is simply a weighted plug, 
vents high pressure (around 10 kPa or 1.5 psi) to prevent 
over-pressure and avoid damaging the bagpipes.  A second 
bleed valve can be adjusted to release air and lower the 
pressure. 
4. The Chanter Control 
The chanter requires “ fingers”  to open and close sound 
holes. Analysis of video indicates that bagpipers can play 
sequences of notes at rates up to around 25 notes per 
second. Human players can also uncover sound holes 
slowly, partially, using either an up-down motion or a 
sideways motion. The design for McBlare restricts 
“ fingers”  to up-and-down motion normal to the chanter 
                                                           
1 This is less than the 0.045-0.07 cubic meters per minute based 
on bag deflation measurements above. This may be due to 
differences in instruments and/or measurement errors. 
surface. Fortunately, this is appropriate for traditional 
playing. The actuators operate faster than human muscles, 
allowing McBlare to exceed the speed of human pipers. 
McBlare’s “ fingers”  are modified electro-mechanical 
relays. (See Figure 3.) Small coils pull down a metal plate, 
which is spring loaded to return. Lightweight plastic tubes 
extend the metal plate about 3 cm, ending in small rubber 
circles designed to seal the sound hole. The length of travel 
at the sound hole is about 2.5 mm, and the actuators can 
switch to open or closed position in about 20 ms. The 
magnet coils consume about 1 Watt each, enough to keep 
the mechanism warm, but not enough to require any special 
cooling. The magnet mechanism has the beneficial 
characteristic that the finger force is maximum (around 100 
gf) with the magnet closed, the point at which finger force 
is needed for sealing the tone hole.  
 
Figure 3. Chanter is mounted on aluminum block along with 
electromagnetic coils that open and close sound holes using 
rubber pads at the end of lightweight plastic tubes. 
The whole “ hand”  assembly is designed to fit a standard 
chanter, but the individual finger units can be adjusted 
laterally (along the length of the chanter) and vertically. 
The lateral adjustment accommodates variations in hole 
spacing. The vertical adjustment is critical so that the 
magnet closure point corresponds to the point of finger 
closure. 
The actuator current is controlled by a current driver IC, 
which is in turn controlled by a microcontroller. The 
microcontroller receives MIDI, decodes MIDI note-on 
messages to obtain pitch, and then uses a table-lookup to 
determine the correct fingering for that pitch. MIDI notes 
outside of the bagpipe range are transposed up or down in 
octaves to fall inside the bagpipe range. 
5. Findings and Status 
The chanter control works extremely well. The speed 
allows for authentic-sounding grace notes and some very 
exciting computer-generated sequences. In its original 
configuration (see Figure 4), McBlare included a small 
Yamaha hardware MIDI sequencer so that it could play 
traditional tunes that we found on the web in the form of 
standard MIDI files. We also developed a small laptop-
based program to allow users to select and play a tune or to 
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
82
record and play a melody from a MIDI keyboard. A further 
option can automatically ornament the recorded melody 
using typical bagpipe figures that are automatically 
extracted from our database of MIDI files. 
 
Figure 4. Garth Zeglin with McBlare shortly before its debut 
at the Robotics Institute’s Twenty-Fifth Annivesary. Bagpipes 
are mounted on a display board that conceals the pump and 
additional electronics. 
The use of MIDI control makes it possible to adapt all sorts 
of controllers to McBlare, including keyboards (which are 
very useful for experimentation), novel sensors, or even 
MIDI bagpipe controllers. [4] For now, the bagpipes 
themselves are so captivating that we have not pursued the 
use of special controllers. Since bagpipes have no control 
over dynamics, pitch is really the only controllable 
parameter. Therefore, any bagpipe interface should be 
particularly agile as a pitch controller.  
As might be expected, there is considerable mechanical 
noise generated by the air compressor. In addition, the 
electro-mechanical chanter “ fingers”  make clicking sounds. 
However, the chanter is quite loud, and few people notice 
the noise once the chanter begins sounding. 
Under ideal conditions, McBlare can play sequences 
covering the full range of pitches from G4 to A5. More 
typically, however, the lowest two notes do not cooperate at 
the pressures needed to sustain oscillation at the top end of 
the range. We suspect a number of factors are causing 
difficulties. First, chanter reeds are very delicate and 
problematic even for human players. They are made from 
natural cane and take time to adjust and break in. McBlare’s 
reeds seem to be drying out in the dry compressed air. 
Second, the pump does not deliver absolutely steady air 
pressure, and sometimes a very slight modulation can be 
heard that matches the pump frequency. Third, we have no 
dynamic control over pressure, whereas the lowest notes 
can often be brought under control if the pressure is 
lowered. 
6. Future Work 
We intend to explore options for chanter reeds, including 
artificial reeds, adding a humidifier to the pump input to 
prevent reeds from drying out during performances, and 
regulating the air pressure to avoid fluctuations caused by 
piston strokes. Recent experiments with human lung power 
providing steady pressure indicate that pressure regulation 
is needed. As a last resort, we might control air pressure via 
MIDI to coax less-than-ideal reeds into sounding over their 
full range. One possibility is to adapt a standard gas 
pressure regulator with a servo motor to change the 
pressure setting. Further experiments and measurements of 
expert pipers should tell us whether this is really necessary. 
An automated “ arm”  to squeeze the bag is still a possibility, 
and could provide some interesting control aspects to the 
problem.  
Since the chanter pitch can be adjusted with air pressure, 
with minimal effect on the drone pitch, there is the 
possibility of tuning the bagpipes by capturing the chanter 
and drone audio on separate channels, analyzing their 
fundamental frequencies, and then adjusting pressure to 
bring the chanter reed in tune. Again, this practice is 
frowned upon by experts, so we need to conduct further 
observations and experiments to determine whether 
pressure changes are really necessary. 
Once the basics are under complete control, there are some 
finer points of piping to consider. One is the fact that 
humans can cover tone holes partially to achieve pitch 
bending effects. We chose to ignore this possibility, which 
would greatly complicate the design and which is not 
required for most performances. However, a design that 
allows for pitch bends, either using tone holes— or perhaps 
a radical change such as a telescoping chanter or slide-
whistle-like piston— could offer many new interesting 
musical possibilities. 
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The School of Computer Science, which includes the 
Robotics Institute, supported this work by providing funds 
for equipment and purchasing bagpipes. Three of the 
authors received support from the Robotics Institute and the 
Department of Computer Science. We thank Alasdair 
Gillies, Patrick Regan, and Soshi Iba, and Marek 
Michalowski for teaching us about the bagpipe and being 
subjects for our tests; and Carl Disalvo for helping with 
McBlare’s aesthetics. Thanks to Ivan Sutherland for 
suggesting the concept initially.  
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
83
8. REFERENCES 
 
[1] BBC News UK Edition. Robot trumpets Toyota's 
know-how, BBC, http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/ 
technology/3501336.stm (accessed April 2005), 2004. 
[2] Jorda, S. Afasia: the Ultimate Homeric One-man-
multimedia-band. In Proceedings of New Interfaces 
for Musical Expression, (Dublin, Ireland, 2002), 
2002. 
[3] Lenz, A. Andrew's Tips: Making a Water Manometer, 
http://www.bagpipejourney.com/articles/ 
manometer.shtml (accessed April 2005), 2004. 
[4] Music Thing. Burns Night Special: MIDI Bagpipes 
are everywhere!, http://musicthing.blogspot.com/ 
2005/01/burns-night-special-midi-bagpipes-are.html 
(accessed April 2005), 2005. 
[5] Ohta, H., Akita, H. and Ohtani, M. The Development 
of an Automatic Bagpipe Playing Device. In 
Proceedings of the 1993 International Computer 
Music Conference, (Tokyo, Japan, 1993). 
International Computer Music Association, San 
Francisco, 1993, 430-431. 
[6] Roads, C. Sequencers: Background. in The Computer 
Music Tutorial, MIT Press, Cambridge, 1996, 662-
669. 
[7] Sekiguchi, K., Amemiya, R. and Kubota, H. The 
Development of an Automatic Drum Playing Device. 
In Proceedings of the 1993 International Computer 
Music Conference, (Tokyo, Japan, 1993). 
International Computer Music Association, San 
Francisco, 1993, 428-429. 
[8] Singer, E., Larke, K. and Bianciardi, D. LEMUR 
GuitarBot: MIDI Robotic String Instrument. In 
Proceedings of the 2003 International Conference on 
New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-03), 
(Montreal, 2003). McGill University, 2003, 188-191. 
[9] Takanishi, A. and Maeda, M. Development of 
Anthropomorpic Flutist Robot WF-3RIV. In 
Proceedings of the 1998 International Computer 
Music Conference, (Ann Arbor, MI, 1998). 
International Computer Music Association, San 
Francisco, 1998, 328-331. 
[10] Tosa, N. The Nonsense Machines. Maywa Denki, 
Japan, 2004. 
[11] Vergez, C. and Rodet, X. Comparison of Real 
Trumpet Playing, Latex Model of Lips and Computer 
Model. In 1997 International Computer Music 
Conference, (Thessaloniki, Greece, 1997). 
International Computer Music Association, San 
Francisco, 1997, 180-187. 
 
 
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
84