The Convergence of Alternate Controllers and Musical 
Interfaces in Interactive Entertainment 
 Tina Blaine 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Entertainment Technology Center 
700 Technology Drive 
Pittsburgh, PA 15219 
011-412-268-2980 
tblaine@andrew.cmu.edu 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper will investigate a variety of alternate controllers that 
are making an impact in interactive entertainment, particularly in 
the video game industry.  Since the late 1990’s, the surging 
popularity of rhythmic and musical performance games in 
Japanese arcades has led to the development of new interfaces and 
alternate controllers for the consumer market worldwide.  
Rhythm action games such as Dance Dance Revolution, Taiko No 
Tatsujin (Taiko: Drum Master), and Donkey Konga are 
stimulating collaborative gameplay and exposing consumers to 
custom controllers designed specifically for musical and physical 
interaction. We are witnessing the emergence and acceptance of 
these breakthrough controllers and models for gameplay as an 
international cultural phenomenon penetrating the video game and 
toy markets in record numbers.   
Therefore, it is worth considering the potential benefits to 
developers of musical interfaces, electronic devices and alternate 
controllers in light of these new and emerging opportunities, 
particularly in the realm of video gaming, toy development, 
arcades, and other interactive entertainment experiences.  
Keywords 
Alternate controllers, musical interaction, interactive 
entertainment, video game industry, arcades, rhythm action, 
collaborative gameplay, musical performance games 
1. INTRODUCTION 
In the past five years, a proliferation of inexpensive controller 
devices has surfaced to enhance player interaction predominantly 
with musical video games and other interactive entertainment play 
experiences. These controllers are for the most part, accompanied 
by relatively straightforward interfaces and comprised of the most 
economical components available. Nevertheless, a variety of 
sensors embedded in percussion controllers, dance pads, handheld 
toys, video games, mobile devices and more have been gaining in 
popularity and further driving sales of the hardware peripheral 
gaming and toy markets.   This paper will focus primarily on 
games and toys developed in the musical rhythm genre that are 
played with custom controller devices.  
According to DFC Intelligence, the worldwide market for 
videogame peripherals, consoles and software was approximately 
23 billion in 2004.1 [1]. Despite the comparatively small 
penetration of game peripherals in the video game market overall, 
the commercial potential that alternate music controllers and 
associated software pose is potentially significant and relevant to 
the NIME community.2 
2. BACKGROUND  
There are many precedents in the NIME community related to 
creating controllers oriented toward novice play and to the 
collaborative musical experience. [2] Researchers at the MIT 
Media Lab have developed a number of playful musical controller 
devices prior to and as part of the Toy Symphony project, 
including Squeezables, Musical Shapers and BeatBugs to name 
just a few. [3] [4] [5] Some of these design efforts have motivated 
subsequent collaborations with toy companies and resulted in 
spin-off products such as the Fisher Price Symphony Painter 
inspired by Farbood and Pasztor’s music composition software 
Hyperscore. [6]  Other easily accessible controllers or interfaces 
presented  in the NIME community such as Musical 
Trinkets/Navigatrics [7], Sonic Banana [8], Context-Aware Sensor 
Doll, [9], SillyToneSquishFactory [10] or PhISEM controllers 
[11] have been primarily designed for exhibition, performance, or 
research, with the Jam-O-Drum [12] being one of the few 
exceptions crossing over into the realm of video games.  
In Wanderley and Orio’s research about input devices for musical 
expression, they suggest using a series of simple musical tasks as 
a means of evaluating controllers and defining which gestures that 
a controller might be capable of performing. [13] They further 
suggest that tasks specifically related to music such as timing and 
rhythm have no parallels in the field of Human-Computer 
Interaction. However, the introduction of controllers specifically 
intended for rhythmic gameplay rather than explicit musical 
                                                                   
1 The NPD Group reports 9.9 billion in U.S. with 1.2 billion for 
peripherals. 
2 Price Waterhouse Cooper’s publication The Outlook for Video 
Games reports that 60% of all Americans over the age of six 
now play video games. 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
Nime’05, May 26-28, 2005, Vancouver, BC, Canada. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
27
control or music making per se, suggest that we reconsider this 
theory from a different perspective. 
3. OVERVIEW 
3.1 Playing to Win 
Gaming controllers used to trigger events as a means of “ playing” 
music are not necessarily thought of nor have they been evaluated 
as “musical instruments”.  In fact, the very notion of using a 
controller to “win” a game rather than being “played” as a musical 
instrument runs somewhat contrary to the notion of musical 
interface designed for novel performance. Yet, the physical shape 
and functionality of specialty game controllers in combination 
with rhythmic prompts displayed via an onscreen interface 
effectively advocate playing music to win a game.  The 
implication is clear to players that the motivation for perfecting 
timing and rhythmic response is to win a game as the reward, 
whereas developing proficiency with an instrument to convey a 
musically meaningful outcome is usually the motivation behind 
playing musical controllers. (Figure 1).  
 
Figure 1. Motivations behind Play v. Win  
 
Another way of thinking about this motivation is from a more 
social perspective, whereby the controller becomes a means of 
communication for developing community through gameplay or a 
musical medium. (Figure 2)  Party games such as Karaoke 
Revolution, Dance Dance Revolution, Samba de Amigo, Groove, 
etc. thrive on feedback from community, as do most musicians 
with a responsive audience. 
 
Figure 2. Social Implications of Play v. Win  
Levitin suggests that musical instruments must strike the right 
balance between challenge, frustration and boredom: devices that 
are too simple tend not to provide rich experiences, and devices 
that are too complex alienate the user before their richness can be 
extracted from them [14].  In game design, these same principles 
of learnability are the fundamental principles of level design used 
to build an interest curve to engage players.  As such, the 
underlying design mechanics apply similarly to the role of 
controllers in both gameplay and musical experience.  
 
3.2 Video Games and Education 
Educator Mark Prensky refers to the youth of today as “digital 
natives” due to their increasing exposure and fluency in the 
language of computers, video games and the internet. [15] He 
further believes that their high degree of interaction and facility 
with digital technology and subsequent ability to multitask and 
process information has yet to be fully realized by educators. A 
recent report on the future of learning suggests that video games 
can change the nature of learning by building upon the 
educational properties of games while grounding them within 
theories of learning, social interaction and technology. [16]  While 
there is a great deal of debate surrounding the value and 
assessment of video games and video game technology on 
learning, a recent report on ITFacts.Biz claims that 14% of kids 
under three play video games. [17] If this is true, it may follow 
that many children have their first introduction and subsequent 
expectations about music-making based on early play experiences 
with interactive toys, video games, and other media forms rather 
than traditional musical instruments.  As a proponent of video 
games for effective learning, Paul Gee points out in High Score 
Methods: 
The secret of a videogame as a teaching machine isn't its 
immersive 3-D graphics, but its underlying architecture. Each 
level dances around the outer limits of the player's abilities, 
seeking at every point to be hard enough to be just doable. In 
cognitive science, this is referred to as the regime of competence 
principle, which results in a feeling of simultaneous pleasure and 
frustration. [18]  
The majority of devices and musically oriented games on the 
market currently are predicated upon an emerging genre of 
gameplay known as “rhythm action” or beat matching.  These 
types of games leverage the “regime of competence” principle by 
offering progressively more difficult levels of gameplay, generally 
based on combinations of increasing tempo and number of cues.   
With few exceptions, this genre prompts players to perform a 
series of physical and/or rhythmic actions by integrating player 
feedback via custom controllers in combination with an onscreen 
interface to play in time with a predetermined musical sequence.  
In what D’Arcangelo calls a “new call and response, ” the give 
and take of musical influence in the electronically-mediated world 
is stimulating the invention of new tools and techniques to give 
the audience a channel of response. [19] As he further posits, that 
turntablists have shown a way to infuse humanity into the stream 
of predictable recorded playback, perhaps the high level of 
physicality and immersion required by the responsive nature of 
video games and modern electronic toys are in their own way 
methods of overlooking the repetitive performances upon which 
the interactions are based.  
While it is no surprise that game companies are constantly seeking 
new ways to extend the “gamer” demographic and attract new 
players, IDC consultant Schelley Olhava finds that many 
consumers are intimidated by traditional video game controller 
devices [20]. However, the creation of easy-to-use specialized 
controllers has helped gain inroads to new markets, as evidenced 
by Sony’s Eye-Toy which has shipped approximately 5 million 
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
28
units worldwide as of January 2005. 3 
Extending beyond the paradigm of beat matching in rhythm action 
games to create greater depth and means for musical exploration 
and creation` provides our community with a challenge to impact 
the nature of musical video games in a significant way. 
Undoubtedly, the innovation and advances within the NIME 
community as evidenced by the collective work of the past 
decades is far ahead of the curve in terms of where most video 
game hardware and toy companies are currently thinking.  
Furthermore, there is seemingly great potential to apply this 
collective knowledge to other areas of design to help address the 
parallel issues of achieving greater depth, creativity, expressivity, 
and emotion still lacking in many areas of interactive 
entertainment.  To follow is a brief survey of several 
representative video games with custom controllers, musical 
interfaces and electronic handheld toys built upon the models of 
musical simulation, performance, and rhythm action. 
 
4. KONAMI’S REVOLUTION 
EVOLUTION 
Following the success of BeatMania, the first music rhythm/DJ 
simulation game that required a custom controller in the form of a 
turntable with buttons, the musical dance craze phenomenon 
known as Dance Dance Revolution (DDR) was later introduced in 
Japanese arcades in the late-90’s.  These games launched 
Konami’s Bemani musical series, soon to be followed by many 
others including Andamiro’s Pump It Up, that would lay the 
foundation for the “rhythm action” genre. 
By bundling the DDR software with a game “mat”, Konami 
created a play-at-home adaptation of its wildly popular arcade 
game (Figure 3).  The unequivocal success of the DDR software 
was leveraged by the necessity to purchase an accompanying 
custom dance pad controller in order to emulate the same physical 
immersion and stepping actions required by the arcade version 
and enhance the quality of gameplay at home. 
In December 2003, Konami reported that its Dance Dance 
Revolution franchise had sold 6.5 million units worldwide. [21] 
BeatMania and DDR unexpectedly proved the viability of 
alternate controllers as an option to the ubiquitous hand-held 
console game controller and paved the way for Konami and other 
publishers to take additional risks with musical games and custom 
controllers. In a brilliant marketing strategy, multiplayer mode 
requires the purchase of an additional dancepad. Because the pads 
take a continual beating and are under warranty for only thirty 
days, multiplayer competition further fuels accessory sales.  The 
game’s interface is similar in appearance to the arcade version, 
with a series of moving arrows determining the speed and level of 
difficulty for beat matching in sync to the pre-recorded musical 
tracks.  There is also a computer version of DDR for consumers, 
but most players find that clicking with a mouse is not nearly as 
satisfying as being able to physically match the beats with a 
progression of dance moves.  Perhaps most importantly, the 
continued success of DDR and most of its progeny in the rhythm 
action genre, is integrally linked to the community culture of 
audience interaction and feedback as an essential aspect of the 
players’ experience. 
                                                                   
3 Richard Marks, personal communication 
 
Figure 3. Official and “Unofficial” DDR Dancepads  
 
5. INFUSION OF JAPANESE POP 
CULTURE 
 
5.1 Para Para Paradise  
Cashing in on another Japanese dance craze of the late 90’s, 
Konami ported Para Para Paradise from an arcade device to a 
reconfigurable infrared array controller for home use on the 
PlayStation2 (PS2) via USB.   Each one of five sensors has a 
triangulated infrared array that can be positioned and its height 
sensitivity calibrated to detect a player’s hands, arms or other 
body parts passing over it in sync to the music and onscreen 
arrows.  Also known as DDR for the upper body while requiring 
minimal sidestepping with the feet, the game has a freeplay style 
that encourages players to flail around if they tire of the Para Para 
dance mode. Believed to be inspired by Japanese modern dance 
and Bon-Odori traditional Japanese dance, the game has wide 
appeal for young women in particular. [22] 
 
5.2 Samba de Amigo 
One of the precursors of the rhythm action trend, Samba de Amigo 
was released in 2000 for both arcades and the Sega Dreamcast 
video console.  Samba de Amigo utilizes a pair of maraca 
controllers with an infrared transmitter mounted on each, in 
combination with a sensor bar positioned on a footpad to 
triangulate the players’ range of motion (Figure 4).  Players shake 
at “low”, “medium” and “high” heights in tandem with colorful 
onscreen graphic cues that prompt players to follow the beat. 
Contestants are ranked by their “shaking” ability in five modes of 
game play including multiplayer “party” and challenge settings.  
The natural mapping behavior of the shaking motion creates a 
direct relationship between gesture and musical intent and thus, a 
low bar for entry.   
 
Figure 4: Samba de Amigo Interface and Maracas 
 
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
29
5.3 Taiko No Tatsujin 
Another popular game hailing from Japanese arcades and porting 
over to the game console platform is Taiko No Tatsujin by 
Namco.  Also known as Taiko: Drum Master in the North 
American and European markets, the game comes with a drum 
controller and two plastic drumsticks in order to play in time with 
the music. The cluttered yet simplistic interface is comprised of 
multicolored circles that move across the console screen with each 
color correlating to a specific rhythmic action (Figure 5).  Red, 
blue and yellow circles indicate hitting the center of the drum, the 
rim, and a drum roll equal to the duration of the scrolling 
graphics, respectively. With six releases of the game in Japan for 
the PS2 since 2002, developers attribute the game’s popularity to 
the fact that people are familiar with traditional Taiko drums, but 
rarely have the opportunity to play one. [23] Although most 
Americans may be unfamiliar with Taiko drumming, Namco 
gambled on strong interest in Japanese culture and the broad-
based appeal of anime inspired characters in gameplay in an 
attempt to surmount this cultural divide.  For opportunistic third 
party developers, Namco does not sell individual controllers. This 
situation forces players to buy another copy of the game in order 
to get a second controller and play with friends.  
 
Figure 5: Taiko Drum Master Interface 
 
5.4 Old Gorillas Never Die: Donkey Konga 
Building upon the success of Taiko: Drum Master, Namco 
released a slightly modified version of its interface and game 
mechanics with the introduction of Donkey Konga (DK) for 
Nintendo’s GameCube.  The DK game not only revitalizes 
Nintendo’s infamous gorilla character, Donkey Kong, but also 
comes bundled with a custom double headed “bongo” drum 
controller known as a “Tarukonga” in Japan (Figure 6).  The game 
scales from one to four players (read: one to four controllers 
required for multiplayer mode) and prompts players with cues to 
indicate right, left or two handed double hits, in addition to 
handclaps detected by the controller’s built-in microphone. 
Although the controller looks like a toy bongo drum, the heads are 
soft rubber and are not sonically satisfying as a standalone 
instrument.   
 
Figure 6: Donkey Konga’s Bongo Controller 
 
5.5 I Am Therefore I-Toy 
Sony’s Eye-Toy USB camera peripheral offers its own version of 
rhythm action games first introduced in the basic mini games Beat 
Freak and Boogie Down, followed by the more challenging game 
Groove.  Leveraging the popularity of music video games without 
the need for a handheld controller, the Eye-Toy‘s digital camera 
peripheral tracks player motions and projects their image 
onscreen. Groove presents an unencumbered gesture-based 
rhythm game where players swing their arms and dance around to 
“hit” graphical icons moving around the screen in time to the 
music (Figure 7).  The Eye-Toy’s accessibility and intuitive 
interface encourages high levels of physicality combined with the 
opportunity for multiplayer participation that helps foster a sense 
of community in gameplay.  Almost not released at all, the 
surprising widespread appeal of this device and subsequent 
expansion of the Eye-Toy’s gaming demographic far exceeded 
Sony’s expectations. [24] 
The inspiration for the Eye-Toy may have come from the Mandala 
GX System, which uses real-time video capture to superimpose a 
players’ image into a virtual world displayed onscreen and the 
player’s body becoming the input device.  The development of 
this system originated with musical exploration in a virtual 
environment and evolved into more sports-oriented games.4 
 
Figure 7. Sony Eye-Toy’s Groove 
5.6 Drum Mania/ Guitar Freaks 
The Guitar Freaks controller has buttons and strings that the 
player presses and strums to follow a series of prompts. The 
DrumMania controller is comprised of five-drum pads with a 
small, pressure-sensitive foam pedal to emulate a kick pedal/bass 
drum (Figure 8). Promising percussionists have the option to 
purchase an official or unofficial DrumMania controller 
adaptation of the arcade model. An import version of Sony’s 
Drum Mania comes bundled with Guitar Freaks so that the rhythm 
section can jam together on their respective controllers. While it is 
possible to play these games without the specialized controllers on 
the PS2, it is appreciably more difficult and much less fun.  
 
Figure 8: Guitar Freaks Controller, DrumMania Arcade 
Controller and ”Unofficial” Drum Mania controller 
 
                                                                   
4 The Vivid Mandala GX System – Wireless Virtual Reality 
Games. Available at http://www.vividgroup.com. 
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
30
5.7 Harmonix Music Systems, Beating their 
own Path to Success 
In contrast to the rhythmic beat matching games described 
previously, Harmonix Music Systems took a slightly different 
approach by developing musical video games designed 
specifically for the PS2 standard controller. Frequency and 
Amplitude were both intended to appeal to the gaming community 
that already had proficiency using a handheld game controller.  
Rather than creating a custom controller device, the development 
team focused their design efforts on player’s easy adaptation of 
the controller’s functionality for musical mapping and input in a 
dance remix environment.  In both games, the underlying game 
mechanics and interface work on the same premise; players 
activate sequences of notes placed on tracks in futuristic tunnel-
shaped settings, but Amplitude adds shooting and “dueling” into 
the fray. Matching sequences of notes with button presses in time 
to the beat “captures” and activates automatic playback of that 
track.  Where Harmonix adds a bit more depth to the experience is 
in the player’s ability to chain tracks of their choosing together 
and engage in freeplay mode on top of these dance mix tracks 
once activated.  An energy meter keeps track of powerups and 
missed notes, Points are collected by capturing notes, unlocking 
tracks and multipliers along the way. 
The success of Frequency and Amplitude paved the way for 
Harmonix to pursue another popular musical genre, with the 
development of the Karaoke Revolution series for Konami. The 
game implements a scoring system based on pitch and rhythm, 
players are expected to sing on pitch at the appropriate time using 
a custom microphone controller for the PS2 or XBox. Since there 
is pitch detection, but no voice recognition, there is a high degree 
of flexibility in player performance. Singing in “expert” mode is 
the only time players are expected to sing in perfect pitch with the 
lyrics moving across the screen. The interface is comprised of 
bars of varying heights and lengths to indicate pitch and duration 
of each note (Figure 9). Feedback takes the form of a song meter, 
an arrow to indicate how close to the pitch the player is singing, 
and positive or negative “crowd response” depending upon the 
performance.  The latest release, Karaoke Revolution Volume 3 
offers a duet mode with two microphones and several varieties of 
multiplayer offerings that scale from one to eight players using a 
turn-taking protocol.  As with most other games described herein, 
the most critical feedback is from the live crowd response.   
 
Figure 9: Karaoke Revolution “Genie In a Bottle” 
 
6. COMPETING TO THE BEAT: 
ELECTRONIC HANDHELD TOYS 
Variants of a handheld toy by Hasbro called BopIt took rhythm 
action to the next level by requiring players to repeat spoken and 
musical commands in call and response rapid fire succession.  
BeatBop has musical commands that the players must translate 
into a specific action sequence with the toy.  For example, hearing 
a drum sound means “BopIt”, a slide whistle means “ZingIt” (yo-
yo type of move) and a looping whistle sound means “LoopIt” 
(360 degree around the world), which start simply and advance to 
commands in multiple combinations of two to five actions.  These 
same sounds are also associated with value points that are 
awarded to players in a musical scoring sequence at the end of 
each round of gameplay.  Another descendent from this line of 
handhelds called GrooveIt, tracks player’s hand motions as they 
pass over infrared sensors in a series of patterns called “Groove 
Moves” (Figure 10).  Players learn how to “slide”, “scratch”, 
“zoom” and then move on to more advanced groove moves like 
“kung fu”, “hip hop”, “swirl” and the “chop”.  This game can be 
played in single or multiplayer mode, but players do not achieve 
expert status until they can successfully follow at least 250 
command sequences in the consecutive order. 
 
Figure 10: Hasbro’s “GrooveIt” designed by KID 
 
6.1 More Motion Music 
Billing itself as the “music machine of the next millennium”, 
Discovery’s Motion Music Maker integrates drum, guitar and bass 
sounds with special effects (Figure 11).  Players simply wave their 
hands over the infrared sensors in this futuristic looking device to 
make instant music that responds to motion.   
 
Figure 11: Discovery’s Motion Music Maker 
 
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
31
Table 1. Comparison of Musical Videogame Controllers and 
Actions 
 
7. EDUTAINMENT TOYS FOR TOTS 
Leapfrog’s Learning Drum is designed to teach toddlers in four 
different learning modes that encourage beating the drum to 
trigger sequences of musical notes, flashing patterns, letters and 
numbers.  Leapfrog also makes a learning table called LeapStart 
that helps children develop motor skills by playing piano keys, 
sliding a trombone and cello, pulling banjo levers, spinning 
maracas, tapping drums in addition to learning the alphabet and 
counting (Figure 12).  The table interface integrates more than 
forty songs and switches between a learning mode and musical 
free play. 
  
  
Figure 12: Leapfrog’s Learning Drum and LeapStart Table 
 
 
8. CONCLUSION 
Although the controllers and interfaces described herein offer 
easily accessible rhythmic and musical experiences, the genre 
may have matured enough to allow for more complex musical 
exploration. In order to continue to grow and reach a wider 
demographic, players will need greater depth of experience and 
more control over their creative input, rather than reflexively 
following prompts. While many rhythm action games can be 
played without specialized controllers, the resultant gaming 
experience is considerably less fun. It would appear that alternate 
controllers have finally achieved status as a critical component of 
game play. This puts the NIME community in a unique position to 
raise the bar as to the quality and range of experiences, devices, 
and the expressive capabilities they inspire, particularly as it 
relates to music creation and education. 
Mapping gestures to musical output, creating more expressive 
controllers, integrating multiple combinations of sensors, 
developing musical learning systems, adding levels that lead to 
expert performance, and routing signals through sound synthesis 
programs or adaptive audio algorithms are just a few of the ways 
that player experience could be enhanced. There is still much to 
be discovered about the motivations and implementation 
approaches to musical gameplay where the objective of winning 
takes precedence over musical exploration. 
In all of these systems encumbered or not, the players’ physical 
interactions appear to enhance the feeling of immersion in the 
games and distract from varying degrees of latency inherent in the 
responsiveness of these systems (Table 1). Generally, the latency 
is less noticeable at easier levels of gameplay and doesn’t become 
problematic until faster execution at more advanced levels is 
required. Until studies in this area are conducted, it remains a 
mystery as to whether or not players are content with controllers 
that lack complexity but are simply fun to play. 
Due to the considerable cost of development for new titles and 
products, the game industry has traditionally shied away from 
integrating more custom controllers into their games.  A similar 
situation is true for toy companies, software, hardware and third-
party developers.  With few exceptions, most companies in the 
business of creating entertainment experiences are risk-averse. We 
need to pursue networking opportunities to connect the people 
who make musical interfaces and alternate controllers with video 
game developers, peripheral hardware companies, toy developers, 
arcades, family entertainment centers, interactive museums, theme 
parks and mobile applications developers of all kinds if we hope 
to further the field of musical interface development. Despite their 
engaging aspects and contributions toward the development of 
cognitive/social skills, there is still a long way to go toward 
advancing the experiential and educational affordances of 
interactive entertainment.  
It should be noted that opportunities have arisen for third party 
developers to provide “unofficial” spin-off versions of controllers 
as accessories for games.  These are often offered more 
inexpensively at the same or higher quality as the large 
developers, and bypass the need for consumers to purchase 
software in order to get an extra hardware device.  Third-party 
developers are also starting to offer “upgrade kits” to take 
advantage of the hardware install base in arcades all over the 
world by providing new modes of game play, stylized interfaces, 
and for now, additional catalogs of popular music tracks.   
Interactive entertainment is a multi-billion dollar industry with 
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
32
forecasts for worldwide sales expected to increase anywhere from 
$31 - $56 billion in total revenue by 2009. [25] [26].  In light of 
the difficulty facing developers of musical interfaces and alternate 
controllers from achieving commercial success due to the 
historically limited market, perhaps it is time for the NIME 
community to consider opportunities for convergence in areas of 
interactive entertainment and education.   
9. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Thanks to the NIME reviewers for their input and my colleagues 
at Carnegie Mellon University’s Entertainment Technology 
Center for providing numerous opportunities to attend 
conferences and engage with people and companies in the 
entertainment industry that collectively inspired this work.  
10. REFERENCES 
[1] DFC Intelligence, Worldwide Market Forecasts for the Video 
Game and Interactive  Entertainment Industry. Available at: 
http://www.dfcint.com./news/prsep222004.html 
[2] Blaine, T. and Fels, S. Collaborative Musical Experiences for 
Novices.  Journal of New Music Research, 2003 Vol. 32,  pp. 
411-428. 
[3] Weinberg, G. and Gan, S. (2001), The Squeezables: Toward 
an Expressive and Interdependent Multiplayer Musical 
Instrument, Computer Music Journal, 25:2, 2001, pp. 37–45. 
[4] Weinberg, G., Orth, M., and Russo, P.  "The Embroidered 
Musical Ball: A Squeezable Instrument for Expressive  
Performance."  Proceedings of CHI. The  Hague: ACM 
Press, 2000. 
[5] Weinberg, G., Aimi, R., and Jennings, K. (2002), The 
Beatbug Network: A Rhythmic System for Interdependent 
Group Collaboration, In Proceedings of the 2nd International 
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical 
Expression(NIME02), 2002, pp. 107-111. 
[6]  Farbood, M., Pasztor, E., Jennings., K. "Hyperscore: A 
Graphical Sketchpad for Novice Composers." IEEE 
Computer Graphics and Applications, January-March 2004. 
[7] Pardue, L. and Paradiso, J. Musical Navigatrics: New 
Musical Interactions with Passive Magnetic Tags. In 
Proceedings of New Interfaces for Musical Expression 
(NIME 02) (Dublin, Ireland, May 24-26, 2002) .  
[8] Singer, E. Sonic Banana: A Novel Bend-Sensor-Based MIDI 
Controller. In Proceedings of New Interfaces for Musical 
Expression (NIME 04) (Hamamatsu, Japan, May 24-26, 
2004) . p.220-221. 
[9] Yonezawa, T., Clarkson, B., Yasumura, M., Mase, K. 
Context-Aware Sensor Doll as Music Expression Device, In 
Extended abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI ‘01), Seattle, WA 2001. pp.  307-308 
[10]  Morris, G., Leitman, S. and Kassianidou, M. SillyTone 
Squish Factory.  In Proceedings of New Interfaces for 
Musical Expression (NIME 03) (Montreal, Canada, May 24-
26, 2003)  
[11] Cook, P. Principles for Designing Computer Music 
Controllers, In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME01),  ACM 
SIGCHI, electronic proceedings. 
[12]  Blaine, T. and Forlines, C. Jamoworld: Evolution of the 
Jam-O-Drum Multiplayer Musical Controller into the Jam-O-
Whirl Gaming Device. .  In Proceedings of New Interfaces 
for Musical Expression (NIME 02) 2002,  pp.17-22. 
[13] Wanderley, M. and Orio, N. (2002). Evaluation of Input 
Devices for Musical Expression: Borrowing Tools from HCI. 
Computer Music Journal, Vol. 26, No.3. pp 62-76. 
[14] Levitin D.J. et al. (2002). Control parameters for musical 
instruments: a foundation for new mappings of gesture to 
sound. Organised Sound, 7(2), 171-189. 
[15] Prensky, M. On the Horizon, NCB University Press, Vol. 9 
No. 5, October 2001.  Available at: 
http://www.twitchspeed.com/site/Prensky%20-
%20Digital%20Natives,%20Digital%20Immigrants%20-
%20Part1.htm) 
[16]  Shaffer, D., Squire, K., Halverson, R., Gee, J. Video Games 
and the Future of Learning, University of Wisconsin-
Madison and Academic Advanced Distributed Learning Co-
Laboratory. December 2004.  Available at: 
http://64.233.161.104/search?q=cache:obrKxKtYbr0J:www.a
cademiccolab.org/resources/gappspaper1.pdf+video+games,
+models+for+learning&hl=en 
[17] Available at: http://www.itfacts.biz/index.php?id=P344 
[18] Gee, P. High Score Education: Games Not School are 
Teaching Kids to Think, Wired.com., May 2003 Available 
at: 
http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/11.05/view.html?pg=1 
[19] Darcangelo, G.  Recycling Music, Answering Back: Toward 
an Oral Tradition of Electronic Music, In Proceedings of 
New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 04) 
(Hamamatsu, Japan June 3-5, 2004)  
[20] King, B. Appeasing the Control Freaks, Wired.com, July, 
2003. Available at: 
http://www.wired.com/news/print/0,1294,59808,00.html 
[21] DDR Sales Available at: 
http://www.gamespot.com/ps2/puzzle/dancedancerevolution
partycollection/news_6084894.html) 
[22]  Available at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parapara 
[23] Klepek, P.  Enter the Taiko, Gaming-Age.com, December 
2004. Available at: http://www.gaming-age.com/cgi-
bin/specials/special.pl?spec=taiko&pagenum=1 
[24] Maher, D. EyeToy Story: Part One. November 2003. 
Available at: 
http://uk.playstation.com/features/featureStory.jhtml?storyId
=104799_en_GB_FEAT&linktype=FSRS 
[25] DFC Intelligence, Worldwide Market Forecasts for the Video 
Game and Interactive Entertainment Industry. Available at: 
http://www.dfcint.com./news/prsep222004.html 
[26] Price Waterhouse Coopers. PwC Outlook Forecasts Industry 
Gaining Momentum, Growing to $1.7 Trillion in 2008;   
Available at: 
http://www.pwc.com/extweb/ncpressrelease.nsf/docid/5F00E
EB0CD947F6085256EC2005D6D19
  
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
33