Application of new Fiber and Malleable Materials for
Agile Development of Augmented Instruments and
Controllers
Adrian Freed
CNMAT (Center for New Music and Audio Audio Technology)
Dept of Music UC Berkeley,
1750 Arch Street, Berkeley CA 94709
+1 510 455 4335
adrian@cnmat.berkeley.edu
ABSTRACT
The paper introduces new fiber and malleable materials,
including piezoresistive fabric and conductive heat-shrink
tubing, and shows techniques and examples of how they may
be used for rapid prototyping and agile development of musical
instrument controllers. New implementations of well-known
designs are covered as well as enhancements of existing
controllers. Finally, two new controllers are introduced that are
made possible by these recently available materials and
construction techniques.
Keywords
Agile Development, Rapid Prototyping, Conductive fabric,
Piezoresistive fabric, conductive heatshrink tubing, augmented
instruments.
1. INTRODUCTION
Many human activities have a variant form optimized to deliver
results in the shortest time. The idea is the same although the
names vary: short story writing, hacking, sketching, composing
esquisses, short-order cooking, improv., fast-turn, live coding,
rapid prototyping etc. Rapid and agile development of
augmented instruments and controller prototypes is valuable
because many of the important insights that guide design
refinements are unavailable until performers have experienced
and used a device. The best predictor of the effectiveness of
new controller design is usually the number of design iterations
available.
Controller projects usually involve co-design of musical
mapping software, electronics for the sensor data acquisition,
and the physical interface. Providing an approximate physical
interface early speeds development of the other components of
the system by providing both a real data source and time for
performance skills to be acquired.
This paper focuses on new physical design techniques and
materials. We will not explore electronic interfacing and music
control structure programming issues because mature rapid-
prototyping methods [2] are already well known to the
community – notably: high channel count, high resolution data
acquisition [1, 5, 12]; OSC wrapping, mapping, scaling and
calibrating [17]; and visual programming dataflow languages
[15] tuned for media and arts applications, e.g., Max/MSP, Pd,
SuperColider, Processing, etc.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces new
materials that facilitate rapid processing by describing a series
of variations on a single theme: the humble footswitch. Section
3s h o w sh o we x i s t i n gc o n t r o l l e r sc a nb er a p i d l yi m p r o v e du s i n g
those new materials. Section 4 describes novel controllers made
possible by the new materials. A conclusion considers the
challenges of teaching the design and construction techniques
that these new materials demand.
2. Variants of the footswitch
As i m p l ec o n t r o l l e rp e r h a p s ,b u tt h eh u m b l ef o o t s w i t c hf i n d s
wide use in technology-based musical performance contexts
because the performer’s hands are usually actively engaged
playing an instrument. The traditional approach is to mount a
heavy-duty mechanical switch into a solid metal box. These
“stomp boxes” are standard tools of the electric guitarist. As a
vehicle for exploration of new fiber and malleable materials we
will improve on the traditional stomp box by adding the
requirement that switch operation should be silent.
The basic design pattern for a switch is to combine an
interruptible electrical conduction path (contact system) with a
device that returns the contacts to a stable rest equilibrium
when the actuating force is removed. The additional challenge
we face is that the motions created by these forces have to be
dampened to minimize the sounds they make.
2.1 Floor Protector + FSR
Figure 1 shows a solution that can be assembled in a few
minutes.
Figure 1:FSR Footswitch
The foot/switch interface is provided by a soft but “grippy”
toroidal ring of molded rubber embedded in a hard PVC disk.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
NIME08,J u n e4 - 8 ,2 0 0 8 ,G e n o v a ,I t a l y
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
107
These disks are sold as “floor protectors” for furniture. A flat
ring of polyurethane foam with a peel-off adhesive is on the
opposite face of the disk. This foam provides the restoring force
for the “switch” which is implemented with an Interlink Force
Sensing Resistor (FSR). A screw provides the necessary
adhesion to resist kicks of the foot and also preloads the FSR.
Although not generally a good idea, punching a hole at the
center of the FSR (with an office hole punch) provides a clear
path for the screw to reach the wooden substrate below. Dust is
prevented from entering the gap between the interdigitated
conductor layer and the piezoresistive film layer by the foam.
This sensor works adequately but the tension adjustment is
delicate as the FSR saturates easily at the range of forces a foot
can easily apply.
2.2 Floor Protector + Piezoresistive Fabric
Figure 2: Fabric/PCB Footswitch
In Figure 2 we have replaced the FSR package with a PCB
containing dozens of adjacent conducting strips and a patch of
piezoresistive fabric made by EEonyx (http://eeonyx.com). The
measuring principle is basically that of the FSR except we have
exchanged the position of the conducting elements and
piezoresistor with respect to the foot. This interface took a few
minutes longer to integrate because the circuit board needed to
be wired so that alternating traces were connected. The board is
aS c h m a r t b o a r ds u r f a c e - m o u n tp r o t o t y p i n gb o a r d
(http://schmartboard.com). The tension adjustment is
unproblematic because the piezoresistive fabric supports very
high dynamic range of forces. By combining plies of fabric or
selecting a thicker felt substrate the foam layer could be
eliminated from the design – the fabric itself providing the
restoring force. This would be a higher reliability solution as
polyurethane foam breaks down, especially on PVC substrates
[14].
2.3 Floor Protector + Piezoresistive
Fabric+Conductive Adhesive Copper Tape
and Conductive Fabric
The sensor shown in Figure 3 uses the same piezoresistive felt
fabric as that of Figure 2 but avoids the need to print a
conductor pattern by using a conductor on either side of the
fabric. The base conductor is a series of overlapped adhesive
copper strips. They form a single conductor because the
adhesive itself is a conductive acrylic.
Figure 3:Fabric/Foil Footswitch
The top conductor is a copper impregnated nylon fabric. The
advantage these materials offer is that the sensor can be scaled
in either direction simply by cutting more tape or cutting larger
pieces out of the base fabric stock. Wires can be soldered
directly to the copper tape and with some practice even to the
copper fabric.
Many interesting variants of this design are possible by
substituting the copper tape with conductive fabric and using
conductive and insulating thread for adhesion. These techniques
are the basis of many wearable switches and sensors [3, 4, 11].
2.4 Half-round + Piezoresistive
Fabric+Conductive Heatshrink + Copper
Tape
The previous designs are limited by the sizes of floor protecting
disks available. The construction illustrated in Figure 4 is free
of these size constraints.
Figure 4: Fabric/Heatshrink Footswitch
Ah a l f - r o u n dw o o d e ns t r i pi sc u tt ot h ed e s i r e dl e n g t ha n dt w o
separate strips of copper tape are employed on the flat length
and the curve. A strip of piezoresistive fabric is trapped and
preloaded under the flat copper tape by a length of ShrinkMate
heat-shrink tubing that is conductive on the inside (http://
methodedevelopment.com). This tubing connects one side of
the fabric to the top conductive strip.
If we ground the upper strip and measure the resistance from
the inner conductor to this ground the whole sensor is self-
shielding. We chose the half-round configuration for the
footswitch application but this technique can be used for
cylinders and other shapes. Figure 5 shows a grip sensor built
with a larger dowel.
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
108
Figure 5: Fabric Round Touch Rod
The inner conductors are strips of separate conductive tape
allowing for separate pressure measurements around the dowel.
By carefully controlling the time of application of the heat gun
the amount of shrink has been controlled to allow the tubing’s
inner conductor to “self connect” to tape on the dowel without
constricting the piezoresistive fabric. This can be clearly seen
on the left of Figure 5. These structures are mechanically stable
without adhesives.
Figure 6: Bendable Pressure sensor
The sensor in Figure 6 uses the same design principal as the
foot sensors but used a 1/4inch malleable aluminum tube as the
substrate. The interesting feature explored in this configuration
is that the shape of the entire sensor assembly can be adjusted
after construction. The key to this design is the helical wrap of
the piezoresistive fabric under the flexible conductive heat-
shrink tubing. The overlap in the wrap avoids a short circuit
path. The stray fabric end illustrates the value in rapid
prototyping of the “measure-once cut and trim” principal which
is in direct oppos ition to the traditional carpenter’s maxim
“measure twice and cut once”. The majority of prototypes
illustrated in this paper were sized “on the fly” with reference to
other instruments or the performer’s body rather than to
numerical measurements.
2.5 E-field (capacitive) Sensing
The previous implementations use the same physical sensing
principle: gesture modulating current flow. Capacitive or e-field
proximity sensing is an interesting alternative principle to apply
for rapid prototyping. Only one conductor is needed and more
flexibility about where the conductor is placed is available. It
can be under glass, plastic or wood or other non-conducting
material.
Figure 7 shows a foot switch built with an approach that can be
used to create sensors in less than a minute. A wire with a
crocodile clip is attached to a conductive spandex fabric
(http://eeonyx.com) that is stuffed inside a length of plastic
door insulation. The fabric needn’t be very conductive for this
to work well as no current flows through it.
Figure 7: Capacitive footswitch
Although useful for rapid prototyping we have found that most
capacitive sensing integrated circuits are challenging to apply
for musical applications. In stage situations we have found
them to be susceptible to external electromagnetic fields (from
lighting dimmers for example) and reliable sensing often
requires careful calibration and multiple measurements
resulting in delays that are unacceptably long, i.e. hundreds of
milliseconds.
2.6 Position sensing strip + Rubber Door
Threshhold
To create multiple foot switches we can simply tile out arrays
of the previously described devices. There is a better, faster
way with the additional convenience that the switch functions
are built into a single strip that is constructed quickly in a few
steps. Instead of employing the principal of piezoresistivity
change we employ a printed-resistor position-sensing strip such
as the SlideLong (http://infusionsystems.com) or a Softpot
(http://spectrasymbol.com ).
Modifying an existing interface in this way is often the fastest
way to develop a new controller. These position-sensing strips
were originally designed for finger touch interaction. To protect
the sensor strip and provide tactile feedback we attach it to the
base of a length of rubber door threshold. This is molded with
corrugations that grip the sole of the foot well and a curved
surface above the sensor. The flat sensor stays where it is put
on smooth flooring and carpets.
Unfortunately the lateral sensitivity region of position sensing
strips is narrow and the top of the door threshold may simply
collapse and not activate it. The solution is to fill the gap above
the sensor with a lightweight flexible incompressible material.
Two lengths of nylon rope worked well in the prototype shown
in figure 8.
Figure 8: Position Switch
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
109
This device was designed to roll up and fit into a guitar case.
The electronics is configured to measure the positions of up to
two concurrent depressions of the strip.
3. Augmenting controllers
3.1 Pressure sensing buttons
In a project augmenting the cello [6, 7] the author discovered
many situations where it was as easy to install a pressure sensor
as a switch. Many microcontrollers have built-in A/D
converters so often there is a tiny or no additional cost to using
pressure sensors for switches. Continuing this idea -that the
fastest route to a new controller may be to modify an existing
sensor- we see in Figure 9 how to retrofit the Monome button
array with pressure sensors, the grey octagonal disks.
.
Figure 9: Pressure Sensitive Monome Adaptation
Monome (http://monome.org)i n t e r f a c e sa r es q u a r ea r r a y so fl i t
switches interfaced over USB using OSC messaging. A large
part of the desirability of this interface is the tactile quality of
the buttons created with careful design of the silicone molding.
Each button has a ring of conductive rubber attached to connect
with a circular array of interdigitated contacts. The conductivity
of this connection does change with pressure but the
conductivity is so effective it is hard to measure the change
accurately. By cutting a small disk of piezoresistive fabric with
ac e n t r a lh o l ew ec a nr e t r o f i tah i g h e rr e s i s t a n c er a n g ep r e s s u r e
sensor. With careful design of the interface electronics we can
even eliminate the array of diodes needed to scan concurrent
depressions of the buttons [9, 13].
3.2 Dual Touch Pad
Because of the number of connections required for matrix
scanning it is difficult to rapidly prototype multi-touch systems.
Even optical systems that avoid matrix scanning on the surface
itself are hard to build quickly because of the difficulties of
sufficiently illuminating the interior of the touch surface and the
complexities of calibrating the optical path of the camera [8].
Figure 10: Dual Touch Pad
We can still explore some multitouch gestures by assembling a
pad that senses two simultaneous touches as shown in Figure
10. A pair of SlideWide sensors (http://infusionsystems.com )
are stuck to each other at right angles.
Instead of measuring single touch position for each axis using
the well-known potential divider method we ground the
“wiper” contact and measure the two end point resistances to
this ground node to estimate the position of the outer most
touch point pair. This idea was patented in 1972 for duophonic
analog synthesizer keyboards (USPO3665089). This method
was independently rediscovered for resistive touch applications
by the author and Mr. Loviscach [10].
The controller in Figure10 also includes a sheet of
piezoresistive fabric to measure a single pressure estimate. The
SlideWide sensors flex sufficiently for a useful touch pressure
range.
3.3 Touch Pad
Most computer laptop touch pads use capacitive measuring
techniques because of the low costs of high volume PCB
production. Touch pressure cannot be measured by these pads
which is unfortunate as it is an extremely useful control
parameter in musical applications - specially in combination
with spatial location [16]. Resistive touch pads by contrast
provide x,y and z axis sensing, require simple calibration and
are less prone to electrical interference and variations in
ambient humidity.
Interlink, the main supplier of resistive xyz touch pads offers
them in only a few small standard sizes. They are rather
expensive and technically challenging to employ in large
arrays. By combining Velostat (http://3m.com), an electrically
resistive plastic sheet material and piezoresistive fabric we can
rapidly build xyz pads for modest cost and in a wide range of
sizes as illustrated in figure 11.
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
110
Figure 11: Conductive Plastic XYX TouchPad
The spatial sensing principal has long been used in touch screen
sensors. Conductive strips at the edge of each sheet of resistive
plastic form the nodes of a wide resistor. Two such sheets are
arranged at right angles to each other. An intervening layer of
piezo-resistive fabric establishes current paths at the point of
connection between the two sheets. With a carefully designed
interface circuit the three desired parameters can be extracted
from the four nodes of the sensor [16]. As well as size
flexibility this design avoids the need for a fine array of
insulating spacer dots or the special air gap used in Interlink
touchpads.
4. New Controllers
4.1 Kalimba
Figure 12 shows a simple controller inspired by the kalimba. It
illustrates application of rapid prototyping practice integrating
the materials and techniques we have seen earlier into a
complete controller that can be assembled in an hour or two.
The core kalimba design lends itself to rapid assembly because
of its use of a single central bar held down by two screws to
trap the array of tines between two pivot bars.
Figure 12: Fabric and Stick Kalimba
Wooden tines are used in this prototype because they are faster
to shape than the traditional metal and this controller doesn’t
require the tine’s resonances to be tuned. The flexibility of
copper tape is exploited as strips follow the contour of the flat
base around the curve of a half-round pressure pivot.
Each tine is covered in conductive copper tape. Trapped
between this copper strip and the base strip is a piece of peizo-
resistive fabric. The rear pivot of the tines also has a copper
strip that is a grounding bus for the tines. The 18F2553
controller has 10 ADC’s and sends an OSC-encoded estimate
of the voltage formed by a pull-up resistor and the variable
resistance pressure sensor of each tine.
Notice that the length of each base copper strip is trimmed to
simplify the wiring flow of the conductors to the
microcontroller.
4.2 The Tablo
The novel controller of Figure 13 exploits recently available
conductive stretchable fabric and an approximation to the curve
known as the witch (sic) of Agnesi.
Figure 13: Tablo Fabric Multitouch Controller
The fabric is stretched in an embroidery hoop and draped over
an inverted circular bowl.
Ap i e c eo fc o n d u c t i v ep l a s t i cc u ti nas p e c i a ls h a p ef o r m sa
corolla on the surface of the bowl. The tips of each petal are
folded inside the bowl and taped with conducting adhesive
copper tape. The microcontroller board measures the electrical
resistances of these petals from their tips to a common center
established with a conductor at the flat of the bowl. As the
conductive stretchable fabric (the “calyx” to complete the
flower analogy) is displaced towards the bowl it shorts out
different lengths of each conductive plastic petal.
The result is a circular array of nearly mass-less displacement
sensors. Unlike the Continuum Finger board
(http://HakenAudio.com) the gesture-to-displacement
relationship changes sensitivity according to distance from the
center of the bowl. This allows for several different playing
styles. One style – similar to hand drum technique – involves
tapping the fabric surface directly onto the bowl with the
fingers of one hand and leaning towards the other side of the
bowl with the palm.
Another style involves both hands interacting from the outer
hoop towards and around the base of the bowl. The latter style
affords some interesting parameter mappings. One fruitful
approach is to divide the circular petal array into two halves and
compute the direction and amplitude of a pair of vectors by
summing contributions of sensors accessible to each hand. An
additional third parameter for each hand representing the “size”
of the gesture is obtained by computing the ratio of the
arithmetic and geometric means of the displacement values.
Two refinements were added recently: a pressure sensitive
“aftertouch” using fabric on the base around the bowl and a
pressure sensing fabric disk at the very center of the controller.
5. Conclusion
New fiber and malleable materials present interesting
challenges and potential beyond the rapid prototyping
advantages described here. It is surprisingly hard to find
learning materials or a learning environment to exploit this
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
111
potential. Most engineering departments still focus on high
manufacturing volume materials made with standard milling
and printing techniques.
Ad i f f i c u l tp r o b l e mf o re x p e r i e n c e dd e s i g n e r si st h a tt h e yh a v e
to abandon standard assumptions, such as “conductors are
metals and plastics are nonconductive”. Polymers exist now
that are nearly as conductive as copper and are expected soon to
be more conductive. Even translucent concrete is now
available.
Physical computing books mostly encapsulate workable recipes
that are twenty years old. Vendor application notes usually
address very narrow application spaces.
Effective application of the new materials requires a new
curriculum based on emerging design patterns and will require
ac o n t e x tw h e r et h ew i s d o ma n de x p e r i e n c eo ff i b e ra n d
malleable materials artists can be melded with that of material
scientists and application developers.
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Frances Marie Uitti’s slider controller bag motivated the
author’s exploration of fabric sensing. Thanks to Leah
Buechley and Syuzi Pakchyan for generously sharing their
sources and techniques. Thanks to Judi Pettite for providing a
challenging and rewarding studio environment in her fiber arts
and malleable materials class.
7. REFERENCES
[1] R. Avizienis and A. Freed, OSC and Gesture
features of CNMAT's Connectivity Processor, Open
Sound Control Conference,B e r k e l e y ,C A ,2 0 0 4 .
[2] S. K. Bjorn Hartmann, Michael Bernstein, Leith
Abdulla Brandon Burr, Avi Robinson-Mosher,
Jennifer Gee,Reflective Physical Prototyping
through Integrated Design, Test, and Analysis,
UIST 06,A C M ,M o n t r e a u xS w i t z e r l a n d ,2 0 0 6 .
[3] L. Buechley, N. Elumeze and M. Eisenberg,
Electronic/computational textiles and children's
crafts,I n t e r a c t i o nD e s i g nA n dC h i l d r e n( 2 0 0 6 ) ,
pp. 49-56.
[4] A. Chang and H. Ishii, Zstretch: a stretchy fabric
music controller,P r o c e e d i n g so ft h e7 t h
international conference on New interfaces for
musical expression (2007), pp. 46-49.
[5] A. Freed, R. Avizienis and M. Wright, Beyond 0-
5V: Expanding Sensor Integration Architectures,
International Conference on New Interfaces for
Musical Expression,P a r i s ,F r a n c e ,2 0 0 6 .
[6] A. Freed, A. Lee, J. Schott, F.-M. Uitti, M. Wright
and M. Zbyszynski,Comparing Musical Control
Structures and Signal Processing Strategies for the
Augmented Cello and Guitar, International
Computer Music Conference,I n t e r n a t i o n a l
Computer Music Association, New Orleans, LA,
2006, pp. 636-642.
[7] A. Freed, F.-M. Uitti, D. Wessel and M.
Zbyszynski, Augmenting the Cello, International
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical
Expression,P a r i s ,F r a n c e ,2 0 0 6 ,p p .4 0 9 - 4 1 3 .
[8] J. Y. Han, Low-cost multi-touch sensing through
frustrated total internal reflection, Proceedings of
the 18th annual ACM symposium on User interface
software and technology,A C M ,S e a t t l e ,W A ,U S A ,
2005.
[9] W. D. Hillis, AH i g h - R e s o l u t i o nI m a g i n gT o u c h
Sensor,T h eI n t e r n a t i o n a lJ o u r n a lo fR o b o t i c s
Research, 1 (1982), pp. 33.
[10] J. Loviscach, , Two-finger input with a standard
touch screen, Proceedings of the 20th annual ACM
symposium on User interface software and
technology,A C M ,N e w p o r t ,R h o d eI s l a n d ,U S A ,
2007.
[11] R. Koehly, D. Curtil and M. M. Wanderley, Paper
FSRs and latex/fabric traction sensors: methods for
the development of home-made touch sensors,
Proceedings of the 2006 conference on New
interfaces for musical expression (2006), pp. 230-
233.
[12] D. Overholt, Musical Interaction Design with the
CREATE USB Interface: Teaching HCI with CUIs
instead of GUIs, ICMC,N e wO r l e a n s ,L A ,U S A ,
2006.
[13] J. A. Purbrick, AF o r c eT r a n s d u c e rE m p l o y i n g
Conductive Silicone Rubber,P r o c e e d i n g so ft h e1 s t
International Conference on Robot Vision and
Sensory Controls (1981), pp. 73-80.
[14] J. T. Remillard, J. R. Jones, B. D. Poindexter, J.
H. Helms and W. H. Weber,Degradation of
Urethane-Foam-Backed Poly (vinyl chloride)
Studied Using Raman and Fluorescence
Microscopy,A p p l i e dS p e c t r o s c o p y ,5 2( 1 9 9 8 ) ,p p .
1369-1376.
[15] M. J. Wesley, J. R. P. Hanna and J. M. Richard,
Advances in dataflow programming languages,
ACM Comput. Surv., 36 (2004), pp. 1-34.
[16] D. Wessel, R. Avizienis, A. Freed and M. Wright,
AF o r c eS e n s i t i v eM u l t i - t o u c hA r r a yS u p p o r t i n g
Multiple 2-D Musical Control Structures, New
Interfaces for Musical Expression,N e wY o r k ,
2007.
[17] M. Wright, Open Sound Control: an enabling
technology for musical networking,O r g a n i s e d
Sound, 10 (2005), pp. 193-200.
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
112