Engravings for Prepared Snare Drum, iPad, and Computer 
 
 
Timothy Polashek 
Transylvania University 
Division of Fine Arts 
300 North Broadway 
 Lexington, Kentucky 40508 USA  
tpolashek@transy.edu 
Brad Meyer  
Stephen F. Austin State University 
School of Music 
  Box 13043, SFA Station 
Nacogdoches, Texas 75962-3043 USA 
meyerbe@sfasu.edu 
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper describes the technologies, collaborative processes, and 
artistic intents of the musical composition Engravings for Prepared 
Snare Drum, iPad, and Computer, which was composed by Timothy 
Polashek for percussionist Brad Meyer using a jointly created electro-
acoustic and interactive musical instrument. During performance, the 
percussionist equally manipulates and expresses through two 
surfaces, an iPad displaying an interactive touch screen and a snare 
drum augmented with various foreign objects, including a contact 
microphone adhered to the drumhead’s surface. A computer program 
created for this composition runs on a laptop computer in front of the 
percussionist. The software captures sound from the contact 
microphone and transforms this sound through audio signal 
processing controlled by the performer’s gestures on the iPad. The 
computer screen displays an animated graphic score, as well as the 
current states of iPad controls and audio signal processing, for the 
performer. Many compositional and technological approaches used 
in this project pay tribute to composer John Cage, since the premiere 
performance of Engravings for Prepared Snare Drum, iPad, and 
Computer took place in 2012, the centennial celebration of Cage’s 
birth year. 
 
Keywords 
composition, interactive music, iPad, John Cage, prepared snare 
drum, percussion 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Engraving is the art of incising a design on to a hard, usually flat 
surface, by cutting grooves into it. Engravings for Prepared Snare 
Drum, iPad, and Computer directs the percussionist to create and 
sculpt in sound by performing gestures on an iPad and a prepared 
snare drum through tactile and interactive processes. A computer, fed 
by a contact microphone on the drum and wireless signals from the 
iPad, renders these inputs into sound and displays a score consisting 
of a series graphical images based on statistical data from the state of 
Kentucky for the performer to interpret and “engrave” through time.  
2. THE PREPARED SNARE DRUM 
Brad Meyer created the prepared snare drum by modifying the 
drumhead of a standard snare drum. Although snare drums are 
usually used to produce sound by being struck with drumsticks, the 
prepared snare drum is equip ped with a contact microphone to 
capture and amplify softer sounds created by rubbing, tapping, and 
scraping. Six tightly-wound metallic springs that vertically protrude 
through the drumhead are struck to create a quick, "ping-pong ball 
bouncing" effect. A trapezoidal piece of sandpaper is taped onto the 
drum, which is scratched with the hand or a knitting needle to create 
a granular, white noise sound. One side of a pair of Velcro strips is 
glued to the drumhead. When the free side is slowly pulled away 
from the other fixed one, a light popping sound is created, or a louder 
hissing sound when pulled quickly. A small chain is looped through 
the head and drum shell to create an "infinite growl" sound.  An 
attached rope is pulled on with the fingernails for a d ark, rubbing 
sound. A rectangular section of attached moleskin enables muted 
sounds when tapped or scraped. Also, a small rubber ball that has 
been cut in half and attached to a wooden skewer is used to create a 
nontraditional "lion's roar" effect. It can also create muted whale-like 
sounds. 
 
 
Figure 1. Overhead view of the prepared snare drum.  
3. REFLECTING JOHN CAGE 
The premiere performance of Engravings for Prepared Snare Drum, 
iPad, and Computer took place in 2012, the centennial celebration of 
Cage’s birth year, and several decisions in the technological design 
and composition of this piece are inspired by Cage’s work. The 
previously described prepared snare drum is inspired by Cage’s 
tendency to modify traditional instruments and to score for “found” 
objects, such as tin cans, radios, and flower pots, which are non-
traditional musical instruments, to produce compositions such as 
Cage’s Water Walk [2] and Sonata and Interludes [1] for prepared 
piano. 
 Cage is well-known for creating graphic scores and implementing 
aleatoric procedures to make musical decisions, therefore Timothy 
Polashek decided to combine both approaches in the composition of 
Engravings. Polashek searched through images providing statistical 
data about his home state of Kentucky on the internet. Some of the 
randomly returned images, for example, show the Annual Mean 
Temperature of Louisville, Kentucky, the Unemployment Rate in 
Kentucky (1975-2012), the Kentucky Coal Mining Production and 
Employment (1979-2008), the 2009 Kentucky Derby Positions 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on 
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME’14, June 30 – July 03, 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
82
Through Race, and the Gamma Radiation Gross Count Rate in 2011 
for Lexington, Kentucky. Thirty-eight of these images were selected 
to form the score for Engravings, and Polashek created a computer 
program, written in the MAX language [3], to sequentially display 
them to the performer along with a red, vertical cue line, which 
moves from left to right over each graph. Again paying homage to 
Cage, the perucssionist is given the instruction to perform on the 
prepared snare drum and iPad with improvised gestures that mimic 
the process of engraving the shapes and lines presented in the current 
image. Conversely, the performer is also instructed, at times of his or 
her choosing, to decide to improvise freely and to ignore the graphs, 
or to musically respond to unseen and unheard gestures and sounds 
of an imagined performer that is responding to the graphs. As the cue 
line is moving through a score image, a small copy of the next image 
is displayed to the upper right of the current image in order to help 
the performer create seamless musical transitions between the given 
images. 
 
 
 Figure 2. The computer animates  for the performer a cue 
line moving from left to right over the graphic score for the 
current section (left) while providing a preview of t he next 
section’s graphic (upper right), audio level indicators and 
system controls (middle right), and iPad control states and 
override controls (lower right).  
4. iPAD INTERFACE AND AUDIO SIGNAL 
PROCESSING 
The role of the iPad in Engravings for Prepared Snare Drum, iPad, 
and Computer is to provide the performer with a tactile interface of 
controls for a variety of audio signal processing algorithms that 
extend and transform the timbres of the prepared snare drum. 
 The iPad wirelessly sends control signals to the program running 
on the performer’s computer, which does the actual audio signal 
processing of audio captured from the contact microphone on the 
prepared snare drum. The signal processing features ring modulation, 
frequency modulation, and delay effects, which are routed to 
speakers for the audience. 
 During performance, the performer uses the iPad interface to 
choose different behavior modes for the audio signal processing of 
the prepared snare drum. Three of the modes ring modulate the signal 
with an oscillator whose frequency is also modulated at performer 
selectable slow, medium, or fast rates. There is also a randomizer 
mode for the oscillator feeding the ring modulator that  randomly 
alternates its frequency in rapidly or slowly changing rhythmic 
pulses. Another mode allows the performer to manually control the 
frequency of the oscillator. For all of these modes, the performer has 
control over the mix level ratio of the ring-modulated level to the 
original signal. The performer also has control of a delay/echo effect, 
including the effect level and delay time. If the performer changes the 
delay time, after several seconds, it will gradually sweep back to the 
default delay time, which eases the workload of the performer and 
facilitates the utilization of accelerating and decelerating rhythmic 
effects. Although these audio signal processing algorithms are 
relatively simple, but quite flexible, the performer can predictably 
combine multiple iPad control gestures with various percussive 
gestures on the prepared snare drum to synthesize a great variety of 
both static and transitioning timbres, ranging from acoustic to 
electronic, pitched to indefinitely pitched, metallic to wooden, and 
inharmonic to harmonic spectra. 
 
 
Figure 3. Prepared snare drum and iPad positioned for 
performance. Visual interface on laptop computer  screen 
(cropped out of picture) is centered below and in front . 
5. CONCLUSION 
Engravings for Prepared Snare Drum, iPad, and Computer  is a 
collaborative work between composer and performer in the joint 
development of performance technology , a fusion of acoustic, 
electro-acoustic, and digitally interactive musical frameworks. The 
purpose of this work  is to maximize the diverse and expressive 
rhythmic and timbral potentialities of the prepared snare drum by 
empowering the percussionist with simultaneous and equivalent 
expressive control of both acoustic and electronically processed 
sounds. In addition, this work commemorates and reflects upon the 
widely influential approaches and philosophies of composer John 
Cage in honor of the centennial of his birth. 
6. REFERENCES 
[1] John Cage. 1946-48. Sonatas and Interludes. Edition Peters, EP 
6755. 
[2] John Cage. 1959. Water Walk. Edition Peters, EP 6771. 
[3] Cycling74. 2012. MAX. http://cycling74.com/products/max/  
 
7. ADDITIONAL RESOURCES 
1-Video recording from a performance of Engravings for Prepared 
Snare Drum, iPad, and Computer: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mu9cQBrejjU  
2-Timothy Polashek’s website: http://www.tdpmusic.com 
3-Brad Meyer’s website: http://www.brad-meyer.com/ 
 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
83