Sounding Architecture:  
Inter-Disciplinary Studio at HKU  
	
Álvaro	Barbosa		
Faculty	of	Creative	Industries	
University	of	Saint	Joseph	
Macao	S.A.R,	China	
abarbosa@usj.edu.mo	
	
	
Thomas	Tsang	
Department	of	Architecture		
University	of	Hong	Kong	
Hong	Kong	S.A.R,	China	
howtsang@hku.hk	
	
 
ABSTRACT 
Sounding Architecture, is the first collaborative teaching 
development between the Department of Architecture and the 
Department of Music at the University of Hong Kong (HKU), 
introduced in Fall 2016. Composed of 67 students and 6 tutors, at 
the start of their studies, the Year 2 students of the Bachelor of Arts 
(Architectural Studies) (BAAS), received a year of basic training in 
the foundation courses.  they were able to experiment with sound, 
shape and materials with no specific goals, except to construct a 
sound instrument and develop a set of drawings that informs both 
construction and performance  depending on their individual 
suitability and finding. This was followed by practical work in the 
workshops led by composer Ken Ueno (UC Berkeley), composer 
Eli Marshall (Cornell University), percussionist Deborah Waugh 
(HKU) and fabrication laboratory manager Donn Holohan (HKU), 
all accompanying their disciplines. 
In this paper we present critical observations about the studio after a 
final public presentation of all projects in the 29th of November 
2016. The Review was conducted with demonstrations by groups of 
students supervised by different tutors, in each case focusing on a 
different strategy to create a connection between Sound, Music, 
Acoustics, Space and Architectural Design. There was an 
assumption that the core working process would have to include the 
design of a new musical instrument, which in some cases became 
the final deliverable of the Studio and in other cases a step in a 
process that leads to a different outcome (such as an architectural 
design, a performance or a social experiment). One other relevant 
aspect was that Digital technol ogy was used in the design and 
fabrication of the physical instruments’ prototypes, but in very few 
cases, it was used in the actual generation or enhancement of sound, 
with the instruments relying almost exclusively in acoustic and 
mechanical sound. 
 
Author Keywords 
NIME, Architecture, Design Research, Inter-disciplinary Teaching, 
Design Studio, Prototyping  
ACM Classification 
H.5.5 [Information Interfaces and Presentation] Sound and Music 
Computing. 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Architecture and Sound have been approached in many different 
ways [1] [2]. On the other hand, t he design of New Musical 
Interfaces for Music Expression (NIME) is an established research 
field with conferences and peer-reviews publications for over 15 
years [3]. However approaching this topic from the perspective of 
Architectural Design, as a pedagogical exercise, is an innovative 
and substantial contribution to the field. Nevertheless, one should 
always keep in mind that the most successful musical instruments, 
such as the piano or the violin, took centuries to be developed until 
they become perfectly fine-tuned and sophisticated, as we know 
them today. Even with the advances of modern digitals tools for 
design and prototyping, as well as University level knowledge 
supervision and references, the expectation of what can be achieved 
in one semester needs to be framed into an adequate perspective. 
Even so, the projects developed by the students tackled, in an 
empirical way, some of most relevant research topics in the field of 
Sound and Music Computing [4] or Auditory Display [5] [6]. 
The projects explored issues such as sonification, collaborative 
music instruments, multidimensional interaction design, wearable 
music instruments, performance, notation, collective improvisation, 
collaborative composition, participative performance or generative 
sound. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Sounding Architecture Poster 
 
48
2. SOUNDING ARCHITECTURE 
PROJECTS 
The Year 2 Coordinator was Thomas Tsang and projects were 
developed in groups supervised by Miho Hirabayashi, Ryo 
Fujimori, Wei Tseng, Jae Lim and Sony Devabhaktuni, each one 
introducing a distinctive approach  towards the Sounding 
Architecture studio. In the beginning of the semester the students 
were challenged to answer the question “ Can we understand 
architecture or building as form of a music instrument where the 
design might not necessarily be performed exactly how it was 
conceived?”. The goal was to search for latency or gap between 
building and performance, by trying to understand how a building is 
being used in the same way an instrument could be used and 
performed. In the early foundation of architectural education, the 
body and the relationship of the 1:1 scale is addressed. In that sense, 
this project reinforces how building can be closer to us.  
 The process resulted from discussions and open-ended questions to 
the students, such as:  “ Are architects able to perform their 
architecture? ” or “By performing, do we get to reflect on our work 
and understand through research where it can be developed 
further?”. Since the majority of our students play traditional 
classical instrument (mainly Western) and contemporary music is 
not part of their repertoire, the students’ understanding of sound is 
more based on what is given to them, as oppose d to being 
discovered. Architecture design works in the same way in terms of 
the discovery process.  
In addition, the basic requirement of Year 2, is to get students to 
develop a discourse on inter-disciplinary practice, which is highly 
supported by the University’s 3 pillars agenda 1 and the basic 
requirements of the defined learning outcomes: 
• Develop awareness of design and finding problems via design.  
• Training of basic skills of drawing and modeling, developing 
observations on the concrete part of the everyday to a form of 
abstraction. 
In this paper, we present a critical review of the projects developed 
during this course. 
2.1 Participative social interaction and music 
notation  
Group 1 was supervised by Thomas Tsang and included 6 projects 
that developed diverse works with the common denominator of 
drawing inspiration from seminal master works of experimental and 
electroacoustic music, proposed by the course supervisor. The 
projects followed different approaches focusing on a unique aspect 
that was crucial to the music piece they were assigned. We can 
highlight the following 4 projects: 
2.1.1 Silence is not universal 
Silence is not un iversal is an installation that explore s the 
importance of silence as an element in music composition and more 
importantly as form of tuning in other senses. To test some of the 
ideas, the students developed a device that allows two people to 
look at each other’s face depriving them of other senses by 
minimizing peripheral vision and ambient sound.  
The experiment was carried out in the busy streets of Hong Kong 
with several subjects. This conceptual prototype has several possible 
directions for further dev elopments, but for these students the 
importance of exploring these concepts, specially in the public 
place, is relevant to understanding how music can be composed, and 
most importantly getting familiar with the notion of designing 
spaces of intimacy in the public place, as defined in the term “no-
place” by the French anthropologist Marc Augé [7]. 
 
                                                                    
1 The HKU 3 Pillars Agenda (Accessed in 17 April 2017): 
http://www.sppoweb.hku.hk/visi on2016-2025/our-three-pillars.html  
 
 
Figure 2. Silence is not universal by Minia Cheung and April Soo 
2.1.2 Bench Automata 
Bench Automata is a sophisticated installation that also explores the 
social interaction in the public space. The students developed an 
elaborate foldable bench that reacts when a person sits on it, with a 
low pitch vibration that will trigger tactile and sonic perception. The 
purpose was to test how subjects react and interact with this bench 
in a public space. T o create the sound effect the students used 
electronic components, when realizing that the physical structure of 
the object could not provide a loud enough acoustic sound. This is 
an approach to generate sound that was not used by any other 
groups and that has tremendous potential to be explored in future 
developments of this Studio. The students also used wireless digital 
tracking to better analyze the behaviors of the subjects. 
2.1.3 Sounding Column 
Sounding Column is a musical interface that hangs from above and 
provides different pads for percussive performance. The device 
itself does not introduce novelty but the students took the 
opportunity to explore Notation as a form to organize sound during 
a performance. The notation developed by the students was adapted 
to this specific instrument and guided them during the performance 
presented live. Exploring the relevance of notation as a language to 
compose and perform organized sounds was an important and 
meaningful experience to these architecture students. 
2.1.4 Double Front 
Double Front is a percussion instrument made out of galvanized 
steel that provides different textures, based on the shape and areas of 
resonant boxes. With microphone amplification it provides an 
engaging sonic experience that can be further explored in the future. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Double Front by Francis Cheung and Nicole Yung 
 
49
2.2 Collaborative Music Instruments  
Group 2, supervised by Miho Hirabayashi, included 5 projects 
developed under the theme of Collaborative Music Instruments. 
This is an extremely important research topic in contemporary 
musical instrument design, especially in the digital domain. The 
students tackled some of the major issues that arose from designing 
instruments that were meant to be shared by several performers. The 
following 3 projects stand out: 
2.2.1 Wall Euphony 
Wall Euphony is a wall design that incorporates a shared musical 
instrument. A wall that encases several “ Kalimba” musical 
interfaces separates the performers. The performers react to what 
they can hear across the wall replicating a behavior as if they were 
in a room trying to listen to what is happening in another room, but 
communicating and interacting musically with the other peer. This 
Design, not only served the purpose of a captivating performance, 
but also could be considered as a prototype for a model, which 
could be developed into a real-world product that could make sense 
as an interior-architecture strategy. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Wall Euphony by Shivangi Das and Wing Tung Wong 
2.2.2 The Tandem Breeze 
The Tandem Breeze is a Multi-User wind instrument in which the 
performers face each other connected by the body of the instrument 
to their mouths. By extending or compressing a sliding mouthpiece 
into each other’s direction and blowing into it, the performers can 
create pitch variations that combine an organic coupling of their 
body movement and gesture, with the combinations of distinctive 
musical notes. The instrument has a dramatic performative effect 
providing an intense interaction between the players and a unique 
sonic experience. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Tandem Breeze by Janice Chu and Raphael Galvez 
2.2.3 The Sandwich 
The Sandwich is a percussion instrument that explores multiple 
materials providing a variety of timbres that allows for extensive 
creativity while performing. It is designed to be shared by two 
performers facing each other and a reacting to gesture and 
expressions that can be seen through the instrument. From all the 
instruments designed in this class this was the one that provided the 
widest range of timbre variety, almost as if the music was in “color” 
while the others were in “black & white”. 
2.3 Sonification 
Group 3, supervised by Ryo Fujimori, included 5 pieces that had in 
common the concept of sonification as form transposing to sound a 
range o f perceptual information that results from a physical 
behavior or movement. From these projects we can single out 4 
performances: 
2.3.1 Paper-tearing 
Paper-tearing is a semi-automated device that explores the idea of 
capturing and amplifying the sound of a cutter tearing paper. It is a 
dramatic installation that was used in a performance that induces 
some sense of danger. The acoustic sound projection was very 
subtle but once amplified properly it becomes a very engaging and 
powerful sonic experience. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Paper-tearing by Xiangning Wang, Hoi Yin Yeung and 
Charlene Lau 
2.3.2 The Clear Box 
The Clear Box is a device that has the goal of sonifying  water 
waves, by mapping the cyclic vertical movement from a set of 
floaters positioned along an aquarium into a rudimentary 
xylophone. The system is very ingenious and has the potential to 
create a very tight and clear mapping with an extremely musical 
outcome, as long as the mechanics of the prototype can be improved 
with better robustness. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Clear Box by Oi Tung Lam and Xinhao Chen 
2.3.3 The Black Box 
The Black Box is a performative wearable structure that reacts and 
adapts to the movement of a full body performer enclosed within 
the object construct. The structure resembles a human size 
accordion that is played with full body movement and by inflating 
and compressing, it blows out a stream of air that will trigger 
whistles, bells and rudimentary wind chimes for a musical effect. 
50
 
 
Figure 8. Black Box by Talia Lam and Du Hoi Ming 
2.3.4 Tensionball 
Tensionball is possibly the most inspiring system developed in this 
section, since it explores the mapping of extremely complex 
pendular cyclic movements with a completely mechanic acoustic 
system that convincingly sonify the nuances and expressiveness of 
the ball's movement. By introducing a wider variety in the sound 
sources triggered by the movement, the system can introduce even 
more emphasis on the sound specialization in order to produce an 
immersive sonification experience. 
2.4 Instrument Design for an Ensemble 
Group 4 supervised by Wei Tseng, was also divided in 6 groups of 
students, approaching the instruments’ design so that these must 
become part of a performative ensemble. E ach instrument 
contributes to a section of a musical piece and plays its role in an 
integrated and complementary way, to the ensemble. The musical 
instruments followed diverse approaches that range from windpipes 
triggered by the movement of a helix to a large-scale music box or a 
human scale seesaw triggering glass marimba keys. 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Seesawphone and The Music Recorder by Bertha Leung, Chi 
Yan Tam, Ming Yan Ho and Wing Ching Yuen. 
2.5 Wearable Musical Instruments 
Group 5 was supervised by Jae Lim and explored a rather unique 
approach in Music Instrument Design by introducing as a project 
topic the notion of wearable music Instruments, a topic that has been 
relatively less explored in this area, but with inspiring examples 
such as Nick Cave’s Soundsuit [ 8]. Three groups of students 
developed wearable sounding devices that encases more than one 
performer, are mobile as a vehi cle and produce musical sounds, 
either as a result of moving parts or by the acoustic modulation 
performance voices within the structure of the Suit. In particular the 
experimentation with voice in this type of structure is very fruitful 
for architecture students, since it gives then a unique perspective on 
the issue of acoustic spaces to be cohabited by human.  
 
 
 
Figure 10. The Howl, Ditto and Epidermal Being by Gina Park, Zackary Yuen, 
Sherry Cheung, Gracia Wong, Chinghey Chan, Daniel Stiensmeier, Yukuan Guo, 
Hiu Tung Lui, Lydia Chiu, Natalie Lai and Kevin Lai 
2.6 From Form to Architectural Space 
Group 6, Supervised by Sony Devabhaktuni, included 3 groups of 
students and followed a more traditional approach in terms of what 
an Architecture Studio usually addresses in an Architecture School. 
The students were challenged to develop an acoustic music 
instrument that derived from an existing classical string instrument, 
but expanded in space, scale or dimensions. The instrument resulted 
in expressive designs that could be performed live. After that, the 
students isolated certain visual perspectives of the instruments’ form 
that provided reference and inspiration for a real design of a 
building, which became the final deliverable of the studio. 
3. CONCLUSIONS 
The experiment of introducing a multidisciplinary approach into an 
Architectural Studio at HKU primarily had the goal of expanding 
the students’ minds and provides inspiration for creative and 
innovative Architectural Work. However, the results surpassed this 
goal, by providing the students with a valuable experience in Sound 
and Acoustic C entered Design, which will inherently create a 
competitive advantage on their skills and knowledge as future 
practicing architects. On the other hand, from the perspective of 
NIME, the development of new and original ideas of Interfaces for 
Music Expression, was a rewarding result, in the sense that fresh 
and original approaches for established problems, were introduced 
and suggested from a totally different perspective, then they would 
have been developed by Musicians, Computer Scientists or 
Engineers (as they usually are in NIME). In future editions of this 
Studio the pedagogical and Artistic perspective of this work, can 
benefit from a stronger inspiration in music and acoustics, as well as 
from the introduction of multidimensional interaction strategies, the 
use of sensor and contact microphones to capture the inner sounds 
of materials and the use of acoustic sound as triggers for additional 
layers of sound processed digitally. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Blesser, B., & Salter, L.-R. (2008). Spaces Speak, Are You Listening?.  
MIT Press. 
[2] Pallasmaa, J. (2013). Eyes of the Skin Architecture and the Senses (3rd 
Edition). Somerset, NJ, USA: John Wiley & Sons. 
[3] Jensenius, A.; Lyons, M., eds. (2017). A NIME Reader: Fifteen Years 
of New Interfaces for Musical Expression. Springer. ISBN 978-3-319-
47214-0. 
[4] Bernardini, N., Serra, X., Leman, M., & Widmer, G. (Eds.). (2007). A 
roadmap for sound and music computing. The S2S2 Consortium. 
[5] Kramer, G., Walker, B., Bargar, R. (1999). Sonification Report: Status 
of the Field and Research Agenda. International Community for 
Auditory Display ISBN: 0967090407 
[6] Hermann, T., Hunt, A., & Neuhoff, J. (2011). The Sonification 
Handbook. Logos Verlag Berlin. 
[7] Augé, M (1995). Introduction to an Anthropology of Supermodernity. 
Verso. ISBN 1859840515 
[8] Brooke, W. (2015). Medium and Meaning in Nick Cave’s Soundsuit. 
The First-Year Papers (2010 - present). Trinity College Digital 
Repository, Hartford, C 
51