Haptic-Listening and the Classical Guitar 
John A. McDowell and Dermot 
J. Furlong
Music and Media Technologies 
Department of Electronic and 
Electrical Engineering 
Trinity College Dublin, Ireland  
mcdowejo@tcd.ie
ABSTRACT 
This paper reports the development of a ‘haptic-listening’ 
system which presents the listener with a representation of the 
vibrotactile feedback perceived by a classical guitarist during 
performance through the use of haptic stimulation. The paper 
describes the design of the haptic-listening system which is in 
two prototypes: the “DIY Haptic Guitar” and a more robust trial 
prototype using a Reckhorn BS-200 shaker. Through two 
experiments, the perceptual significance and overall musical 
contribution of the addition of haptic stimulation in a listening 
context was evaluated. Subjects preferred listening to the 
classical guitar presentation with the addition of haptic 
stimulation and the addition of haptic stimulation contributed to 
listeners’ engagement with a performance. The results of the 
experiments and their implications are discussed in this paper. 
Author Keywords 
Haptic, Shaker, Engagement. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
During instrumental performance, it is well-established that 
advanced instrumentalists rely heavily on the vibrotactile 
feedback that is relayed to them through the body of the 
instrument, to continuously reassess their technique and to 
inform musical and technical decisions [ 13]. This performer-
instrument vibrotactile feedback relationship is vital for 
performer engagement with an instrument. For the purpose of 
this study, the term engagement was interpreted as the degree to 
which the listener feels actively involved in the presentation 
and the degree to which the performance holds the listener’s 
attention. 
 Studies have shown that the addition of haptic stimulation in 
digital musical instruments (DMIs), which typically do not 
provide vibrotactile feedback to the performer, results in an 
increase in performer engagement with the instrument [ 4] [ 6] 
[12]. Through the use of vibration motors embedded in light-
weight gloves, Lauren Hayes was able to establish a 
vibrotactile performer-instrument relationship for performers of 
her hybrid piano [ 4]. She concluded that the implementation of 
a feedback system allows performers to engage more closely 
with the instrument which has a major influence on the musical 
outcome. However, the emphasis of those researching the role 
of haptics in music has mainly been on the performer.  
Some research has been carried out on the role of haptics in the 
mediation of music and the potential for augmenting a listening 
presentation through the use of haptic stimulation. [3] coupled 
musical composition with tactile stimulation. Listeners wore a 
full-body vibrotactile stimulator during a one-hour concert of 
musical and tactile compositions. The study showed that the 
addition of tactile stimulation tended to result in stronger 
reactions to the compositions. In the present study, the research 
questions is: does the implementation of haptic stimulation in a 
listening context result in an increase in listener engagement 
with an instrumental performance?  
 There are a number of commercially available products 
which utilise haptic stimuli to enhance user experience. The 
“Basslet” is a haptic device designed by Berlin-based tech 
company, Lofelt, which is marketed as a “wearable subwoofer 
for your body” [10]. Using haptic technologies, the watch-sized 
device silently delivers a vibrotactile stimulus to the wrist 
which is designed to allow the listener “feel the music”. 
Nintendo’s 2017 video-game console, the Nintendo ‘Switch’, 
boasts a more nuanced haptic feedback system than any 
previous game console [ 2]. The increase in the number of 
commercially available haptic systems designed to enhance 
music listening, as well as the continued investment by video 
game companies in haptic technology, suggests that research 
into the role of haptics in music presentation is relev ant to 
current trends in interactive media technologies. 
 In an address at the 2006 Connecting Media conference in 
Hamburg, Marc Leman defined mediation technologies as 
“technologies that connect the human mind with matter” [ 8]. 
He proposes that the future of mediation technologies lies in 
mediating interaction through a multimodal experience which 
reflects the embodied cognition understanding of musical 
meaning, a field of music cognition which suggests that our 
understanding of musical intentions emerges from our human 
motor-systems and body movements. This study explores the 
potential application of haptic technologies as a means of 
contributing to multimodal mediation of music through the 
medium of touch. 
 The design considerations in the development of a haptic-
listening system are first discussed. This is followed by the 
results of two haptic-listening experiments: Experiment 1 and 
Experiment 2 which investigated the subjective responses of 
participants to the addition of haptic stimulation  in music 
listening. Finally, the implications of these results are 
discussed. 
2. DEVELOPING THE HAPTIC-
LISTENING SYSTEM 
In order to create a haptic-listening presentation, a system was 
designed which presented the listener with a conventional 
stereo recording of a classical guitar performance with the 
293
addition of a haptic component. The system was designed to 
provide a representation rather than an accurate simulation of 
the player’s experience. The technology required to create a 
convincing simulation of the performer’s experience was not 
available to the researcher but this could be pursued in further 
research. There were two phases in the development of the 
haptic-listening system: (1) recording the physical vibrations of 
the guitar during an original performance; (2) reproducing the 
vibrations in the playback scenario. Recordings were made of 
the physical vibrations of a 2007 Dieter Hopf/Manuel Adalid 
“Artista Membrane” classical guitar during a performance by 
Alan Grundy, a renowned Irish performer and musicologist, in 
the Trinity College Dublin Music and Media Technologies 
(MMT) recording studio. The recorded vibration signal was 
then reproduced onto the body of the listener using haptic 
stimulation. While listening to an audio recording of the 
performance on headphones, the listener positioned a haptic 
actuator against his/her sternum which played back the 
recorded vibrations of the original performance. The system 
was designed to present the haptic stimulation in a manner that 
represents the conceptual metaphor of playing the guitar, i.e., 
the feedback is delivered to the sternum much like the guitar 
vibrations are felt against the sternum during performance. 
2.1 Recording the Vibrations 
The research of Marshall & Wanderley [ 12] and Askenfelt & 
Jansson [1] into the measurement of guitar vibrations indicates 
that a light-weight accelerometer is the ideal instrument for 
measuring instrument vibrations. A PCB Piezotronics ICP 
accelerometer, model 352C22 was used in [12] and a Brüel & 
Kjaer 4374, 0.6g accelerometer was used in [1]. The light-
weight accelerometers used in these studies were highly 
sensitive sensors and the instruments were held in fixed 
positions when measuring the instrument vibrations. However, 
in the context of recording a guitar performance, such highly 
sensitive sensors would undoubtedly pick up extraneous sounds 
created by the bodily movements of the performer. For this 
reason, the present study made use of the less sensitive Schaller 
“Oyster” S/P piezo pickup to convert the vibratory motion of 
the instrument into an electrical signal. The pickup came with 
an adhesive wax which was used to attach the pickup to the 
guitar. The ‘audio’ component of the recording was achieved 
using an XY stereo array of Rode NT5 small-diaphragm 
cardioid condenser microphones. A Presonus Studio 192 audio 
interface was used for recording. 
 Alan performed four of his own original compositions, each 
varying in style and degree of technical complexity. During the 
recording session, four positions around the bridge of the guitar 
were investigated and eventually it was determined that 
positioning the pickup on the bridge of the guitar beside the 
bass strings (see Figure 1) yielded the most tonally balanced 
signal. Positions on the back plate and side plates were 
considered. However, the stiffness of the wood, as well as the 
proximity of the wood to the body of the performer, would 
mean that the ratio of guitar body vibrations to extraneous noise 
(both from performer as well as electrical interference) would 
be too small. The use of a multiple pickups to record the guitar 
was considered. Summing these recorded signals may have 
reflected the complexity of the guitar vibrations more 
accurately. However, this was not possible because the 
researchers did not have access to multiple pickups. 
2.2 Reproducing the Vibrations 
Two prototype acoustic ‘shakers’ were designed to reproduce 
the vibration of the guitar body on the listener. The first, called 
the “DIY Haptic Guitar”, was a home-made prototype which 
was built so that it would be ready for Experiment 1 which was 
conducted in Dublin in Summer 2017. A more robust prototype 
was later built for Experiment 2. 
 Informed by Marshall & Wanderley ’s [11] findings, the “DIY 
Haptic Guitar” was realised using the voice-coil actuator of a 
disused 4-inch Panasonic speaker. The diaphragm of the 
speaker was removed and three metal washers from a cymbal 
stand were attach to the dust cap of the speaker using super  
Figure 1: Pickup positioning during recording 
session. The black oval around the bridge is part of 
the “membrane” design of the guitar. This highly 
flexible membrane results in increased volume.
  
Figure 2: Exhibition prototype – Voice-coil actuator 
housed in a soft material and sewn shut.
  
294
glue. The washers acted as a ‘foot’ through which the vibrations 
would be channeled from the voice-coil to the listener’s 
sternum. The speaker was then housed in a soft cushion-like 
material which was fashioned out of the strap of a camping bag. 
Soft padding from a pillow was inserted into the prototype 
behind the speaker to give it a teddy-like feeling. Two buttons 
were sewn onto the prototype to encourage people to engage 
with the device and to embrace it like a teddy (see Figure 2). 
The recorded vibration signal was amplified and channeled to 
the voice-coil using a Creek Audio Systems CAS4040 
amplifier. After Experiment 1, a more robust playback 
prototype was built using a Reckhorn BS-200i shaker. It was 
felt that the DIY prototype was not robust and that the findings 
of a trial using the Reckhorn Body Shaker would be more 
robust and replicable. 
The shaker was housed in a pouch made from a thick plastic 
bag. The remaining space in the pouch was stuffed with soft 
padding from a pillow to give it a more comfortable feeling. 
Again, buttons were sewn onto the prototype to encourage 
people to engage with the device (see Figure 3). The device 
could also be attached to a strap with which listeners could 
mount the device against their chests. A Creek Audio Systems 
CAS4040 amplifier was used to amplify the haptic signal. 
3. RESULTS 
This section describes the results of  two experiments designed 
to evaluate the effects of the addition of haptic stimuli on the 
overall listener experience of a classical guitar recording 
presentation. Participants were asked to respond to 
questionnaires in each experiment. Experiment 1 was a 
preliminary trial carried out during the MMT Exhibition and 
Experiment 2 was a more formal listening test carried out after 
the Exhibition.  
In both experiments, listeners were asked to indicate whether 
they preferred the presentation with or without the addition of 
haptic stimulation. The participants were also asked to rate the 
degree to which the addition of haptic stimuli contributed to 
their level of engagement with the performance. In Experiment   
1 participants were asked to identify what emotional feeling the 
haptic stimulation encouraged. The options presented to 
participants were based on informal feedback received during 
the development of the haptic-listening system. In Experiment 
2, participants were asked to rate the degree to which the 
addition of haptic stimuli contributed to the perceived 
expressivity of the performance. For this study, the term 
expressivity was interpreted as the degree to which the emotion 
of the performance is communicated. Responses were based on 
three-point or five-point scales . A three-point scale was judged 
to be sufficient for a preference test while a five-point scale was 
used for the engagement and expressivity tests to allow for 
finer resolution. 
As the responses to the listening experiments were likely to be 
different depending on whether a participant was an 
experienced guitarist or a non-guitarist, participants with 
varying degrees of familiarity with the guitar were included in 
both experiment samples. The participants were categorised 
into three groups: (1) experienced guitarists; (2) novice 
guitarists; (3) participants who have almost never played the 
guitar. 
3.1 Experiment 1: Exhibition Responses 
3.1.1 Methodology 
Experiment 1 was carried out at the MMT Exhibition of 
students’ projects and was attended by the students, family and 
friends of the students, MMT staff, and members of the public. 
Attendees were invited to interact with the various projects. 
The haptic-listening installation was titled the “DIY Haptic 
Guitar” and comprised the haptic-listening system as well as a 
simple Max/MSP patch that allowed users to choose between 
the four Alan Grundy compositions and to adjust the volume of 
the haptic and the audio signals. The reason that participants 
had the ability to adjust the volume of the haptic and the audio 
signals was to give the researchers an insight into the level at 
which users liked to feel the haptic signal relative to the audio 
signal. However, the level adjustments made by the participants 
were not recorded by the researchers. The test would have been 
more scientific if the same levels were used for all participants. 
A toggle was included in the patch which muted/un-muted the 
haptic signal. When attendees chose to interact with the “DIY 
Haptic Guitar”, they were invited to complete a questionnaire 
afterwards.  
Figure 3: Trial prototype – The Reckhorn Body 
Shaker inside its homemade pouch.
  
Figure 4: MMT student interacting with the haptic-
listening installation.
  
295
Participants were instructed to hold the device against their 
sternum with both hands “like a teddy” (see Figure 4). This 
meant that the vibrations were felt against the sternum and in 
the hands. Before interacting with the installation, participants 
were given a brief demonstration on how to use the “DIY 
Haptic Guitar” and how to use the Max/MSP interface. 
Participants were invited to listen to as many of the four 
compositions as they wished. Participants were instructed to 
toggle between having the haptic signal muted and un-muted in 
order to get an impression of what the presentation felt like 
without haptic stimulation. In more ideal circumstances, 
participants would have been instructed to listen to the 
compositions for a fixed length of time, with and without haptic 
stimuli, to allow for more consistent treatment conditions. 
However, due to the informal nature of the exhibition, the 
length of time spent interacting with the “DIY Haptic Guitar” 
varied with each participant and, as such, the experiment was 
designed to be completable within a few minutes. 
 The questionnaire was completed by forty-one participants, 
of which thirty were members of the public, ten were MMT 
students, and one was a lecturer at MMT. Thirty-two 
participants were male (78%) and nine participants were female 
(22%). Thirteen participants identified as “advanced 
guitarists” (31.7%), fifteen identified as “novice 
guitarists” (36.5%), and thirteen said that they had “almost 
never played the guitar” (31.7%). Regarding participants’ level 
of experience with instruments other than the guitar, seventeen 
participants  (41.5%) identified as “advanced instrumentalists”, 
thirteen (31.7%) identified as “novice instrumentalists”, and 
eleven said that they had “almost never played any other 
instrument”. Participants were not asked to state their age. 
3.1.2 Outcomes 
Table 1 summarises the responses following Experiment 1. 
Almost all participants preferred the presentation with haptic 
stimuli (95%). Almost all respondents found the haptic 
stimulation contributed to their engagement with the 
presentation (97.5%). In addition, when asked “which of the 
following feelings did the addition of haptic stimulation 
encourage?”, a large majority of respondents found the haptic 
stimulation calming/relaxing (75%). However, the responses to 
this question may have been influenced by the compositional 
style of the recorded music. At the end of the questionnaire, 
respondents were asked to “provide any additional thoughts or 
comments”. The twenty-two comments show that respondents 
generally enjoyed the experience of the haptic stimulation 
technology. Many respondents seemed to find the experience 
relaxing and suggested that a haptic-listening presentation 
could be useful in music therapy: “I think it’s very promising 
for music therapy/treatment for autism etc.”, “Definite scope 
for music therapy”. Many respondents felt that the haptic 
component added an extra dimension to the experience: 
“Haptic feedback added another element to the song”, “After 
[the haptic component was removed], the music felt empty and 
dry as if a richness had gone”, “It felt a bit like getting the 
performer's perspective rather than the audience’s.” These 
comments are representative of the general comments from 
participants. As respondents were not a random sample, the 
possibility of bias in their responses is acknowledged. A 
comparison of the responses of non-guitarists, novice guitarists, 
and advanced guitarists showed that responses were not 
dependent on the respondents’ level of experience with the 
guitar, although the small sample size precluded statistical 
analysis of the differences in responses by level of experience.  
3.2 Experiment 2: Controlled Experiment 
3.2.1 Methodology 
Like Experiment 1, Experiment 2 involved interacting with the 
system and responding to a questionnaire. However, a number 
of changes were made to the presentation and the questionnaire 
to achieve a more robust and controlled result. The strategies 
used in creating the experiment were informed by [ 9]. Rather 
than giving participants control over the playback volume, the 
audio and haptic components were played back at a fixed 
volume for all participants. The more robust Reckhorn BS-200 
shaker haptic-listening prototype was used. This prototype was 
strapped onto the participants so that the device would be 
firmly positioned against the listener’s sternum. This meant that 
the contact, pressure, and positioning of the device would be 
relatively consistent throughout the experiment across each 
participant. It also meant that the vibration signal would not be 
felt through the hands. Participants were presented with three 
short excerpts from the recording session with Alan. The order 
of presentation of the trials were randomised. Excerpt A 
(‘Without Words’) and B (‘Millennium Mirror’) were 
stylistically contrasting and were both heard four times, twice 
with haptic stimuli and twice without. Excerpt C (‘Karma’), 
was also heard four times: twice with a haptic signal that was 
congruent with the audio signal; twice with a haptic signal 
taken from a separate recoding and, therefore, incongruent with 
the audio signal. The composition used for the incongruent 
haptic signal was another of Alan’s compositions called ‘Waltz 
Louise’. 
 After the participants responded to the questions relating to 
each excerpt, they were asked to respond on their overall 
impression of the haptic playback system. This comprised two 
sections. The first section asked participants whether they 
preferred listening to the music in general with or without 
Table 1 - Experiment 1: Effect of haptic stimulation
No.
Preference for haptic stimulation
Preferred with haptic technology 39
Preferred without haptic technology 1
No preference 1
Total respondents 41
Effect of haptic stimulation on engagement
Very distracting 0
Slightly distracting 0
No effect 1
Slightly engaging 11
Very engaging 29
Total respondents 41
Feelings encouraged by haptic stimulation
I thought it was: 
Funny/silly 1
Calming/relaxing 31
Uncomfortable/weird 1
Pensive/reflective/sad 8
No effect 0
Total respondents 41
296
haptic stimulation. The participants were then given the 
opportunity to submit their thoughts or comments on the 
system. The second section presented the participants with 
selected comments from the responses to Experiment 1 and 
asked them on a five-point scale to state the degree to which 
they agreed or disagreed with each comment. These comments 
were judged to be representative of the general comments from 
Experiment 1. The Experiment 2 questionnaire was completed 
by nineteen participants, of which fourteen were friends of the 
researcher and five were MMT students. Fifteen participants 
were male (78.9%) and four participants were female (21.1%). 
All participants were between twenty-two and twenty-six years 
old. The average age of participants was 23.47 (std. dev. 0.993). 
3.2.2 Results 
Table 2 summarises the responses to Experiment 2. Participants 
preferred the music with haptic stimulation (89%). More 
participants preferred the addition of haptic stimulation with 
Excerpt A (89%) than with Excerpt B (73.6%). With Excerpt C, 
participants preferred the version with congruent haptic 
stimulation (89%). Participants found the addition of haptic 
stimulation made them feel more engaged with the 
performances (89%). Most participants found Excerpt A more 
expressive with the addition of haptic stimulation (73.6%). 
Participants were evenly split on whether Excerpt B was more 
expressive with or without haptic stimulation. Participants 
found Excerpt C was more expressive with congruent haptic 
stimulation (89%). 
 Participants’ responses in Experiment 2 to the Experiment 1 
comments showed that participants tended to agree with most 
of the Experiment 1 comments. Participants were almost 
unanimously in agreement with the following comments: “It 
felt a bit like getting the performer's perspective rather than the 
audiences’”; “Definite scope for music therapy”; “Helps to 
make the [music] more immediate and live”.  
 As in Experiment 1, participants were asked to provide 
additional comments. The eighteen comments show that many 
participants experienced an increased sense of engagement 
when haptic stimulation was included: “Preferred with haptic 
feedback, the vibrations put you more ‘in the moment’ with the 
music as if you were playing the guitar yourself,” “ I think as 
someone who is not familiar with guitar music (as in classical 
guitar), I found the haptic feedback helped me engage more 
with a genre I am novice to. It made me pay more attention to 
the chord progression or subtle shifts in the playing. In short it 
forced me to take notice of a type of music I would not 
normally listen to.” Some participants said that the haptic 
stimulation enhanced the excerpt only if the participant liked 
the audio component of the excerpt: “The haptic component 
definitely adds to the listening experience, however, it doesn't 
necessarily improve it. It doesn't really suit some music types.” 
 A comparison of the responses of non-guitarists, novice 
guitarists, and advanced guitarists showed that responses were 
not dependent on the respondents’ level of experience with the 
guitar, with the exception of Excerpt A. Most non-guitarists 
found Excerpt A more expressive without haptic stimulation 
while all novice and advanced guitarists found it more 
expressive with haptic stimulation. Because only two pieces 
with congruent haptic feedback were presented in the 
experiment, it was not possible to determine why non-guitarists 
found Excerpt A more expressive without haptic feedback 
while all novice and advanced guitarists found it more 
expressive with haptic feedback. A study which presented a 
larger number of performances could clarify why responses 
might vary depending on the composition. 
Table 2 - Experiment 2: Effect of haptic 
stimulation technology
Overall preference for haptic stimulation No.
Preferred with haptic stimuli 17
Preferred without haptic stimuli 0
No preference 2
Total respondents 19
Preference for haptic stimulation
Excerpt A B C
Preferred with (congruent) haptic stimuli 17 14 17
Preferred without (with incongruent) 
haptic stimuli
2 4 2
No preference 0 1 0
Total respondents 19
Effect of haptic stimulation on engagement
Excerpt A B C
More engaging with (congruent) haptic 
stimuli
17 17 15
More engaging without (with 
incongruent) haptic stimuli
1 1 3
No preference 1 1 1
Total respondents 19
Effect of haptic stimulation on perceived expressivity
Excerpt A B C
More expressive with (congruent) haptic 
stimuli
14 9 17
More expressive without (with 
incongruent) haptic stimuli
5 9 1
No preference 0 1 1
Total respondents 19
297
4. DISCUSSION 
The objectives of this study were to present the listener with a 
representation of the vibrotactile feedback perceived by the 
classical guitarist during performance through the use of haptic 
technology, and to evaluate the perceptual significance and 
overall musical contribution of the addition of haptic 
stimulation in a listening context. Preference for the addition of 
a haptic component, increased engagement with the 
performance, and increased perceiv ed expressivity were the 
parameters by which the musical contribution of haptic 
stimulation was evaluated. Original compositions by Alan were 
successfully recorded and presented via haptic-listening 
prototypes at the MMT Exhibition and at a subsequent formal 
trial. In two experiments, subjective responses to the MMT 
Exhibition presentation and the formal trial were obtained 
through two questionnaires. 
 The Experiment 1  questionnaire responses showed that 
almost all participants preferred the listening experience with 
the addition of haptic stimulation. The questionnaire also 
showed that almost all participants felt more engaged with 
haptic stimulation. An attempt was made to establish what type 
of emotional contribution might come from the introduction of 
haptic stimulation. While the majority of participants said that 
the haptic stimulation made them feel “calm/relaxed”, it is 
likely that the responses to this question were influenced by the 
mood of the compositions. The free-flow comments suggest 
that participants were enthusiastic about the system and felt that 
it had relaxing and therapeutic effects. 
 The investigation carried out by Marshall & Wanderley [ 12] 
showed that the introduction of haptic stimulation in a digital 
slide guitar resulted in a marginally significant increase in 
performer engagement. The research by Hayes [ 4] [ 5] also 
suggested that the addition of haptic stimulation in DMIs could 
result in an increase in performer engagement with the 
instrument. The results of this experiment support the argument 
that, in the same way that haptic stimulation ca n result in a 
performer feeling a greater sense of engagement with an 
instrument, haptic stimulation can be used in a listening context 
to enhance the listener’s engagement with the performance.  
 Experiment 1 was not a highly controlled experiment and the 
results are not as robust as the more formal Experiment 2. 
However, Experiment 2 supported the results of Experiment 1 
in that almost all participants preferred the listening experience 
with the addition of haptic stimulation. Participants also felt 
more engaged with the addition of haptic stimulation. 
Participants found Excerpt A more expressive with the addition 
of haptic stimulation. The sample was split down the middle on 
whether Excerpt B was more expressive with or without the 
addition of haptic stimulation. Participants preferred the version 
of Excerpt C with congruent haptic stimulation and found it to 
be more engaging and expressive than the version with 
incongruent haptic stimulation. 
 Some of the comments of participants in Experiment 1 were 
supported by participants in Experiment 2 which reinforced 
those of Experiment 1. Experiment 2 shows that participants 
agree that a haptic-listening presentation could be implemented 
in a music therapy context. The role of haptic stimulation in 
music therapy may be a subject for future study. In Experiment 
1 the listener held the device in by hand against the chest while 
in Experiment 2 the listener could position the device against 
the sternum using a belt. The results of the experiment did not 
show a clear difference between the two approaches but this 
could be pursued in further research. 
 Preference for the addition of haptic technology and 
increased engagement with the performance suggests that 
haptic stimulation could be used to improve instrumental 
listening. As participants in the experiments suggested, haptic 
stimulation could be used in a wide number of listening 
contexts such as art installations, therapeutic and health 
settings, mental health settings, and as a sleeping aid. The 
technology may have particular application for hard of hearing/
deaf children and adults. The findings support the recent 
investment by companies like Lofelt into haptic stimulation in 
listening contexts.  
 This study implements the ideas suggested by Marc Leman 
[8] relating to the multimodal mediation of music. The results 
of the experiments and the enthusiasm of participants supports 
continued research into multimodal mediation of music. From 
our results, it is clear that there could be a demand for haptic-
listening technology which can improve our music listening 
experience. The results of this study suggest that the 
multimodal mediation of music could be a viable next step in 
improving listener experience. 
5. REFERENCES 
[1] A. Askenfelt, and E. Jansson. On vibration sensation and 
finger touch in stringed instrument playing. Music Perception, 
9, 3 (1992), 311-350. 
[2] COG Connected. The Nintendo Switch HD rumble feature 
is a game changer & nobody is talking about it [online] 
Available at: http://cogconnected.com/feature/joy-con-hd-
rumble-is-a-game-changer/, 2017 [last accessed 16/06/2017]. 
[3] Gunther, E., & O’Modhrain, S. (2003). Cutaneous grooves: 
Composing for the sense of touch. Journal of New Music 
Research, 32(4), 369-381. 
[4] L. Hayes. Vibrotactile feedback-assisted performance 
NIME – The International Conference on New Interfaces for 
Musical Expression, (2011), 72-75. 
[5] L. Hayes. Haptic augmentation of the hybrid piano. 
Contemporary Music Review, 32, 5 (2013), 499-509. 
[6] L. Hayes, and C. Michalakos. Imposing a networked 
vibrotactile communication system for improvisational 
suggestion. Organised Sound, 17, 1 (2012), 36-44. 
[7] (uploader unknown) M. Leman. Marc Leman - Embodied 
music cognition. (Connecting Media conference, Hamburg 
2006). [video] Available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=DvMJk1sJzq8 [accessed 30/04/2017]. 
[8] M. Leman. Embodied Music Cognition and Mediation 
Technology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2007). 
[9] D. Levitin. Experimental design in psychoacoustic research. 
In: P. Cook, ed., Music, Cognition, and Computerized Sound: 
An Introduction to Psychoacoustics, 1st ed. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 1999, 299-328. 
[10] Lofelt. Basslet [online] Available at: https://eu.lofelt.com/, 
2017 [last accessed 30/04/2017]. 
[11] M. Marshall, and M. Wanderley. Vibrotactile feedback in 
Digital musical instruments. NIME – In: The International 
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression. Paris: 
ACM Press, 2006, 226-229. 
[12] M. Marshall, and M. Wanderley. Examining the effects of 
embedded vibrotactile feed-back on the feel of a digital musical 
instrument. In: NIME – The International Conference on New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression. Oslo: ACM Press, 2011, 
399-404. 
[13] P. Rebelo, “Haptic sensation and instrumental 
transgression”. Contemporary Music Review, 25 (1), 2006, pp. 
27-35.
298