The Kalichord: A Physically Modeled Electro-Acoustic 
Plucked String Instrument
Daniel Schlessinger
CCRMA
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
schless1@ccrma.stanford.edu
Julius O. Smith III
CCRMA
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
jos@ccrma.stanford.edu
Abstract
 We  present  the  Kalichord:  a  small,  handheld 
electro/acoustic instrument in which the player's right hand 
plucks virtual strings while his left hand uses buttons to 
play  independent  bass  lines.   The  Kalichord  uses  the 
analog  signal  from  plucked  acoustic  tines  to  excite  a 
physical  string  model,  allowing  a nuanced  and  intuitive 
plucking experience.  First, we catalog instruments related 
to  the Kalichord.   Then  we examine  the use of  analog 
signals to excite a physical string model and discuss the 
expressiveness and form factors that this technique affords. 
We then describe the overall construction of the Kalichord 
and possible playing styles, and finally we consider  ways 
we hope to improve upon the current prototype. 
Keywords: Kalichord, physical model, tine, piezo, plucked 
string, electro-acoustic instruments, kalimba, accordion
1. Introduction
   The Kalichord is a new plucked string instrument that 
combines acoustic and electric elements. At the heart of the 
Kalichord is a system in which the player plucks a few 
small tines that act as virtual strings.  The tines each have 
embedded piezo elements which act as pickups, and the 
acoustic signal from these pickups becomes the  excitation 
signal for a digital physical model of a string.  This method 
of acoustically exciting a string model from a tine turns out 
to  be  surprisingly  realistic  and  expressive  as  well  as 
allowing  for  new  form  factors  and  performance  styles 
previously  unavailable  to  plucked  string  instruments. 
Using these new form factors, we sought to maximize the 
facility  for  simultaneously  playing  bass  lines  with  one 
hand  and  arpeggios  with  the  other.   (This  kind  of  two 
handed  interplay  is  relatively  easy  on  the  piano  or 
accordion, but is more difficult with most plucked string 
instruments.) In this way, we hoped to create an instrument 
that benefits solo musicians who want to play bass lines 
and chordal or melodic accompaniment simultaneously. 
2. Related Instruments/Controllers
We used as inspiration a number of different existing 
instruments, including the acoustic guitar, the kora (West-
African  two-handed  harp),  the  kalimba  (African  thumb 
piano),  and  the  orchestral  harp.  However,  our  greatest 
influence was the button accordion.  Like the accordion, 
the Kalichord has bass buttons under the left hand, melody 
notes under the right, and registers inter-hand motion in 
order to implement a similar “one-man-band” style of play. 
The the use of tines for plucking was inspired in part by 
Adrian  Freed's  electric  kalimba  [1],  which  is  itself  a 
controller inspired by the african thumb piano. Freed uses 
control  rate  signals  from  wooden  tines  to  measure  the 
strength of the pluck and to capture aftertouch information.
The Thummer [2] controller has a similar form factor to 
the  Kalichord,  with  a  handheld  model  that  features  a 
matrix  of  buttons  with  expressive  touch  and  some 
innovative new tunings.
There have been a number of guitar interfaces (such as 
the  Ztar  [3]  and  Yamaha  EZ-GE  [4])  that  convert 
physically plucked signals into MIDI notes. There have 
Figure 1: The Kalichord being played (left)
close-up on tine-strings (right) 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists 
requires prior specific permission and /or a fee. 
NIME09, June 3-6, 2009, Pittsburgh, PA 
Copyright remains with the author(s).  
NIME 200998
also been at least a few electronic instruments which use  
audio  signals  for  excitation.  The  Korg  Wavedrum,  for  
example,  used  contact  microphones  underneath  a  
drumhead to send excitation signals to a synthesis engine  
[5].  Edgar  Berdahl  &  Julius  Smith's  tangible  virtual  
vibrating  string  [6],  discussed  below,  uses  a  heavily  
damped guitar string to excite a physical model.
3. Control of Physical String Models
3.1 Physical String Modeling
In physical modeling, the acoustics of the instruments  
themselves are often separated from the excitation stimulus 
(in this case, the plucking) and modeled independently [7].  
For  plucked  string  instruments,  resonator  and  string  
acoustics  have  been  studied  extensively,  but  excitation 
signals  have  received  less  attention:  they  are  generally  
either simulated using a filtered noise burst  [7], or the  
pluck signal itself is extracted from a recording and stored  
as an excitation signal to be used later [8] (see figure 2).  
There  has  been  work  done  towards  methodically 
modeling the finger-string interaction of an acoustic guitar,  
notably by Cuzzucoli/ Lombardo [9] and more recently by  
Eckerholm/ Evangelista [10]. However, we have not found  
controllers  that  can  fully  manifest  the  nuances  of these 
models.  Part  of  the  problem  is  the  sheer  bandwidth  of 
information that a guitarist is able to impart upon a string,  
from  the  exact  angle  of  the  plucking  over  time  to  the 
complicated flesh-fingernail-string interaction, to name a  
few.  
3.2 Tangible Virtual Strings
As an alternative, Berdahl & Smith demonstrated that a  
great deal of realism and expressiveness could be achieved  
by plucking a heavily damped string and using that signal  
at  audio  rates  to  excite  a  physical  model  [6].  In  other 
words, the finger-string interaction is measured instead of  
modeled. There is an elegant simplicity to this approach,  
and we created the Kalichord as a way of further exploring  
it.
3.3 Use of Tines As Virtual Strings
The Kalichord further abstracts Berdahl/Smith's virtual  
guitar string by replacing the damped string with a tine  
pickup  (figure  3).   Like  the  damped  guitar  string,  the  
analog signal from the piezo tine is digitized at audio rates  
and fed directly into a waveguide model of a string.  We  
use the term 'audio rates' to mean typical CD or computer  
quality  audio,  at  least  16-bit  44.1kHz  (although  22kHz 
might be sufficient).  This is in comparison to what can be  
called  “control  rate”  signals  often  used  for  music  
controllers, which tend to be at a much lower sample rate  
(often 3kHz or lower).  With the increase in power and  
lowered cost of today's audio interfaces, the use of audio 
rate  controllers  is  now  possible  even  for  homemade  
instruments. (To determine minimum required sample rate, 
we lowpass filtered the signals prior to feeding them into 
the string model and informally determined that cutting 
frequencies lower than roughly 10 kHz really degraded the 
Kalichord's realism and playability.  More rigorous testing  
in this area as well as opinions from various musicians is  
still necessary.)
3.4 New Form Factors
Because of their compact size, one can easily arrange  
tines  in  a  much  more  condensed  area  than  would  be  
required for a full length of string.  This opens up the  
arrangement  of  virtual  strings  into  all  sorts  of  
configurations  that  are  difficult  (or  impossible)  with  
acoustic instruments: one could design for ergonomics, for  
the imitation of an already-existing instrument (such as a  
piano  keyboard),  or  for  visual  aesthetics,  among  other  
possibilities. In the case of the Kalichord, the arrangement  
is  primarily  ergonomic,  with  the  tines  positioned  just  
below the fingertips. 
4. Construction / Play
The design  of the Kalichord  is  similar to  that  of an  
accordion, with  bass buttons  on the left side and  piezo  
tines on the right side (see figure 4).  The current prototype  
Figure 4: 
Bass side (left) and tine-string side (right)
Figure 2: 
Common Plucked String Physical Model Signal Flow
Figure 3: 
Kalichord Tine Signal Flow
99
is  constructed  out  of  thin  plywood  which  is  cut  into  a 
teardrop shape, with egg-shaped grips on both sides and a  
strap  on  the  left  hand  side.  The sensors themselves  are  
inset on a thin piece of foam board, which is helpful for  
rapid prototyping of the buttons and tine layout.  The two 
pieces of plywood are fastened to each other by means of a  
rotary pot to measure rotational displacement (see inter-
hand movement below).  The teardrop shape, in addition to 
aesthetic considerations, offers the player visual feedback  
as to the amount of rotation between the two halves.
4.1 The Tines
The current prototype features 8 piezo tines, using DT-
series piezo film made by Measurement Specialties, Inc.  
The tines are approximately 0.5mm thick, and are rated to  
have frequency response up to 50khz [11]. A comparison  
of the frequency response of one of the tines being plucked  
to  that of a damped guitar high E string can be seen in 
figure 5. 
For the physical model itself, we are experimenting with 
different amounts of complexity but we have found that, 
even using a primitive single waveguide model [7], the 
tines produce a very realistic and playable virtual string.  
In  our  current  setup,  the  pluck  signal  goes  through  a  
hardware interface and into a computer running Max/MSP  
[12],  where  the  string  model  has  been  compiled  into  a 
Max/MSP external object.  
For added expressivity and realism, we also wanted the  
Kalichord to distinguish whether the finger was plucking  
or merely resting on its tine, so that we could dampen the  
virtual string in the latter case.  At first, we tried to get this  
data directly (through low-pass filtering the tine signal),  
but  this  often  produced  a  false  positive  (occasionally  
sensing  a  touch  after  the  tine  had  been  released).   So  
instead,  we  have  attached  small  force-sensing  resistors  
(FSRs) to the base of each tine, which works much more  
reliably.  Hopefully in future designs we will be able to  
eliminate the FSRs.
4.2 Bass Buttons
The  bass  buttons  are  momentary  switches  arranged  
underneath  the  left  thumb  and  fingers.   In  the  current  
prototype, there are 12 bass control buttons located under  
the thumb of the left hand, and 9 buttons under the other  
four fingers.  Two of the buttons are raised for tangible  
navigation.   In the current prototype, the button signals are 
sent  into  Max/MSP through  an  Arduino  microcontroller 
[13],  and  the  bass  tones  are  created  using  additive  
synthesis of a few simple oscillators.   
4.3 Inter-Hand Movement
The Kalichord also registers rotational motion between  
the two hands by means of a rotary pot (figure 6, left)  
connecting the two halves.  The rotational position is fed  
into Max/MSP via the Arduino (figure 6, left).  This data  
can  be  used  for  expressive  control  such  as  pitchbend, 
volume, or vibrato, as well as for changing the note values  
of the tines.
4.4 Mode Button
There is one large button positioned under the thumb of  
the right hand (figure 6, right).  This button is used for  
toggling  through  different  modes  of  play  or  engaging 
certain effects, such as pitch bend or output distortion.
4.5 Modes of Play
We  are  still  experimenting  with  different  ways  of  
mapping notes to individual tines.  One method that has  
been effective is what we call “bass-control mode.”  In  
bass control mode, chords are determined by the left hand 
thumb buttons. The thumb buttons then have two functions  
– they play the tonic of the chord, and also change the  
notes of the rest of the bass buttons and tines to adhere to  
the new chord.  In this way, any bass line that begins with  
the tonic will be extremely easy to play; you just pres the  
thumb button pertaining to the chord you want, and the rest 
of the bass buttons and the tines transpose themselves.  
Bass  control  mode  would  be  helpful  for  vocal  
accompaniment or rhythmic support; playing non-chordal  
melodies,  however,  would  be  difficult  in  bass  control  
mode, since you can only play notes that are in the current  
chord.  For more melodic play you could then use what we  
Figure 5:
Frequency Response of Piezo Tine Pluck (top)
 vs Damped Guitar E String (bottom)
 Figure 6:  Innards with Arduino and Rotary Pot (left)
Tines, FSR and Mode Button (right)
100
call slide control mode, where the notes of the tines change  
as you rotate the two sides in relation to each other, as  
though you were moving your hand up across the various  
strings of a harp. This mode is substantially harder to play  
than bass control mode, and we are still working on ways  
to make it more intuitive.  
5. Website
   We have created a website with information, pictures and 
video of the Kalichord at:
http://www.dannymo.com/kalichord
6. Results
6.1 Realism and Expressiveness of the Tine-Strings
We  plan  to  perform  rigorous  user  testing  of  the  
Kalichord, but so far, informal test results have been very  
encouraging.    A number  of  guitarists  have  played  the  
Kalichord  and  reported  that  the  tine  plucking  felt  very 
similar  to   plucking  real  strings.   In  addition  to  tactile  
similarities between a tine and a string (they both provide  
force that varies linearly with displacement [14]), this may  
also  be  due  to  the  range  of  timbres  available  when  
plucking  the  tines.   By  subtly  changing  some  of  the  
characteristics  of  the  pluck  such  as  the  position  of  the 
finger on the tine, the amount of fingernail used, or the  
speed of release, the player is able to excite a large variety  
of frequencies.  Figure 7 shows the frequency profile of  
two separate plucks from the same tine (just the pluck, no  
string  response),  and  you  can  clearly  see  how different 
they are, especially in the 200hz-1khz range.  After playing 
for a minute or two, one musician reported that he had  
learned the characteristics of the tine response and adjusted 
his  playing  accordingly.   This  adjustment  may  also 
contribute to the perceived realism of the tine strings.
7. Conclusion/Future Work
Our work on the Kalichord is by no means finished.  We 
have shown that using tines as an excitation signal for a  
string  model  gives  us  a  high  level  of  realism  and  
expressiveness. Additionally, we have demonstrated a way 
of  exploiting  the  tine-string  form  factor  to  devise  new 
ways of playing plucked string instruments.  We plan to  
continue  experimenting  with  different  note  and  effect  
mappings as well as  with with more advanced physical  
models in order to  increase realism. We hope that  our  
techniques will help others create even more interesting  
and expressive musical interfaces.
References
[1] http://cnmat.berkeley.edu/user/adrian_freed/blog/2008/03/12  
/electronic_kalimba
[2] http://www.thummer.com/  
[3] http://www.starrlabs.com/  
[4] http://www.yamaha.com  
[5] “Wave  of  the  Future,  Korg  Wavedrum”,  from Sound  on  
Sound,review,http://www.soundonsound.com/sos/1994_artic
les/nov94/korgwavedrum.html, 1994
[6] Edgar  Berdahl  &  Julius  O.  Smith,  “A Tangible  Virtual  
Vibrating String” in Proc. of the Conf. on New Instruments  
for Musical Expression (NIME), 2008
[7] Julius  O.  Smith.  Physical  Audio  Signal  Processing  For 
Virtual  Musical  Instruments  And  Digital  Audio  Effects , 
http://ccrma.stanford.edu/~jos/pasp, 2007
[8] Nelson Lee, Zhiyao Duan, Julius O. Smith III. “Excitation  
Extraction  for  Guitar  Tone”  In  Proceedings  of  the  
International  Computer  Music  Conference  (ICMC-07),  
Copenhagen, Denmark, August 27-31, 2007
[9]  V . Lombardo & G. Cuzzucoli.” A physical model of the  
classical guitar, including the player's touch”, in  Computer 
Music Journal, (1999) 23(2):52 
[10] Fredrik Eckerholm, Gianpaolo Evangelista “The Plucksynth  
Touch String “, DAFx-08, Espoo, Finland, Sept. 1-4, 2008
[11] MSI  Piezo  Film  Sensors  Technical  Manual  
http://www.imagesco.com/sensors/piezofilm.pdf Jan. 2009
[12] http://www.cycling74.com  
[13] http://www.arduino.cc  
[14] Rossing,  T.  &  Fletcher,  N.  Principles  of  Vibration  And 
Sound, Springer Verlag, New York, Inc. 2004,1995
Figure 7: 
Frequency Response Of Two Differing Tine Plucks.
101