Osiris: a liquid based digital musical instrument 
Desarrollos tecnológicos digitales aplicados al arte 
Escuela Universitaria de Artes 
 
ABSTRACT 
This article describes the process of creation of a new digital musical 
instrument: Osiris. This device is based on the cir culation 
detection of liquids for the generation of musical notes. Besides the 
system of liquid distribution, a module that generates MIDI events 
was designed and built based on the Arduino platform; such module 
is employed together with a Proteus 2000 sound generator 
programming of the control module as well as the choice of sound 
generating module had as their main objective 
should provide an ample variety of sound and musical possibilities, 
controllable in real time. 
 
Author Keywords  
NIME, Digital Musical Instrument, Liquid based sound generation 
 
ACM Classification 
H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation] User Interfaces 
User-centered design; H.5.5 [Information Interfaces and 
Presentation] Sound and Music Computing. 
 
1.  INTRODUCTION 
The proposal of this work consists in the design and construction of a 
digital musical instrument: Osiris. This instrument proposes the 
generation of sound based on the circulation of water. There are 
various instruments in existence which have a functioni 
based on liquids, the majority of these being acoustic instruments 
This paper proposes a device that is based on the flow of electric 
current through a liquid medium for the generation of sound and 
music. 
The first experiences involved the u 
se of analogue oscillators, which 
soon proved to limit the potential of the device. Consequently a new 
digital version was designed afterwards, building a control module 
and introducing a more versatile sound generator. 
2. INITIAL EXPERIENCES 
The process of creation and construction of the first 
prototype had as premises the use of low-cost electronic technology 
and to explore the aesthetic possibilities of simple electronic devices. 
The project started with the construction of several 
                                                                 
1 Steve Mann has created several instruments which ba se the 
generation of sound on alternative principles to those of classical 
acoustic instruments. Among them, the Hydraulophone and the 
Poseidophone are both based on water [1] . Other instruments of 
interest are the Aquaphones developed by Jacques Dudon 
the Waterphone by Richard Waters [3]. All of them are acoustic 
instruments with the exception of the Poseidophone, 
electroacoustic and can also be used as a MIDI controller 
 
 
 
 
 
Osiris: a liquid based digital musical instrument 
 
Martín Matus Lerner 
Desarrollos tecnológicos digitales aplicados al arte  
Escuela Universitaria de Artes - Universidad Nacional de Quilmes 
Buenos Aires, Argentina 
mmatus@unq.edu.ar 
 
 
This article describes the process of creation of a new digital musical 
instrument: Osiris. This device is based on the cir culation  and 
of liquids for the generation of musical notes. Besides the 
system of liquid distribution, a module that generates MIDI events 
was designed and built based on the Arduino platform; such module 
sound generator . The 
programming of the control module as well as the choice of sound -
objective  that the instrument 
should provide an ample variety of sound and musical possibilities, 
based sound generation  
H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation] User Interfaces --- 
H.5.5 [Information Interfaces and 
The proposal of this work consists in the design and construction of a 
This instrument proposes the 
generation of sound based on the circulation of water. There are 
various instruments in existence which have a functioni ng principle 
based on liquids, the majority of these being acoustic instruments 1. 
This paper proposes a device that is based on the flow of electric 
current through a liquid medium for the generation of sound and 
se of analogue oscillators, which 
soon proved to limit the potential of the device. Consequently a new 
digital version was designed afterwards, building a control module 
and introducing a more versatile sound generator.   
of creation and construction of the first  analogue 
cost electronic technology 
of simple electronic devices. 
several  low-tech audio 
Steve Mann has created several instruments which ba se the 
generation of sound on alternative principles to those of classical 
the Hydraulophone and the 
. Other instruments of 
interest are the Aquaphones developed by Jacques Dudon  [2], and 
All of them are acoustic 
the Poseidophone, which is 
MIDI controller . 
oscillators. The original aim was to build several of these simple 
oscillators, and to generate interest in terms of sound by means of 
their combination. 
The oscillators were built using the CD40106 
circuit which has  six Schmitt Trigger 
used for the prototype ( thus counting on twelve oscillators 
a fixed scale of pitches by means of presets. 
liquid is produced at the end of the audio output of each oscillator: 
the circui t is opened and two conductors are set a few millimeters 
apart; in con tact with the drop of liquid thi 
current, permitting the audio signal output 
 
Figure 1. Simplified operating scheme of the first 
 
For the distribution of liquids a water pump was employed; when 
activated it distributes the liquid along several hoses. Each of these 
hoses is provided with a dropper which enables to regulate the flow 
rate through it, controlling the drip. When 
closes, corresponding to an oscillator with a specific tuning. The 
speed of the drip determines a type of rhythm and the combination of 
the different drips allows for results 
complexity. 
Even if this first 
version was very instructive during an experimental 
and learning stage, several limitations soon became evident. For this 
reason, a new version of the device was implemented. 
3. A DIGITAL MUSICAL INSTRUMENT 
3.1  General operating scheme 
A new version of the instrument 
microcontroller and a more versatile audio generator 
of this digital version of the instrument 
designed based on the Arduino platform, which sends MIDI control 
                                                                
2 About Schmitt Trigger circuits , see: 
3 About oscillators based on R-C networks, see: [ 
4 Pure or distilled water behaves electrically as an insulator. Water 
acquires good electrical conduction properties when  ionic 
compounds are added, such as certain 
Osiris: a liquid based digital musical instrument  
Universidad Nacional de Quilmes  
 
was to build several of these simple 
oscillators, and to generate interest in terms of sound by means of 
The oscillators were built using the CD40106  CMOS integrated 
six Schmitt Trigger s2. Two integrated circuits were 
thus counting on twelve oscillators 3), tuned to 
by means of presets.  The interaction with the 
liquid is produced at the end of the audio output of each oscillator: 
t is opened and two conductors are set a few millimeters 
tact with the drop of liquid thi s allows the flow of electric 
output 4. 
 
. Simplified operating scheme of the first  device 
For the distribution of liquids a water pump was employed; when 
activated it distributes the liquid along several hoses. Each of these 
hoses is provided with a dropper which enables to regulate the flow 
rate through it, controlling the drip. When a drop falls an audio output 
closes, corresponding to an oscillator with a specific tuning. The 
speed of the drip determines a type of rhythm and the combination of 
the different drips allows for results  of a  medium degree of 
version was very instructive during an experimental 
and learning stage, several limitations soon became evident. For this 
reason, a new version of the device was implemented.  
DIGITAL MUSICAL INSTRUMENT  
General operating scheme  
instrument  was designed introducing a 
more versatile audio generator . For the creation 
of this digital version of the instrument , a control module was 
designed based on the Arduino platform, which sends MIDI control 
                         
, see:  [4].  
C networks, see: [ 5] and [6]. 
Pure or distilled water behaves electrically as an insulator. Water 
acquires good electrical conduction properties when  ionic 
certain  minerals. 
52
events to a sound-generating module. According to the classification 
proposed by Miranda and Wanderley, Osiris possesses an alternate 
controller, since it is “not directly modelled on or necessarily inspired 
by existing acoustic instruments” [7]. 
 
 
Figure 2. Osiris: general operating scheme 
 
Figure 2 schematizes in terms of modules the several stages that 
conform the instrument: 
1) The water pump (activated by the control module) feeds a series of 
hoses that make water circulate. 
2) Drops resulting from the various hoses spill 
 onto a series of 
electrical contacts which work as switches activated by the flow of 
water. 
3) The control module generates MIDI events on the basis of the 
detection of water. The events generated have param eters 
configurable by the user in real time. 
4) The sound-generating module produces audio based on the MIDI 
data received. 
 
 
Figure 3. Liquid distribution system 
 
3.2  Liquid distribution system 
Various water pumps can be activated in an independent manner by 
means of Arduino-controlled relays. The pump feeds an independent 
system of liquid distribution: from each pump a ser ies of hoses 
branch out, provided with droppers to control the flow of water. The 
drops resulting from the various hoses spill onto a series of electrical 
contacts. These contacts are connected to Arduino digital inputs, 
working as switches which detect when water closes the circuit.  
The design of the liquid distribution system was carried out taking 
into account sculptural aspects. In this way, the p laying of the 
instrument presents interesting visual patterns due to the process of 
circulation of the liquids, corresponding to the ac tivation and 
deactivation of the various pumps. 
Using an interface of simple operation such as droppers are, it is 
possible to control music parameters in a direct way. The timing of 
the drip will determine the rhythm of the sound generated. Another 
possibility for the playing of the instrument is to interact with the 
liquid in a direct form by distributing it on the contacts by hand. In 
this way it is possible to obtain results of irregular rhythms. However, 
when operating in this manner, it is more difficult to control the 
results, being the behaviour of the liquid more unpredictable and 
aleatory. 
 
 
Figure 4. Detail of drops spilling on the contacts 
 
Audio example 1 shows the sound resulting from a co ntact 
controlling a note 
5. By modifying the speed of the drip the tempo 
may be varied. Audio example 2 offers the polyrhythmic result of 
two overlapped contacts with different tempos. 
3.3  Control module 
The system for the generation of control events was designed based 
on an Arduino board (model Mega 2560). A rack was assembled, 
containing the board, as well as the relay modules, the input and 
output connections, and a user’s interface for parameter control in 
real time. 
Each electrical contact is connected to an Arduino digital input. 
When the flow of water closes a given contact, it allows electrical 
conduction and a change of state is produced. Based on the detection 
of the various inputs, MIDI control events are trig gered which 
provide a variety of options, aiming for the instrument to offer ample 
musical versatility. 
Besides the options to control the drops by means of the droppers, 
several musical parameters are configurable employing the user’s 
interface. The control interface has two potentiometers, two rotary 
encoders and two push-buttons (incorporated into the encoders). An 
LCD display provides visual feedback: accessing a main menu and 
submenus, it is possible to attain a series of control alternatives in real 
time. 
When a contact closure is detected, a Note On MIDI message is sent 
to the output; the parameters of this output are configurable by the 
player. The configuration options of the MIDI messages generated 
were established with the aim of obtaining richness and variety in the 
musical results. At the present stage of development, the module 
provides independent control of the following parameters: pump 
activation, pitch structures, octave range and intensity. 
 
 
Figure 5. Internal detail of the control module 
 
                                                                
 
5 Examples are available on the links on section 8. 
53
By default, when a pump is activated it controls a note with a fixed 
intensity and range. By modifying the parameters in real time it is 
possible to adjust the values within which the messages will be sent.  
The messages will be generated with an adjustable d egree of 
randomness within a determined range. These options allow for a 
“macro” type of control. It is also possible to work at a “micro” level 
(the level of the sound materials themselves), from the parameters of 
the audio generator, as well as by adding effects or processes 6. 
3.4  Sound generator 
One of the main aims in the design of this instrume nt was its 
autonomy (to be able to function without the need o f an extra 
computer). For this reason, the E-MU sound module Proteus 2000 7 
was chosen for the generation of audio. This module was acquired 
second hand, due to its being an “antique” compared to the present 
state of development of commercial modules available in the market 
(synthesizers and samplers). The use of this module set a series of 
limitations that fed the creative process decisively, by means of the 
exploration of its possibilities and constraints. This does not exclude 
the chance to expand these possibilities, articulating or replacing 
them by other software-based sound generators, as future stages of 
development of the instrument. 
Another key aspect in the design of Osiris consisted in defining a 
sound palette wide enough to provide timbral variety. This specific 
sound palette was determined based on the functioning of the control 
module and the detection of the gestures sensed by the interface of 
liquids. To this end, a study was carried out regarding the patches 
available on the synthesizer (such study is still in process since the 
module contains more than 1000 factory patches), choosing the ones 
that proved to work better in relation to the events generated by the 
drops and the resulting sound structures. These pat ches were 
classified according to their timbral qualities and chosen as a starting 
point for the musical exploration with the instrument.  
In other words, the construction and programming of the control 
module was done taking into account the options provided by the 
sound generator, developing in this way what Jordà defines as 
“parallel design” 
8. 
3.5  Objectives  achieved  with  the new design 
The creation of this new version widens the musical options of the 
instrument, thanks to the design and construction o f a 
microcontroller-based control module and the incorporation of a 
Proteus 2000 sound generating module. 
Amongst the main objectives accomplished by this new digital 
version are the following: 
• The definition of pitch structures, octave range and intensity by 
means of a real-time controllable user’s interface. 
•  An ample sound and timbral palette, thanks to the use of MIDI and 
an external sound generating module. 
• The possibility of adding variable degrees of randomness for the 
control of parameters, as well as availability to widen the musical 
alternatives according to new specific objectives by modifying the 
microcontroller programming. 
• Higher levels of polyphony (limited only by the characteristics of 
the sound generator). 
                                                                
 
6 About micro and macro levels of control, see [5]. 
7 This module was built and commercialized by E-MU in 1999. The 
audio generation is based on samples recorded on its internal ROM 
memory, with the option to expand sounds by means of additional 
memories. This type of modules are also known as “Romplers”. 
8 Jordà asserts that “it becomes hard – or even impossible – to design 
highly sophisticated control interfaces without a profound prior 
knowledge of how the sound or music generators will work (…) a 
parallel design between controllers and generators is needed with 
both design processes treated as a whole” [8]. 
•  Options to control a larger amount of pumps, allowing to expand 
polyphony and sound events density. 
 
 
Figure 6. Control module and sound generator  
4 . MUSICAL POSSIBILITIES 
The engine of generation of control events in Osiris is relatively 
simple. High interest musical options are determined by the control 
of the parameters of such events, and by the process of addition of 
several of these simple events, thus obtaining a resultant of higher 
richness and complexity. 
 
Table 1. Real-time parameters of the control module 
Option  Parameter 1  Parameter 2 Example 
Pump 
activation On / Off - Audio example 3 
Pitches Key note Intervals, 
chords, scales. 
Video examples 1-2 
Audio example 4 
Octave 
range 
Minimum value 
(1 to 9) 
Maximum 
value (1 to 9) Audio example 5 
Intensity Minimum value 
(0 to 127) 
Maximum 
value (0 to 127) Audio example 6 
 
The playing of Osiris allows for the use of various  contacts 
simultaneously and the control of several timbre la yers in an 
independent manner. It is possible to obtain higher complexity by 
means of the overlapping of various contacts, which  allows for 
polyphony, polyrhythms, multi-timbrality, harmonic overlays, 
amongst other possibilities. 
The configuration of the different musical parameters analyzed may 
be carried out independently in three layers. Each of these layers is 
assigned to a series of specific contacts, and sends information by an 
individual MIDI channel. In this way, different patches of the Proteus 
module can be used simultaneously. Video example 3 shows the 
functioning of Osiris as it is being played. At a musical level, we can 
listen to a structure that employs several timbres. Audio example 7 
shows a fragment of the audio corresponding to the video example, 
and following, each of the layers individually. 
 
Audio example 8 is another multi-timbral example, which uses two 
simultaneous layers in a low range. The overlapping of these layers 
with contrasting drip speeds provides a complex rhythmic resultant. 
Finally, another option is the addition of processors and audio effects 
at the sound generator output (considering this electronic instrument 
to be “autonomous and open-ended” according to Tana ka’s 
definition [9]). Audio example 9 and 10 show the re sultant of 
different layers of timbres processed in real-time with effects such as 
distortion, filters, delay and reverb. 
 
54
 
Figure 7. Operating the instrument 
 
5 . CONCLUSIONS 
The design and construction of Osiris involved, bes ides the 
electronic design and the programming of the contro l module, 
working with the most diverse materials: acrylics, copper, steel, 
water pumps and hoses, amongst others. Also, the us e of 
“antique” technologies such as the Proteus 2000 mod ule and 
the MIDI protocol. In retrospective, I can assert t hat this was 
due not only to practical or cost-related matters, but also to 
process and aesthetic motivations. In this sense, I  consider that 
this kind of restrictions enabled the development o f original 
strategies that nurtured in a decisive way the creative process of 
the instrument. 
The fundamental premise that guided this process was to build 
a device that allows a broad range of sound and mus ical 
possibilities, regardless of the degree of technolo gical 
complexity. In general terms, the degree of develop ment 
achieved involves a simple sensing system derived f rom the 
first analogue experiences carried out, and affects  the rhythm 
and the global density of events; and other sound a nd musical 
parameters are determined by the mapping strategies employed. 
A relevant consequence of the process of creation o f Osiris was 
the chance to reflect upon the complex dialectic th at is 
established between the technological development a nd the 
musical praxis, in the field of the creation and in terpretation of 
a new electronic musical instrument. Michel Waisvisz explains: 
About my own experiences with gestural controllers I can only say 
that I fight with them most of the time. That’s something that almost 
every instrumentalist will tell. But if you are in the position to be able 
to design and build your own instruments, and so many interesting 
technologies pop up almost weekly, you are tempted to 
change/improve your instrument all the time. This adds another 
conflict: you never get to master your instrument p erfectly even 
though the instrument gets better (?) all the time. The only solution 
that worked for me is to freeze tech development for a period of 
sometimes nearly two years, and than [sic] exclusively compose, 
perform and explore/exploit its limits. [10] 
The next priority steps in the work with Osiris will be in relation to 
the exploration and practice in the area of perform ance and the 
development of specific interpretation techniques. Secondly, the 
evaluation and implementation of technical improvements of the 
instrument, from the constructive point of view as well as the 
programming, introducing new levels of sensing, control and sound 
generation, amongst other aspects. 
6 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I would like to thank Lila Mitchelstein for the tra nslation of this 
paper, Bárbara Bilbao and Camila Matus for their comments on the 
original text. Also, Claudia Araya López and Leandro Sánchez Cozzi 
for their assistance on the visual documentation. 
Special thanks to Andrés Rodríguez for his guidance in this research. 
This work was developed with the support of the “Fondo Argentino 
de Desarrollo Cultural” (Ministerio de Cultura). 
7 . REFERENCES 
[1]  S. Mann. Natural Interfaces for Musical Expression:  
Physiphones and a physics-based organology. In  Proceedings 
of the 2007 International Conference on New Interfaces  
for Musical Expression  (NIME´07), pages 118-123, New 
York University, New York, USA, 2007. 
[2]  T. Nunn. Jacques Dudon´s Music of Water and Light. 
Experimental Musical Instruments . Vol. 3, No. 5. Nicasio, 
California, 1988. 
[3]  B. Hopkin. The Waterphone. Experimental Musical 
Instruments , Vol. 2, No. 3. Nicasio, California, 1986. 
[4]  A. Malvino. Electronic Principles . Glencoe / McGraw-Hill, 
New York, 1998. 
[5]  P. Scherz and S. Monk. Practical electronics for 
inventors . McGraw -Hill, New York, 2013.
 
[6]  N. Collins . Handmade Electronic Music: The Art of Hardware 
Hacking. Routledge, New York, 2006. 
[7]  E. R. Miranda and M. M. Wanderley . New Digital Musical 
Instruments: Control and Interaction Beyond the 
Keyboard , volume 21 of  The computer music and digital 
audio series . A-R Editions, Middleton, Wisconsin, 2006. 
[8]  S. Jordà. Digital lutherie: Crafting musical compute rs for 
new musics performance and improvisation. PhD Thesis , 
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Departament de Tecnologia , 
2005. 
[9]  A. Tanaka. Mapping Out Instruments, Affordances, an d 
Mobiles. In Proceedings of the 2010 International 
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression  
(NIME´10), pages 88-93, University of Technology, 
Sidney, Australia, 2010. 
[10]  M. Battier, M. Wanderley and J. Rovan. Round Table:  
Electronic Controllers in Music Performance and Composition. 
Trends in gestural control of music , IRCAM, Paris, 2000.
 
 
8 . Links 
Video Examples: 
https://matus-lerner.blogspot.com.ar/2017/01/osiris-video-
examples1.html  
 
Audio Examples: 
https://matus-lerner.blogspot.com.ar/2017/01/osiris-audio-
examples.html  
 
 
 
55