Examining the Perception of Liveness and Activity in 
Laptop Music: Listeners’ Inference about What the 
Performer is Doing from the Audio Alone 
 
 
Oliver Bown 
Design Lab,  
The University of Sydney, 
 NSW 2006, Australia  
oliver.bown@sydney.edu.au 
 
Renick Bell  
Tama Art University, 
Tokyo, Japan 
renick@gmail.com
 
Adam Parkinson 
EAVI Group,  
Goldsmiths, University of London, 
 New Cross, London  
a.d.parkinson@gmail.com 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Audiences of live laptop music have been known to  express 
dismay at the  opacity o f performer activity and question how 
“live” such performances actually are. Yet motionless laptop 
performers endure as a musical spectacle from clubs to concert 
halls, suggesting that for many this is a non -issue. 
Understanding these perceptions might hel p performers better 
achieve their intentions, inform interface design within the 
NIME field and help our understanding of what  ‘liveness’ 
means in the context of new performance practices. To this end, 
a study of listeners’ perceptio n of liveness and performer 
control in laptop performance was carried out, in which 
listeners were presented with several short audio -only excerpts 
of laptop performances and answered questions about their 
perception of the performance: what they thought w as 
happening and its sense of liveness. The study  suggests that 
listeners naturally  associate liveness with perceived performer 
activity (such as improvisation and the audibility of gestures ). 
Listeners were also shown to be able to recognise generative 
music processes, 
 
Keywords 
laptop performance, liveness 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Live laptop performance appears to be subject to an inherent 
philosophical anxiety, stemming from its historical status as 
deriving from, but being fundamentally different to, live 
instrumental performance: the performer commands control 
over a powerful, layered, mesh of sound, but as far as the 
observer is concerned, they might as well be checking their 
email. Whilst the recent proliferation of digital musical 
interfaces has see n a resurgence of gestural performances with 
digital instruments, many performers choose not to work 
gesturally, having carved their niche in the meta -control of 
machine-produced elements  using standard computer 
interfaces: clicking buttons, entering text,  dragging-and-
dropping and so on. Embracing this approach, in the words of 
Stuart, they “sit behind their screens with little or no 
perceivable movement, lost in thought as they manipulate files 
and patches” [14]. This is presented by some as a problem,  and 
work within the NIME community often attempts to bring to 
the field a more traditional sense of performance and, 
specifically, tangible gesture [10,15]. 
Such issues are exemplified through many instances in popular 
music. The electronic duo Autechre are intensely active in their 
performances, but choose to conceal themselves in darkness; 
fellow electronica pioneer Aphex Twin performs DJ sets of his 
own music, but draws from a collection of custom unreleased 
tracks, sometimes  hot off the press ; the duo The Books  play 
guitar and cello over backing tracks of their studio -produced 
work, accepting that they could not perform the intricate 
electronic parts of the compositions live.  
Cascone [ 5] contextualises th e perceived problems of laptop 
performances with in the concert hall tradition , the political 
economy of pop and the expectation of ‘spectacle’ . Sitting 
uncomfortably in this context, he proposes that laptop 
musicians need to move away from spectacle and fi nd their 
own way to establish ‘aura’. It could be argued, from thes e and 
other examples, that audiences have simply adapted to the 
nature of liveness in electronic music. Audiences may perceive 
the sonic activity itself as a type of performance, to be 
exploited by experimental artists, as suggested by Stuart in his 
notion of aural performativity [14]. They may simply not 
conceive of energetically performing persons as part of the 
experience of live music, a view advocated by artists such as 
Francisco Lopez [ 11], who claims that the notion of the 
performing artist is a hangover from past traditions. Yet despite 
this, audiences appear to value the presence of the artist, ‘live’; 
as Prior says, “‘aura’, far from disappearing, is alive and well in 
attitudes to the immediacy and presence of the live performer” 
[13]. 
In our view much contemporary electronic music practice does 
involve a performer meaningfully controlling the music, often 
not in a gest ural, instrumental manner, yet  otherwise true to a 
notion of “musical  performance”. The performer’s control may 
be of more or less interest  to different members of the audience. 
Regardless, concerning  perception of what is happening, laptop 
performance is not as utterly opaque as some have implied 
from the visual opacity of the performer’s actions . Information 
about performance control can also be found in the  audio itself. 
An u nderstanding of what performers do is growing among  
listeners of emerging electr onic subgenres, even when 
performer actions are visually obscured. Performers in some 
genres seem to  purposefully foreground this liveness in the 
audio itself. 
We believe that instead of acknowledging these  subtleties, 
liveness in laptop performance is too easily cast in extremes:  
the standard of instrumental performa nce versus the 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on 
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME’14, June 30 – July 03, 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
13
performative shortcomings of the opaque laptopper . The reality 
requires more study , along the lines of [ 6]. In this paper  we 
explore the idea that a person listening to an audio recording of 
a laptop performance can make statements about liveness and 
other qualities in the performance , and describe what they think 
the performer might be doing. We do not claim that listeners 
can necessarily infer the  right answers  (though they may do) , 
but that their perceptions can be revealing , and probably 
ultimately influence how performers conceive of their 
performances. We expect that  listeners frequently make 
informed guesses about performance activity  and in doing so 
manage to experience laptop performanc e not so  differently 
from other musical performances.  The use of generative 
elements and increasing audience awareness of such  methods 
further complicates considerations of liveness. While there has 
been much discussion of where to attribute authorship when 
generative elements are used, there has been little discussion of 
how their use impacts perceptions of liveness. 
We have conducted a survey and used the responses to examine 
both listeners’ conceptualisations of liveness and their 
perception of  performer action, instrumentation, and 
generativity. We present our  findings and use them to develop a 
more detailed understanding of  liveness and the perception of 
performance in laptop music.   
2. Concepts and Definitions 
While aware of the analysis of liveness in [1,2,7,8] and others,  
we were interested in leaving the defin ition of ‘liveness’ 
relatively open within the survey. We were not only interested 
in how participants qualified liveness, but also in what was 
perceived as not -live: whether this was looping, backing tracks, 
generative processes, or things sounding sequen ced. 
Performance and performativity have varied meanings. In a 
common contemporary usage [3], notions of performativity can 
be applied to even the most everyday behaviour. From this 
viewpoint the artists we discuss are undoubtedly performing. 
Even if doing  nothing or even faking, the essence of their 
performance lies in the fact that they stand on stage, in control, 
and with all eyes on them, and thus avail themselves to an 
analysis of performativity. In some forms of dance and street 
performance, after all, motionlessness is itself clearly 
performative. Such a perspective therefore relieves us of the 
problem of explaining performance in terms of physical action. 
By contrast, from a traditional understanding of instrumental 
musicianship, we can define performance as what the performer 
on stage is doing to control the music being heard. We can also 
include the notion that a computer (or other non -human entity) 
can be a performer too by taking part in musical decision -
making, and that some of the things that co ntribute to the 
experience of a musical performance happen prior to the 
concert (e.g., the preparation of material or of performance 
conditions, as in prepared instruments).  
We define generativity as any process whereby what happens 
next is not determined directly by the performer, but indirectly 
by algorithmic processes set up by the performer. This includes 
full compositional decision -making systems such as the 
improvising agents of Pachet [12], or simple uses of 
randomness to reconfigure melodic patterns . Whilst this 
definition allows for some very trivial cases, including sample -
and-hold LFOs, we assert simply that ‘more generative’ 
systems would be identified with being ‘more sophisticated’, as 
perceived by listeners. 
We define improvisation as any deci sion-making that is made 
during the performance rather than in advance.  
While we did not offer definitions of liveness, performance or 
improvisation to those taking our survey, as we wanted to 
understand how these terms would be interpreted, we did 
provide a definition of the less common term ‘generativity’: 
“computer processes such as randomness for making melody or 
beat patterns”. 
3. Study 
3.1 Related Work 
Others have done studies of listening and perception, but there 
remains an absence of empirical data on perceptions of laptop 
performance. Gurevich and Fyans [9] undertook a related study 
in which they showed subjects videos of performances using 
gestural ‘DMIs’ (Digital Musical Instruments). Taking an 
‘ecological’ approach in which performances are seen as 
occurring within networks of relations, they considered the 
effects of new technologies on creating new musical ecologies 
and performance prac tices. They note that interacting with a 
digital system through moving a slider requires fundamentally 
different skills – often intellectual, as oppose to perceptual -
motor – than interacting with a drum through striking it. 
However, they are interested in how skill is perceived  
predominantly through visual clues , and we would like to bring 
a similar focus to the purely aural . In addition, while their study 
involves electronic instruments , it does not examine the laptop 
itself as an instrument. 
Bergsland and Tone [ 4] presented a vocal performance to two 
groups of students, one of which was blindfolded. Whilst the 
seeing group focused more on the performer's actions and 
technologies used in the performance, there were only minor 
differences in describing the amount of skill and control in the 
performance. Whilst one could conceive of the visual 
dimension as adding to an audience’s understanding of the 
performance, it was also shown to be a distraction, as the 
audience tried to figure out what was happening, rather than 
listening to the music.  
Against this background, there is a place for additional studies 
of user perceptions of live laptop music , with a f ocus on 
listening. 
 
 
3.2 Aims 
Through this survey, we set out to examine:  
- Conceptualisations of liveness : what perceived aspects 
feature in listeners’ formation of what is live, such as whether 
the performer is directly manipulating sound through gesture, 
whether the performer is highly active (regardless of how 
they are controlling the sound), whether the music is non -
repetitive, contains  preconceived elements, and inferences 
made from indirect factors such as genre.  
- Listeners’ identification of specific performer action s and 
instrumentation, including the perception of generativity  and 
gestures such as ‘moving a fader’ or ‘hitting a button’. 
We approach this use of survey methods with an awareness of 
the danger of over-interpreting the results . Amongst many 
reasons for this  two prominent points to note are: (1) our 
survey was directed  towards respondents who would have 
some degree of familiarity with electronic music and 
contemporary electronic music culture , through the choice of 
mailing lists that it was promoted on. We did not go to great 
pains to classify respondents in this first instance. In the future 
results could be better distinguished based on background; (2)  
the survey explicitly requires  participants to make guesses  with 
no benefit of certainty. Thus all answers are inherently  
speculative. Some answers might not be confidently  asserted, 
while some might be very co nfident assertions based on a  
thorough understanding of the processes, performer and tools 
involved.  
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
14
 
 
4. Method 
We gathered eight recordings of recent live laptop 
performances from eight different artists (five solo artists and 
three duos) and selected  two minute excerpts  from each. The 
performances were made in live public concert s, not for the 
purpose of this study. The rationale for our choice of artists was 
that they performed with laptops, and we were in prior contact 
with them and thus able to obtain information from them about 
what they were doing, along with the audio. Beyond this 
requirement, we simply set out to gather a diversity of laptop 
performance styles, without any preconceptions about what 
styles might provoke what responses. We presented these in an 
online survey and asked survey participants to listen to three 
pieces and answer a number of questions. Pieces were 
presented anonymously and in a random order.  
Participants were recruited through an email call -out, targeted 
mainly at communities of electronic music practice . 
Participants were invited to respond to three pieces, but were 
able to carry on to respond to all pieces if they wished. 
Participants were asked an open- ended question about what 
they thought th e performer or performers were doing to control 
the music, including what type of interfaces they might be 
using. Participants were not told anything about 
instrumentation or number of performers, except that the study 
was of live laptop music performance.  They were asked to be 
as specific as possible, referring to specific sounds and time -
stamps in the recording. They were then asked a number of 
Likert-scale questions relating to (i) perceived familiarity of the 
piece/performer, (ii) the perceived degree o f improvisation, (iii) 
the perceived degree of liveness, (iv) the perception of 
mistakes, (v) how preconceived the material sounded, (vi) the 
perceived use of backing tracks, (vii) the perceived level of 
activity of the performer(s), (viii) the perceived u se of 
generative elements, (ix) the perceived use of user interfaces 
besides the laptop, and (x) the level of enjoyment. Participants 
were also asked their age and gender, whether they made 
electronic music, whether they played an instrument, how often 
they went to performances of electronic music, and their level 
of knowledge of electronic music software.  
A repository containing the original survey questions, 
descriptions of the tracks and their performers’ activities, and 
the original (numerical only) sur vey results is available to 
accompany this paper. 1 A very brief overview of the tracks is 
given in Table 1, but readers should refer to the more detailed 
descriptions given in the online documents to get a better idea 
of the material. Links to the excerpts  are included there. 
5. Results 
We had 146 responses to our survey, resulting in a response 
rate per excerpt of between 24 and 33 (owing to the random 
allocation of excerpts). The age of participants ranged from 18 
to 69. The majority of respondents both crea ted electronic 
music and played an instrument (74%), and went to electronic 
music concerts sometimes (40%) or often (38%). Although 
29% described themselves as experts and only 3% described 
themselves as knowing nothing at all, the distribution of self-
evaluation of expertise was widely spread between these two 
extremes (3% ‘know nothing’, 11% ‘rough idea’, 20% ‘some 
experience’, 18% ‘pretty experienced’, 19% ‘know a lot’, 29% 
‘expert’). Text responses indicated that a number of participants 
objected to the idea of having to guess something that was 
impossible to know, whilst others gave only statements of 
                                                                    
1 https://www.dropbox.com/sh/x1l8ocivyurfp7r/0AZUqOqCO3  
preference or offhand comments. However, in general  
respondents made reasonable attempts to listen and make 
guesses about what the performers were doing. Variation in 
numerical results was relatively high and given the small 
sample sizes responses were not analysed for significance.  
5.1 Liveness 
We first look at perceptions of liveness, considered in terms of 
the text-based responses and the relevant questions  (ii-vii).  
The responses to the question of perceived liveness themselves 
show a slight overall tendency towards viewing excerpts as 
live, with track 5, followed by 2, 6 and 8 m ost commonly 
perceived as live and track 7 in particular viewed as non -live. 
The perception of track 5 as live confirms a traditional 
instrumental sense of liveness, in which triggering via drum 
pads was correctly perceived and is  the obvious reason for 
participants associating the track with liveness . Track 2 has a 
similar triggered feel, supporting this view. Tracks 6 and 8 do 
not involve drum pad triggering , and the basis for the 
perception of liveness here is less clear . 
 Tracks 2, 5 and 8 were also the most commonly regarded as 
improvised and track 8, although not live triggered, has a 
chaotic, erratic  structure, which seems the most likely 
explanation for  the perception of liveness. Interestingly, 
though, reports of performer activity were more ambivalent, 
suggesting that conceptualisations of liveness do not require 
intense activity.  
The reporting of track 6 as live is harder to interpret, but was 
also weaker overall. Participants describe hearing the performer 
‘manually tweaking’ or hearing a ‘little tweaking’ (‘tweaking’ 
being a recurrent term used throughout the descriptions)  and 
that the performer ‘ma nipulated pre -structured elements’ , 
implying that the per former used pre-composed material and 
the liveness  consisted of  small but audible  adjustments to 
parameters within pre-determined structures. 
These r esults show the expected association between  liveness 
and a sense of improvisation. Tracks perceived as being live 
tended to be perceived as improvised  but with exceptions that 
may be of interest . For example track 7 was deemed the least 
ID Description M G 
1 Techno, Ableton, FX tweaks, fades.  Y N 
2 Avant garde, MaxMSP, sample triggering 
and FX tweaking.  
N N 
3 Entirely live -coded Extem pore, 
statistically generated melodies and drums. 
Y Y 
4 Entirely live -coded custom rhythmic 
language, mostly percussive . 
Y Y 
5 Live coded system, live triggered events. 
Meta-control and FX control. 
N P 
6 Electronica, duo using Ableton, 
SuperCollider, and a gestural controller. 
Y N 
7 Electronica, drums and simple melodies, 
loop-based with loop triggering and FX 
tweaking. 
Y P 
8 Avant garde breakbeat, duo using semi -
generative elements. Triggering of clips, 
fades, meta-control of statistical generative 
elements. 
P P 
Table 1: Basic summary of tracks,  M = metronomic, G = 
generative, P = partially  
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
15
live, followed by track 1, whereas track 1 was deemed the least 
improvised, followed by  track 7.  
Further studies might not demonstrate a strong correspondance 
between improvisation and liveness, as many performances are 
clearly live yet not improvised . For example, a track that 
sounds more  pre-emptively structured is less likely to be 
perceived as improvised,  but the artist may still be active in 
creating the structure. Alternatively, in the case of , track 1 
which was viewed as neutral in terms of liveness but  very un-
improvised, the performer is engaged with controlling a ‘lead 
voice’. An improvised track, by contrast, may convey a sense 
of disorder and ambiguous  structure, as exhibited by tracks 2, 4, 
5 and 8. Despite being least  live, track 7 was third in terms of 
perception of there being a  backing track. With the exception of 
track 7, ho wever, which may be  anomalous, we also note that 
participants may have been biased against  declaring tracks as 
non-live given that the survey was described as  being about 
‘live’ laptop music. 
Liveness and activity also appeared to be closely related for 
some tracks , supporting the idea that  liveness is perceived as 
the degree of activity of the performer.  Liveness an d the 
perception of mistakes were somewhat related for some tracks . 
Track 5 was associated with a stronger perception of mistakes. 
Track 2 less so. Track 8 was perceived as being reasonably live 
despite not  being perceived as containing mistakes.  As the 
graphs in Figure 1 show, responses were highly varied, with  
most tracks receiving a full spread of opinions. We consider 
some of the variation by looking at text responses and other 
questions for  specific respondents. For the most widely spread 
excerpt, track 1, the  respondent who viewed the track as most 
live showed in their text  response a good awareness of what the 
performer w as actually doing and  considered the performer 
active. However, this respondent also viewed  all of the tracks 
they listened to as sounding live , suggesting they simply 
accepted them as such . Those who rated  the track as non -live 
viewed the music as boring and repetitive and considered the 
performer inactive. 
Text responses gave an indication of other factors that 
influenced perceptions of liveness. Participants often assumed 
something was played live based on timing or quantization. 
Comments show how ‘inaccurate’ timing was seen to be played 
live: “There are some beats that aren't locked/tightly quantised- 
this could be played live on drum triggers, or a wonky loop 
triggered, or again a backing track,” “The background strings 
seems to be played from a keyboard as they are not quantized, 
and they are a bit random”, “it does sound performed because 
of the lack of precision of the timing”.  This reveals a strong 
association between the conceptualisation of live and the idea 
of human instrumental performance.  Of course we are aware of 
the possibility that the performer might be sampling live 
keyboard, in which case seeing the performer play would 
clarify whether this was the case. 
Similarly, tight timing was seen as indicative of non- liveness: 
“The drums are clearly quantized”, “the military bugle seem 
quite precisely timed so I would be impressed if they were cued 
in live.”  
Other examples show the basis on which participants identified 
gestural actions: “the 'skronky' twisting sounds are raw enough 
to be created live by a person using an odd interface (knobs, 
sliders or Wacom -style pen”; “the loud note repeated twice so 
fast suggests that this is a start point being punched in using a 
drum pad or similar ” and even attributing a gesture to 
“experimental physical interface (light sensors or similar).”  
Tracks 2 and 5 were perceived more as being free of a backing 
track. These pieces were non-metronomic and involved a small 
number of in-unison or well-coordinated voices. Tracks 3 and 4 
were also perceived as being free of backing tracks, although 
0%#
10%#
20%#
30%#
40%#
50%#
60%#
70%#
80%#
90%#
100%#
1# 2# 3# 4# 5# 6# 7# 8#
0%#
10%#
20%#
30%#
40%#
50%#
60%#
70%#
80%#
90%#
100%#
1# 2# 3# 4# 5# 6# 7# 8#
0%#
10%#
20%#
30%#
40%#
50%#
60%#
70%#
80%#
90%#
100%#
1# 2# 3# 4# 5# 6# 7# 8#
 
Figure 1: Perceptions of liveness (top), improvisation 
(middle) and activity (bottom)  for each track (brighter 
blue = stronger agreemen t, brighter orange = stronger 
disagreement, light grey = neutral).  
 
0%#
10%#
20%#
30%#
40%#
50%#
60%#
70%#
80%#
90%#
100%#
1# 2# 3# 4# 5# 6# 7# 8#
 
0%#
10%#
20%#
30%#
40%#
50%#
60%#
70%#
80%#
90%#
100%#
1# 2# 3# 4# 5# 6# 7# 8#
 
 Figure 2: Perceptions of preconceivedness  (top) and 
backing track (bottom) .   
 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
16
less strongly. These were the two pure -live-coded 
performances. In the case of track 3 this is surprising because 
there appear to be background elements such as a be at. In the 
case of track 4, the instrumentation is stark so the inference is 
less surprising. It is possible therefore that they involved subtle 
coordination and synchronisation of elements enabled by the 
live coding. The two tracks most associated with ba cking tracks 
(1 and 6 ) were also the least associated with generativity. Thus 
a hypothesis is that regularity and repetition are more indicative 
of backing tracks, despite our expectation that precision and 
complexity might be equally associated with bac king tracks.  
This would be interesting to examine further, for example by 
considering perceptions of  complex studio compositions.  
Tracks 1 and 6 were strongly associated with preconception, 
whereas tracks 2 and 5 were disassociated with it. 
Preconception may be negatively related to generativity but not 
necessarily with liveness (recall track 6 is associated with 
liveness and improvisation). This suggest that preconception is 
associated with fixed composed elements. Thus a 
"preconceived generativ e element" or a "preconceived 
configuration" is a weaker concept.  
5.2 Generativity 
Generativity was accurately identified by a number of 
participants. We found this to be a reasonably surprising result. 
Most surprising is that track 5 is associated with generativity 
despite also being associated with live triggering. Tracks 3, 4 
and 8 were strongly associated with generative elements 
(correctly – i.e., in each track there is some algorithmically 
controlled randomisation of what is happening). Track 2  was 
incorrectly mildly associated with generative elements. The 
only track strongly disassociated with generative elements was 
track 1. We interpret this as meaning that continual micro -
changes in drum and melodic lines that are typical of generative 
music are easily identified as such and distinguished from 
variation that derives from pre -composition. This may either be 
because they have a distinctive 'computer generated' quality, 
given away by traits such as systematic loudness variation and 
rhythmic ran domness, or because the ongoing variation is 
evident and clearly not human-controlled. 
Some text responses confirm which elements are being 
perceived as generative, but do not indicate how these views of 
generativity are formed: “changes in music patterns are changes 
of algorythms,” “ melody and rhythm both sound generated,” 
“the melody seems algorithmically generated”. Respondents 
also made reference to randomness as a computational process: 
“note in tracks are chosen randomly”; “piano in a certain rang e 
of notes randomized in notes speed and level”.  
The perceived generativity in tracks 2 and 5 are harder to 
explain. Generative systems may be meta -controlled (e.g., a 
slider controlling the pitch -range of a randomly modulated 
melody), and thus both live -controlled and generative. This 
may explain the correspondence between generative elements 
and liveness, or it may be that respondents consider generative 
elements to 'have liveness'. This distincti on would make an 
interesting future study.  
The two pure live coded tracks (3 and 4), strongly associated 
with generativity, were also correctly strongly identified as 
being laptop -only. Track 2 was strongly identified as being 
laptop only, possibly corresponding to written responses that 
the performer was clicking and dragging on a waveform or 
timeline to cut up an existing pattern , and also possibly to the 
piece's sparse instrumentation. Track 5 also has spars e 
instrumentation but was clearly identified as using drum pads. 
Some respondents suspected track 2 as using drum pads, but we 
believe there was less evidence of tightly timed rhythmic 
control, thus less evidence from drum pads. 
5.3 Specific Knowledge 
Some participants revealed specific knowledge of software and 
techniques that they thought they could identify in tracks, 
sometimes with strong convictions. Participants would 
associate certain sounds or styles with specific software, for 
instance, the sound of the built -in effects in Ableton Live: 
“Ableton Live loop slicer. I'm willing to bet a few Euros on 
this. The choppyness sounds exactly like that” (in fact the piece 
in question was entirely live -coded); “mostly the piece sounds 
like Ableton’s inbuilt effects”. Sometimes pieces of software 
are associated with the sorts of musical processes they might 
afford, for instance, “something tells me it's a Max patch 
sequencing sounds in a partly predefined fashion.” These 
responses may reveal biases either towards software well 
known to the respondent, or to software that the respondent 
knows is commonly used (both Ableton and Max being the 
most common in their respective areas) , and the ways in which 
they expect it to be used.  
6. Discussion: Auslander and Liveness 
Although these are only indicative results, they show a 
correspondence between perceptions of activity, improvisation, 
and liveness. A natural conclusion from these results then is 
that liveness is being associated first with human action (bodily 
liveness), with triggering being more salient than tweaking 
(possibly because rhythmic action is more noticeable). Liveness 
is then associated with other forms of control (cognitive 
liveness), which include anything indicating ‘live’ decision -
making, the stronger manifestations of which are understood as 
‘improvisation’. We could also imagine a third completely 
imperceptible level of ‘live’ which merely requires the artist to 
be present, and presenting their own creation.  
Our study makes no comment on wha t Stuart refers to as ‘aural 
performativity’ [14] since we have stripped the essential 
contextual elements away. This remains a parallel and 
complementary conceptualisation of live musical experience. 
But we feel it affirms our belief that forms of non -gestural 
control can be heard as live performance, thus broadening the 
idea of liveness as a manifestation of performer control beyond 
the paradigm of instruments being manipulated by traditional 
physical gestures.  
The results can be compared with the treatm ent of liveness in 
the writings of Auslander [1,2], who argues that there is 
nothing essential in the mode of presentation of musical 
material, or the material itself that distinguishes live from non -
live. Thus film and theatrical performance do not natura lly fall 
into categories of non -live and live respectively, but can drift 
across categories according to context. For example, recorded 
film material can be placed into a theatrical context without it 
creating a confusion of liveness. Auslander preferences  a 
cultural-historical interpretation of what it means for something 
to be live, with liveness arising historically as a concept in 
response to the emergence of recorded media, and specifically 
0%#
10%#
20%#
30%#
40%#
50%#
60%#
70%#
80%#
90%#
100%#
1# 2# 3# 4# 5# 6# 7# 8#
Figure 3: Perceptions of generativity.  
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
17
in opposition to the term mediatised. Thus Auslander’s notion 
of liveness is coherent with the view that electronic musicians 
and their audiences have naturally coevolved an understanding 
of liveness that is relevant to their practice, regardless of the 
use of sampled and precomposed material in performances, the 
DJ being the definitive case in point. Auslander adds that “the 
anxiety of critics who champion live performance is 
understandable, given the way our cultural economy privileges 
the mediated and marginalizes the live.” [2] 
In this light, we consider the follo wing four points developed 
by Auslander: 
1. Liveness and mediatization derive their difference from 
historical factors rather than ontological conditions [2 ]. 
Live performance cannot remain “o ntologically pristine” 
[2]. “Mediatized” means “a product of the ma ss medi a or 
media technology”. [2]. 
2. “Live and mediatized performa nces are parallel forms” [1]. 
3. The live gets overwhelmed by  the mediatized [1; 2]. 
4. Liveness exists dually in opposition to the  quality of being 
recorded [2 ], yet doesn’t exist before 20 th century audio -
visual technology, written and oral accounts  are not 
considered as recordings [2]. 
From the observed perceptions of laptop performance, we 
believe a concurrent, more traditional sense of the terms is 
needed: 
1. Liveness can be based on the prior per ception of performer 
activity or decision-making. 
2. Liveness and mediatization can co -occur. Live laptop music 
involves the performance of the mediatized. Mediatization 
may in fact amplify perceptions of liveness.  
From this viewpoint, a udiences call somethin g ‘live’ when they 
feel aware of performer decisions , typically but not always 
manifest in explicit  physical activity in the moment of the 
performance, and this is independent of the media used, 
whereas for Auslander ‘live’ comes as a historically determined 
duality with ‘mediatized’. 
But while ‘live’ in this usage  is said to appear in 1934 2, 
seemingly a time of increasing use of media technology, its use 
is said to mean ‘in person’. ‘In person’, with the meaning of ‘by 
bodily presence’ dates to the 1560s. Where ‘live’ is satisfied by 
the concept of ‘bodily presence’, a live performance is one in 
which the bodily presence of the performers can be perceived, 
with apparently increasing levels of presence. That bodily 
presence may have become more abstract and cognitive in 
response to the laptop mode of performance, crossing over into 
the technological sphere . 
7. Conclusion 
As we have stressed, the r esults are not conclusive but serve as 
the basis for hypotheses which also largely confirm our 
intuition. Whilst our study does not and cannot show that 
audiences can know what a laptop performer is doing, it 
suggests that (a) certain processes, tools and techniques of 
laptop performers are understood (b) different levels of liveness 
are apparent, from lower level event-triggering and effect -
tweaking to more meta -level process control and (c) there are 
also competing notions of liveness (and its opposite), and 
various things will signify liveness to certain audiences. The 
results also support the idea that the identification of specific 
pieces of software (such as Max or Ableton) and controllers 
(such as the monome or MPD) reflect different ‘idioms’, much 
as one might describe the idiomatic sound of a Stratocaster or 
more traditional instruments.  
                                                                    
2 Etymology examined using the Online Etymology Dictionary  
http://www.etymonline.com/ (accessed 5/02/2014).  
The ideas discussed here suggest further studies, particularly 
more detailed interviews and observations, that would truly 
engage with the subtlety of notions of per formance using new 
(and old) technology. These hypotheses should be tested 
against alternative explanation s, such as the possible claim that 
our respondents are left to guess and the opacity of the audio 
leads to ambivalence, except in the cases where gest ural 
performance cues give a clear reason for reporting liveness. 
There may be other views of liveness that are not present in the 
audio. If we had provided longer video footage of a DJ mixing, 
for example, then they may have been identified as live in a 
way that the current study would never have identified.  These 
dimensions are also important to explore.  
8. REFERENCES 
[1] Auslander, P. (2000). Liveness, Mediatization, and 
Intermedial Performance. Degrés: Revue de synthèse à 
orientation sémiologique, 101, 1-12. 
[2] Auslander, P. (2008). Liveness: Performance in a 
mediatized culture. Routledge.  
[3] Barad, K. (2003). Posthumanist performativity: Toward an 
understanding of how matter comes to 
matter. Signs, 28(3), 801-831. 
[4] Bergsland, A., & Åse, T (2012). Using a 
seeing/blindfolded paradigm to study audience 
experiences of live-electronic performances with voice.  
Proceedings of NIME 2012 . 
[5] Cascone, K. (2002). Laptop music -counterfeiting aura in 
the age of infinite reproduction.  Parachute, 52-59. 
[6] Collins, N. (2003). Generative  music and laptop 
performance. Contemporary Music Review , 22(4), 67-79. 
[7] Croft, J. (2007). Theses on liveness.  Organised Sound 
12(01), 59-66. 
[8] d'Escrivan, J. (2006). To sing the body electric: 
Instruments and effort in the performance of electronic 
music. Contemporary Music Review  25 (1-2) 183-191. 
[9] Gurevich, M., & Cavan Fyans, A. (2011). Digita l Musical 
Interactions: Performer–system relationships and their 
perception by spectators.  Organised Sound, 16(02), 166-
175. 
[10] Lippit, T. (2006). Turntable Music in the Digital Era: 
Designing Alternative Tools for New Turntable 
Expression. Proceedings of NIME 2006. 
[11] Lopez, F. (2004). Against the Stage , available online at 
http://www.franciscolopez.net/stage.html  
[12] Pachet, F. (2003). The continuator: Musical interaction 
with style. Journal of New Music Rese arch, 32(3), 333-
341. 
[13] Prior, N. (2009). Software Sequencers and Cyborg 
Singers: Popular Music in the Digital Hypermodern. New 
Formations, 66(1), 81-99. 
[14] Stuart, C. (2003). The object of performance: Aural 
performativity in contemporary laptop music. 
Contemporary Music Review, 22(4), 59-65. 
[15] Zadel, M and Scavone, G. (2006). Different Strokes: a 
Prototype Software System for Laptop Performance and 
Improvisation. Proceedings of NIME 2006 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
18