The Robotic Taishogoto: A New Plug ’n Play Desktop
Performance Instrument
Jason Long
Tokyo University of the Arts
12-8 Ueno Koen
Tokyo, Japan
djkinetix@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
This paper describes the Robotic Taishogoto, a new robotic
musical instrument for performance, musical installations,
and educational purposes. The primary goals of its cre-
ation are to provide an easy to use, cost eﬀective, compact
and integrated acoustic instrument which is fully automated
and controllable via standard MIDI commands. This paper
describes the technical details of its design and implemen-
tation including the mechanics, electronics and ﬁrmware. It
also outlines various control methodologies and use cases for
the instrument.
Keywords
Musical Robotics, Japanese Instruments, Robotic Perfor-
mance, Music Technology, Taishogoto
1. INTRODUCTION
Though the ﬁeld of musical robotics has enjoyed acceler-
ated development over the last few decades, in part due
to increases in power, aﬀordability and accessibility of mi-
crocontroller technology, there are a number of obstacles
that prevent the area from gaining the ubiquity of ﬁelds
such as electronic music. With very few commercial prod-
ucts available, many students in the ﬁeld have turned to
the creation of their own unique instruments and while this
can be artistically rewarding and sonically diverse, most of
these instruments are also complex, requiring a signiﬁcant
investment of space and time to set up and learn. Cost of
parts and access to the required machinery are also signiﬁ-
cant factors which prevent many potential robot musicians
from realizing possible designs. This Robotic Taishogoto
design tries to address these problems by presenting a new
instrument that was built using tools commonly found in
university workshops and local maker spaces, easily obtain-
able and aﬀordable materials, and is created by retroﬁtting
electronics inside an already existing instrument. To reduce
necessary setup time and learning curve in a similar way
to the Karmetik Notomoton outlined in [3], the Robotic
Taishogoto is fully integrated, requiring only a standard
power cable and USB or MIDI connection from the intended
controller or sequencer. It also features a magnetic pickup
with volume and tone controls for ampliﬁcation.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’14,June 30 – July 03, 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Figure 1: The Robotic Taishogoto
1.1 The Taishogoto
The taishogoto, also sometimes called the Nagoya harp, is
a form of fretted Japanese zither instrument. It generally
has ﬁve strings, three tuned to the same note, one tuned an
octave lower, and the other tuned two octaves lower. Above
each fret is a lever which resembles a type-writer key, which
when pressed, will fret the ﬁrst four strings at that note
leaving the lowest string open. In order to allow it to be
played in various keys without retuning, the open string in
this particular instrument was removed. The taishogoto is
traditionally played by strumming the strings with a pick in
the right hand, and using the left hand to control the notes
with the keys. Unlike most string-based instruments such
as guitars, the taishogoto already has a fretting mechanism
built-in, making it an ideal candidate for automation.
2. DESIGN
While to the author’s knowledge this is the ﬁrst example of
a robotic taishogoto, there are a number of aspects of other
instrument designs that have aided in its invention. There
are four main sections of the physical design, the enclosure,
the picking mechanism, the array of fretting components,
and the damper. Each will be discussed in turn below.
2.1 The Enclosure
After some preliminary experiments with solenoids that are
small enough to ﬁt inside the original instrument, it was
found that they were nowhere near strong enough to pull
down the levers with enough force to successfully fret the
strings. Noting that mounting the solenoids above the in-
strument would obstruct an audience’s view of it and pre-
vent manual playing of the instrument, it was then decided
to expand the area underneath the instrument with an en-
closure that could house the twenty three solenoids for the
notes, the damper solenoid, the power supply and all of the
control electronics.
The simple enclosure design as shown in the CAD draw-
ings of Figure 2, was intended for laser-cut MDF wood, and
the roof of the enclosure doubles as a mounting board for
the solenoids.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
479
Figure 2: CAD design of the enclosure
2.2 The Picking Mechanism
There are a number of diﬀerent solutions that have been
invented to carry out the task of picking strings in auto-
matic instruments. Trimpin’s sketches of designs for his ’If
VI was IX’, ’JackBox’ and ’KrautKontrol’ installations as
shown in [2], show a number of diﬀerent motor and solenoid
based methods of plucking a string. Eric Singer’s Guitar-
Bot in [6] uses an eﬀective stepper-motor based mechanism,
and Dr. Godfried Willem Raes’s Expression Control in Au-
tomated Musical Instruments 1 makes mention of stepping
motor, DC motor and rotary solenoid based methods. [7]
gives an analysis of the cost and performance of a number
of these techniques.
The relatively small form factor of the taishogoto and
limited area in which to mount a picking mechanism means
that the chosen method should be simple and compact, and
the goals of this project dictate that it should also be cost-
eﬀective. After a double linear solenoid conﬁguration was
trialed and found not to satisfy these requirements because
of size and mounting complexity, a rotary solenoid based
method was used. The rotary solenoid was mounted near
the sound hole with an aluminum bracket, and the pick was
attached to the plate of the solenoid with another aluminum
bracket as shown in Figure 3. The spring inside the device
was adjusted so that the initial stroke, which is powered by
the onset of a voltage, approximately matches the power of
the return stroke which is powered by the return spring.
Some automated string instruments such as the MechBass
in [4] implement velocity sensitivity in this mechanism by
allowing adjustment of the height of the pick by way of servo
motor or linear soft-shift solenoids. This taishogoto is rela-
tively sensitive to small adjustments in pick height because
the pick must travel through four strings of two diﬀerent
guages in a single stroke and in a position too low, the pick
will occasionally be blocked by one of the strings. Auto-
mated height adjustment would be a welcome addition in
the future of the instrument though, as in its current form,
the higher notes tend to suﬀer from reduced loudness due
to the fact that they are closer to the pick and are forcing
the string position lower. Pick selection also inﬂuences this
balance, so a relatively thin pick of 0.60mm was chosen for
its ﬂexibility, making the pick less likely to be stopped by
the strings if the height is set low.
2.3 The Damper
The damper mechanism is comparatively simple consisting
of a single small tubular push-type solenoid mounted near
the bridge of the instrument under the strings. It has a
felt pad attached to its plunger which is pressed against the
strings at will to silence them. Rather than using a servo
motor like the MechBass [4] which allows varying degrees of
pressure applied to the strings, a solenoid was chosen due
1http://logosfoundation.org/g_texts/
expression-control.html
Figure 3: The picking mechanism
to its speed and quiet action, allowing very quick dampened
notes. The strength of the dampening was optimized using
a ﬁxed power resistor to limit the current applied, as too
strong a push generates bending noise from the strings, and
too weak a push will not silence the strings quickly enough.
The opposite end of the plunger rests on a soft surface in-
side the instrument to prevent clicking upon release of the
damper.
2.4 The Fretters
Not only were the fretting solenoids too large to ﬁt inside
the original instrument, they were also too large to be po-
sitioned in a single row underneath the levers and had to
be positioned in a staggered arrangement as can be seen by
the line of circles on the enclosure design in Figure 2.
Figure 4: A side view of the fretting mechanism
Though each solenoid plunger is placed in line with each
lever in one axis, for most of the notes there is still dis-
placement on the other. To connect the plungers and the
levers, a set of 23 aluminum brackets were created by hand,
in various shapes to accommodate for this displacement and
the shape of the instrument. To account for the rotational
aspect of the movement of the levers, the brackets had to
be attached in a way as to allow both the solenoid side
and the lever side to rotate slightly, though this mechani-
cal movement created a noticeable and distracting metallic
noise. To overcome this, rubber rings were added to sepa-
rate the brackets from the levers. Though the pressing of
the levers naturally generates some noise that is a part of the
sound of the instrument, the abrupt nature of the solenoid
movement, accelerating as it reaches the end of its stroke is
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
480
the opposite of how human players play a note and creates
another extraneous clicking noise at the point of contact
between the levers and their own mounting pole. To reduce
this noise, a very thin layer of soft tape was added at this
point of contact. Pulsewidth modulation of the control sig-
nals to the solenoids may seem to be the natural solution to
the abrupt solenoid movement, but as Dr. Godfried Willem
Raes states “The trouble with PWM [...] is that it causes
audible artifacts from the solenoids. If you try to overcome
these by setting the fundamental frequency way above au-
dio, however, you will run into trouble with the dissipation
and the electromagnetic radiation (EMC).”2
3. ELECTRONICS
Figure 5: Inside the Robotic Taishogoto
3.1 The Power Subsystem
The power supply for the robot taishogoto had to fulﬁll a
number of requirements. Firstly, it had to ﬁt in a relatively
small area inside the enclosure, secondly, it had to provide
enough current to drive the total of twenty ﬁve solenoids
and all of the control circuitry, and thirdly it had to provide
the appropriate voltages for each of these sets of electronics.
The above pictured switched-mode power supply was chosen
because it provides both a regulated 5 volt supply for the
logic level electronics and a 24 volt supply for the solenoids.
At certain current loads, it also emitted a very high-pitched,
penetrating tone which was eliminated by taking it apart
and applying hot glue to the inductor inside.
Though there are twenty ﬁve solenoids in total, twenty
three of them are along the fretboard, and since it is a mono-
phonic instrument, almost never three, rarely two, and in
most cases just one fretboard solenoid will be activated at
any one time during operation. The damper solenoid needs
much less power than the fretboard solenoids to achieve its
purpose so a power resistor reduces its current requirements.
These solenoids were controlled using the left schematic
shown in Figure 6.
The picking rotary solenoid will have an average duty
cycle of ﬁfty percent as it will be charged between every
second note. The power used and heat generated by this
situation is improved upon by implementing a pulse and
hold conﬁguration as shown in Figure 6’s right schematic
which was used in the Logos Foundation player pianos. It
works by sending an initial short pulse at the higher current
for the attack and subsequently switches to a longer hold
signal which need only deliver enough current to keep the
solenoid in place for a length of time before release.
Though in some cases it may be beneﬁcial to apply a
higher than rated voltage to a solenoid to achieve greater
power, since all of the solenoids in this instrument have the
2http://logosfoundation.org/g_texts/
expression-control.html
Figure 6: Fretting solenoid circuit (left) and pick-
ing solenoid circuit (right) Credit : Dr. Godfried-
Willem Raes
potential to be charged for many seconds at a time, it is pru-
dent to stick to their 24 volt rating to prevent overheating
and damage.
3.2 Control Electronics
For this instrument, the AVR Atmega644p chip was chosen
as the main microcontroller because of its easy-to-integrate
40 pin DIP form factor, 2 UART peripherals, 32 GPIO pins
which are more than required for the number of solenoids
used, its low cost, and its compatibility with the conve-
nient Arduino3 programming environment by way of the
Sanguino4 board deﬁnitions. The Atmega8u2 microcon-
troller was also mounted on a separate surface-mount break-
out board dedicated to USB-MIDI communications and was
loaded with the open source HIDUINO ﬁrmware, which is
outlined in [1], recompiled to use an appropriate USB-MIDI
device name.
Even though the Atmega644p features dual UART pe-
ripherals and can accommodate simultaneous MIDI signals
coming from both the USB board and the MIDI input, be-
cause of the fact that there would be no need to use both
of these inputs at the same time, both of the connections
were routed to a single UART RX pin on the master chip
as shown in Figure 7. Taking away the requirement for the
ﬁrmware to poll both UARTs delivers a slight performance
increase and makes the ﬁrmware smaller and simpler.
Figure 7: MIDI signal mixing schematic
3.2.1 Pickup
Separate from the power and control circuits, the instru-
ment was also retroﬁtted with a specialized taishogoto pickup
which is mounted in the sound-hole, and a circuit which in-
cludes volume and tone controls and a 3.5mm TS phono
jack audio output on the rear of the instrument.
3http://arduino.cc/
4http://sanguino.cc/
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
481
4. CONTROL STRATEGIES
Many automatic instruments require just one mechanical
action per musical message received, but the robotic taisho-
goto is somewhat more involved. There are a number of con-
trol strategies ranging from completely manual, to highly
automatic. A manual operation strategy would mean that
each action on the instrument would be triggered by its
own MIDI message, with individual control over the fret-
ting, picking and dampening mechanisms. This method is
clearly the most powerful, as it allows any manner of playing
that the instrument is capable of, but it would be rendered
highly diﬃcult to undertake a live performance, and quite
laborious to compose music with it.
A highly automatic conﬁguration would use as few MIDI
messages as possible to operate the instrument. For exam-
ple, a single note-on command would ﬁrst fret the string of
the desired note, then activate the picking mechanism while
taking note of its position, and wait for the corresponding
note-oﬀ command which would raise the damper and the
fretter to stop the note. This method would let a musician
quickly plug in the instrument for the ﬁrst time and be able
to play intelligible music with ease. On the other hand,
this conﬁguration has a lot less ﬂexibility to create more
detailed compositions, lacking the ability to independently
control the damper, the pick, the fretters, and their time
relationships.
One possible method would be to write a number of dif-
ferent conﬁgurations and allow switching between them via
program change messages, though instead of that, the fol-
lowing conﬁguration has been created which sits in between
the two extremes outlined above to attempt to be practical
for both compositional and live performance purposes.
The range of note-on messages which correspond to the
keys of the instrument, all trigger the desired note to be
fretted, and the strings are plucked soon after. The subse-
quent note-oﬀs then release the fret. There is one exception
in that the lowest note plays the open strings with no fret-
ting. Playing this lowest note while holding down another
note allows the player to repeat the same note without the
interruption of raising the lever between notes.
While keeping the convenience and playability of this au-
tomatic control, manual control capabilities are included
using sustain pedal and expression pedal continuous con-
trollers, the former withholding note-oﬀs from the fretboard
and the latter withholding the pick commands from newly
played notes. Independent control of the dampener is also
implemented by note-on and note-oﬀ signals from the note
one semitone lower than the lowest of the instrument.
5. PERFORMANCE CONSIDERATIONS
A slight inconsistency was observed in the picking mecha-
nism where, although both directions of movement produce
similar volume levels, there is a small timing diﬀerence be-
tween the directions. This would become noticeable when a
line of evenly spaced notes were programmed in a sequence
and the timing of the resulting realization would be some-
what swung. To ﬁx this, a slight delay was added in the
ﬁrmware to the quicker direction to create an even level of
latency. For tight synchronization with other instruments,
it is possible then to use the standard delay compensation
features of MIDI sequencing software.
Even with this extra latency added, there is a delay of
less than 50 milliseconds from when a control message is
sent until the note is sounded. While this does not compare
particularly favorably with most virtual instruments for ex-
ample, it is more than playable and responsive enough for
both compositional purposes and live performance settings.
While there are certainly some performance techniques
which are not realizable on this instrument such as dynamic
control and picking individual strings of the set, it also
makes possible many diﬀerent sounds and musical passages
that are not possible by playing in the traditional method.
For example, very quick scales, arpeggios and large jumps
are easily achieved. Quick, consistent picking and equally
fast, precision-timed damping are also made possible. As
with almost all musical robots, the ﬁelds of real-time algo-
rithmic composition, interactive performance and usage in
installations are also opened up to the sound of this instru-
ment through automation.
6. CONCLUSION
The Robotic Taishogoto is a new robotic musical instru-
ment which has proven itself in performances in concerts,
interactive musical installations, and in educational work-
shops. The use of rapid fabrication techniques and low
cost materials, along with simple circuits derived from open
hardware resources, and both pre-compiled and highly ab-
stracted ﬁrmware from open-source software resources, al-
low the construction of instruments such as this to be cre-
ated by students and musicians without engineering train-
ing in order to pursue their interests in the musical robotics
ﬁeld. It is hoped that the details of this instrument’s de-
sign and construction presented in this paper will inspire
more musicians to undertake musical robotics projects and
contribute to the wider ﬁeld of research.
7. REFERENCES
[1] D. Diakopoulos and A. Kapur. Hiduino: A ﬁrmware for
building driverless usb-midi devices using the arduino
microcontroller. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression.
NIME, May 2011.
[2] A. Focker. Trimpin: Contraptions for Art and Sound.
Marquand Books, Seattle, Washington, 2011.
[3] A. Kapur, M. Darling, J. Murphy, J. Hochenbaum,
D. Diakopoulos, and Trimpin. The karmetik
notomoton: A new breed of musical robot for teaching
and performance. InProceedings of the International
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression.
NIME, May 2011.
[4] J. Mcvay, D. Carnegie, J. Murphy, and A. Kapur.
Mechbass: A systems overview of a new four-stringed
robotic bass guitar. InProceedings of the Electronics
New Zealand Conference., December 2012.
[5] J. Murphy, J. McVay, and A. Kapur. Designing and
building expressive robotic guitars. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on New Interfaces for
Musical Expression., page 40. NIME, May 2013.
[6] E. Singer, K. Larke, and D. Bianciardi. Lemur
guitarbot: Midi robotic string instrument. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on New
Interfaces for Musical Expression.NIME, 2003.
[7] R. Vindriis, D. Carnegie, and A. Kapur. A comparison
of pick-based strategies for robotic bass playing. In
Proceedings of the Electronics New Zealand
Conference., November 2011.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
482