Meta-Instrument 3: a look over 17 years of practice
S e r g ed eL a u b i e r
Studios Puce Muse
2 rue des Pyrénées
Wissous 91320 RUNGIS Cedex, France
(+33) 1 45 12 04 53
sdl@pucemuse.com
Vincent Goudard
Studios Puce Muse
2 rue des Pyrénées
Wissous 91320 RUNGIS Cedex, France
(+33) 1 45 12 04 53
programmeur@pucemuse.com
ABSTRACT
The Meta-Instrument (M-I) is a new instrument for computer
music. Since 1989, three backward compatible prototypes
were designed involving custom developments in electronics,
mechanics, computer science and music. This paper presents
the third generation of M-I, and a few ideas that emerged
from the past 17 years of playing it.
Keywords
Audio-graphic portable instrument, WiFi, Ethernet, Répertoire
1. GENESIS OF THE PROJECT
From 1983 to 1988, we worked at the Puce Muse studios , on
the simulation of sound movement in a 3 dimensional space.
This research led to the conception of the Octophonic Spatial
Processor. This machine compute the sound level distribution
over 8 or 16 loud-speakers, from cartesian or polar sound
coordinates.
The loud speaker positionning canﬁt into various geometries:
line, cube, circle...etc.
After several experiences, we use essentially, since 1988, a
conﬁguration with the loudspeakers placed at the corners of a
cube. This cube ﬁts into a space matching either the stage or
t h ew h o l et h e a t e r .
The various musical pieces composed with the system quickly
highlit the link between the movement of sound in space, and
its spectral movement. The nature of this « intern » Vs.
« architectural » movement relation is a complex topic, since
it covers severalﬁelds of knowledge: acoustics, music, and
cognitive sciences.
Nevertheless, the musical ﬁelds opened by this -very
stimulating- research faced a real problem, when adressing the
conduction of sound. Indeed, if space is omnipresent
metaphorically in music, musical instruments are not meant to
move sounds in space. The question is thus to imagine a
system able to simultaneously displace sounds in space while
making their spectrum evolve.
The 2nd goal of the Meta-Instrument was to be able to play the
« musique concrète » invented by Pierre Schaeffer[1], not for
recording's sake, but to play it live in a concert. To link the
revolution in electroacoustic techniques, that allow the
musician to work with all recordable sounds, not to create
musical pieces that remainﬁxed on sound-tapes, but ﬁnd the
ephemeral dimension of playing live music again.
2. HOW THE META-INSTRUMENT
WORKS
These two questions led to the conception of a general system,
made of three parts: gesture sensing, gesture transformation,
and perception.
The Meta-Instrument main function is to catch the gesture. It
is thus a transductor meant to measure precisely and digitalize
the musician gesture. Aﬁrst version was built in 1989 and still
works today. A second generation, compatible with the ﬁrst
one, exists since october 1995. A third version, compatible as
well with the previous ones, is operational since december
2004.
The Meta-Instrument is connected to an ethernet analogic
interface. The 54 sensors data are sampled at 500Hz, with
16bits resolution.
This interface is then linked to a computer, where the gestural
data are analysed and processed by programs developed with
Max (© Cycling74/IRCAM) [2]. Today, there are more than
150 « software instruments » developed for various
compositions. Each « software instruments » runs within a
standard architecture called « bank », allowing switching and
mixing management between the various « software
instruments », driving sound, graphic or lighting systems.
3. THE SURPRISES OF PRACTICE
3.1 The pulp orﬁnger intelligence
Essentially, the Meta-Instrument is a measuring system, with
its tolerances and measurement errors. Three generations of
them were needed to reach the gesturalﬁnesse of the ﬁngers
pulp. Indeed, each ﬁnger act simultaneously upon 4 keys,
stimulated by longitudinal and lateral movements of the
ﬁnger's pulp.
The minimal pressure measure is of 10 milligrams, and
sampled every 2 milliseconds. This precision allows now to
compute speed and acceleration accurately enough to link
sound energy to gesture energy. This quality of measure gives
the sensation of « seeing » theﬁnger movements on the
screen. As a comparison, theﬁrst Meta-Instrument measured
only 10g or so every 20ms, with only one key per ﬁnger!
Moreover the rigidity of the key used to give tenditinis.
Figure 1: The hand of MI3 with soft keys
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Nime’06, June 4-8, 2006, IRCAM, Paris, France.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
288
3.2 A wide range of possibilities
The number of possibilities given by the 2 nd generation of
Meta-instrument at every time sample is up to 27x32,o r2 224,
which is about a billion times more than the number of atoms
in the universe! This vertigo can be sensed when changing
« software instrument ».
It happened at the beginning to the meta-instrumentist not to
know anymore « where he/she is », and which musical space,
which algorithm runs under the tip of theﬁngers. This kind of
« blackout » disappear with the gesture memory linked to
musical memory. Moving while hearing inwardly the musical
software wakes up the gestural knowledge of the algorithm.
3.3 More conductor than instrumentist
In this temptation to play the orchestra-man, an attractive
instrument is one producing broad and generous sound
phenomenons, which surpasses power and tessitura's limits of
traditional acoustic instrument. An instrument generating
much more with less, as does the conductor baton with the
orchestra.
Most of the software-instruments are closer to the conductor
logic, than the instrumentist's. The relation with sound is often
macroscopic, drivingﬂuxes, speeds, orientations,
probabilities... It is also in this direction that the possibilities
are the newest, allowing interaction of sonic structures
through phrasing and precision that have never been heard.
In this case, the gesture is not necessarily linked to the
creation of acoustic energy, nor is it to the systematic choice
of notes. For each musical idea, we have to decide on the
gesture/sound mapping.
3.4 Position and variation gestures
Several software-instruments work with a double pinciple:
– Position gestures, which determines a more or less stable
and quick selection in the algorithm.
– V ariation gestures which , allowing for variations around
the selected stable state, or “grosse note” as called by
Pierre Schaeffer. [3]
In this duality between continuous and discrete behaviours, it
seems that the Meta-Instrument ﬁts the continous control
better, allowing for arabesques, and roundness. The ﬁrst
corresponding more to keyboard instruments, the other to
instruments like violin or voice.
3.5 Fastﬁngers, stable and precise arm
A software instrument can be controlled through many
different ways. The same gesture can be mapped to any
parameter. Although, in this seemingly endless space of
mapping, there are some rules quite commonly followed.
Fingers are mostly used for their quickness, they can run
through the 64,000 values in about 10ms! The fore arm is
much slower, but also more stable and precise.
3.6 The eye can amplify the hearing
Since 1991, the Meta-Instrument plays the lightings and since
1999, it controls computer graphics. The arrival of visual
elements, in a musical context, sometimes encountered hostile
reactions: “Music is enough itslef, graphics are here just to
hide misery”
And yet, playing a musical instrument is also perceived by the
eye. For exemple, the movement of a musican juste before
starting, silence at the end before applause, are musical
moments despite the absence of sound.
These disappear on audio recordings, when the audience
cannot see what happens. Similarly, the score is a visual
element which, when followed, greatly modiﬁes the hearing.
The experience of listening to a piano play, while watching all
the mechanics is another exemple.
The Meta-Instrument always uses symbolic representation, in
the software instrument, before producing sound.
It is thus possible to use the same parameters to
simultaneously run visual algorithms, and to amplify the
hearing, either by extending the notion of score, or by a
representation of the algorithms.
Of course, interaction between the eye and the ear is a very
complex topic, which goes beyond the scope of this paper.
Let's just keep this exciting idea in mind: music is enlighting
the shadows' light.
3.7 Silent instrument
The development of this work eventually gave birth to purely
graphic software instruments. These instruments are
interesting, because they show a very musical feature: the art
of temporal variation. The musician then becomes a
movement manipulator, “movement” meaning here the
temporal evolution of an object, which can produce sound or
something else.
These silent instruments also emphasize the closeness to
dance, as well as the difference with it. In this case, the
movement of the body is discreet, movements of theﬁngers'
tips are only a few millimeters long, and these gestures need
ampliﬁcation to be seen. The instrument can thus be seen as
an extension of the body.
3.8 Static and dynamic force feedback
The force feedback was particularly taken care of. Keys are
soft, and continuously measuring pressure, from 0 to 200g, on
a 3mm depth. The pressure roughly match an exponential
perception of the touch. In the middle of each key, a small
spot allows to feel where the center of the key is.
Also, all keys are covered by a soft material, so thatﬁngers
can move with ease. This reﬁnement made us let the dynamic
force feeback aside. Though research works such as ACROE's
[4] really show hopefull results in this direction, dynamic
feedback on the Meta-Instrument is only visual and acoustic,
for the present time.
Figure 2: Static force feedback - springs & adjustable friction
3.9 After 15 years with crutches, the Meta-
Instrumentist now walks!
Two previous generations of Meta-Instrument made use of
stands. The third generation is mobile, with straps, and even
wireless thanks to WiFi protocol.
This choice was made after considering the changing role of
the Meta-Instrumentiste, from soloist playing in front of the
audience, to the “Opera conductor” standing in withdrawal
compared to the scene. The mobility offers the possibility to
stand at the right place, which can change during the concert.
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
289
The goal is also to improve the contact with the audience: a
musician will play differently when sitting or standing.
Figure 3: The MI3 is portable and wireless
4. WHY PLAY?
This question may sound weird, as we are used to think of
music being played by musician. However, recording
techniques deepely modiﬁed musical practice and the number
of professional musicians plummeted over the last years. Is it
necessary to mention the meaning or the “play” key, on tape
and CD players?
As far as the Meta-Instrument is concerned, the question is
all the more important that, beyond the instrumentist gesture,
it is possible to record the whole score, with all the nuances,
sounds and images.
4.1 An immense pleasure
Without any doubt, theﬁrst answer is the pleasure of playing
a sound circulating faster than sound, alonghundred meters. It
is about manipulating images sized a few hundred square
meters. More than a megalomaniac pleasure, it is about
animating metaphors of the Creation.
4.2 Acting at the right moment
Here, the work is open, and allows to modify trajectories, and
reshape forms at any time. Playing consists inﬁnding this
fragile, ephemeral, unique moment, and standing ready for the
time passing, for the concert room, and of course, for the
audience.
4.3 Putting the notion of Art work in
question
Rather than “why play?”, the question could be “what to
play?”. What is worth being phrased, and what can be
automated? What interactions to play? These questions put the
notion of art works in question. There underlie a deﬁnition of
composition which could be “to create a space where to play”.
4.4 Playing to explore new musical spaces
The territories that have been opened by this practice are
vasts. We are only at the beginning of discoveries. Many
directions, like the research on the sound of gesture, or the
sound of image, are still quite unexplored. The progress of
this huge work will only be possible through the increase of
the number of composers, musicians, developers, and teachers
interested in thisﬁeld of research.
5. FURTHER WORKS
At this stage in the evolution of the Meta-Instrument, and in
order to spread its practice, several ways are being
investigated.
5.1 Toward a plug'n play instrument
Due to the lack of computing ressources, the Meta-Instrument
used to need a complex and heavy system, with a MIDI
interface, a digital mixing console, samplers, lighting
systems, and an octophonic sound system, along with one or
more computers to analyse the gesture data and send control
informations.
The Meta-Instrument 3 is now directly connected to the
computer through Ethernet or WiFi protocol. The digital
mixing console, samplers, and lighting/visuals have been
integrated in the Max/MSP/Jitter layers of the software-
instrument, thanks to the incredible evolution of
computational speed.
T h en e x ts t e pi st or e d eﬁne and standardize an interface for
the Meta-Instrument, so that using the software part will not
require the musician to be a Max developer, and also to make
available the pieces of code, which are constantly re-used, and
emerged from long-time practice. In this goal, mapping tools
such as IRCAM's MnM [5], and Physical Modeling for Pure
Data (PMPD) [6] libraries are two noticeable effort which will
ease the complex task of mapping.
5.2 Meta-Mallette: a collaborative
alternative to the orchestral instrument
The heaviness of the system described above tended to
discourage a teaching of the Meta-Instrument, that had been
proposed in a few willing conservatories. Also, starting from
scratch with the complexity of the Meta-Instrument may
puzzle somehow the novice student.
In 2003, PuceMuse launched the development of a
collaborative music system using algorithms similar (but
simpler) to those used for the MI, played with joysticks – a
cheap interface well known to children. Most of them just did
not know that their virtuosity at playing videogames could be
used for something else than driving race-cars at 1000 Mph or
killing ennemies...
The Meta-Mallette (which ﬁts in a wallet), introducing
historical and new synthesis algorithms to the players in an
entertaining musical activity, encountered a real success,
giving a accurate response to a real need in music schools.
Several composers, musicians, and multimedia artists
developed collective games meant to 8 to 30 players. Regular
workshops have started to work with various social centers,
music school and conservatories, and which enventually
constitute aﬁrst step for the musicians to more evolved
interfaces.
5.3 Workshops andgrowing community
Besides that, a one year long workshop has been launched in
2004 gathering 10 musicians to learn, and practice the Meta-
Instrument along with collective consideration on the complex
relation between sound, music gesture, image being controled
all at the same time in real time.
The result was very fruitful, raising different approaches,
ranging from perceptually relevant gesture/sound algorithms,
to adaptation of electroacoustic pieces for live playing, and
interactive cinema.
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
290
This experience led PuceMuse to build a few specimens, as
research centers such as LaBRI 1 and LAM2 ordered Meta-
Instruments. It is hoped that the scientific collaboration will
be improved by this direct use of the Instrument in the
laboratories.
Figure 4: The 3 generations of Meta-Instrument
1 Laboratoire Bordelais de Recherche en Informatique.
http://www.labri.fr/
2 Laboratoire d'Acoustique Musicale.
http://www.lam.jussieu.fr/
6. REFERENCES
[1] P. Schaeffer. La musique concrète. Presses Universitaires
de Frances. Paris, 1967.
[2] Max/MSP/Jitter 4.5 reference manual.
Http://www.cycling74.com
[3] Schaeffer, Pierre, Traité des Objets Musicaux, Ed. Seuil,
Paris, 1966.
[4] C. Cadoz, A.Luciani, J.-L. Florens, and N. Castagné.
ACROE-ICA: Artistic creation and computer interactive
multisensory simulation force feedback gesture
transducers. InProceedings of New Interfaces for
Musical Expression (NIME'03), 2003.
[5] F. Bevilacqua, R. Müller, and N. Schnell. MnM: a
Max/MSP mapping toolbox. InProceedings of New
Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME'03), 2003.
[6] C. Henry. pmpd: Physical Modelling for Pure Data. In
Proceedings of the International Computer Music
Conference (ICMC' 04), pages 37-41, Miami, Florida,
USA, 2004.
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
291