Let loose with WallBalls, a collaborative tabletop instrument for tomorrow
Grant Partridge
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Manitoba
Winnipeg, MB R3T 2N2
bluetshirt@gmail.com
Pourang Irani
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Manitoba
Winnipeg, MB R3T 2N2
irani@cs.umanitoba.ca
Gordon Fitzell
Marcel A. Desautels Faculty of Music
University of Manitoba
Winnipeg, MB R3T 2N2
gordon fitzell@umanitoba.ca
Abstract
Tabletops—and by extension, tabletop computers—
naturally facilitate group work. In particular, they pro-
vide a fascinating platform for exploring the possibilities
of collaborative audio improvisation. Existing tabletop
instruments (and digital instruments in general) tend to
impose either a steep learning curve on novice players
or a frustrating ceiling of expressivity upon experts. We
introduce WallBalls, an intuitive tabletop instrument de-
signed to support both novice and expert performance. At
ﬁrst glance, WallBalls resembles a toy, game or whimsical
sketchpad, but it quickly reveals itself as a deeply expressive
and highly adaptable sample-based instrument capable of
facilitating a startling variety of collaborative sound art.
Keywords: Tabletop computers, collaborative instruments,
collaborative composition, group improvisation, spatial au-
dio interfaces, customizable instruments.
1. Introduction
Tabletop musical instruments often feature striking com-
monalities. In most cases, the hardware is specially de-
signed for the musical purposes of the table. Iwai’s Compo-
sition on the Table, for example, employs custom surfaces
with integral physical widgets such as spinning platters and
push switches [4]. This parallels the traditional conception
of musical instruments as specialized devices, intended for
use in a particular way and for a particular purpose.
An alternative approach is to design an instrument that
could be loaded onto a variety of tabletop computers. This
strategy better reﬂects the reality of tabletop computers now
appearing on the market. Just as computer musicians cur-
rently launch Ableton Live or Max/MSP on their laptops,
soon they will launch musicalapplications designed for
general-purpose tabletops.
Given the very real likelihood that tabletop computers or
other multi-touch surfaces will soon become commonplace,
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists
requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee.
NIME09, June 3-6, 2009, Pittsburgh, PA
Copyright remains with the author(s).
it stands to reason that there is value in building applications
that support both casual and virtuosic musicianship. Much
has been said of the notion that digital instruments should be
easy to use by novices, yet allow for sophisticated expres-
sion in the hands of experts [13] [5]. One strategy to satisfy
both groups is to compromise by ﬁnding a single conﬁgu-
ration that supports the basic needs of all players. Such a
solution may appeal to a wide range of users, but is likely
to produce an instrument that feels like a toy, one incapable
of providing a rich experience to the sophisticated player.
A more successful approach might embrace customization,
allowing the instrument to serve the multifarious needs of
a wide range of players. Such an instrument could provide
a range of options that allow players to strike a balance be-
tween expressivity and ease of use. Whatever the means,
the net effect should be a musical experience tailored to the
needs of each individual player.
With this in mind, we set out to develop a musical in-
strument that harnesses both the power and the ﬂexibility
afforded by tabletop computers. The result is WallBalls, a
collaborative platform that challenges conventional beliefs
about the functionality of musical instruments.
2. Related Work
WallBalls tends to draw immediate comparison to other
tabletop instruments, but several essential qualities of its de-
sign are unique. The reacTable* [6], being the most famous
tabletop instrument to date, is frequently cited as a similar
instrument. But save the fact that both are tabletop-based,
the two devices have little in common. The reacTable* is
essentially a modular synthesizer, while WallBalls produces
sound via sample playback. Other tabletop instruments, like
Musical Squares [10] or No. 1 Push from the aforemen-
tioned Composition on the Table [4], bear a stronger re-
semblance, though WallBalls features greater ﬂexibility and
functionality. Another key inspiration was Tenori-on [9].
Some features shared by WallBalls and its predecessors in-
clude a grid layout and interchangeable sample banks.
WallBalls is fully operable by a single player, though it
was always envisioned as a tool to facilitate a shared group
experience. In particular, we aimed to offer a more ﬂexi-
ble social structure than collaborative instruments that pre-
cisely prescribe the roles of each participant (such as Fels
and V ogt’s Tooka [3]).
NIME 200978
Figure 1. Screenshot of WallBalls.
One intriguing idea that struck us during the initial plan-
ning for WallBalls was that interesting things might happen
if the input to the instrument were somehow less tightly cou-
pled to the resulting audio. This is very similar to Schnell
and Battier’s concept of composed instruments [11]. In gen-
eral, the effect of such a decoupling is that the instrument
itself assumes responsibility for much of the minutiae of the
performance, something that signiﬁcantly alters the role of
the human performers.
3. Technical Details
WallBalls consists of two parts designed to work together,
though each could conceivably be useful independent of
the other. Thefront-end is responsible for processing in-
put and managing the display, and is written in C# using the
University of Manitoba’s idenTTop framework for identity-
enabled1 tabletop application development. The back-end
is a Pure Data patch that loads up to 20 samples and triggers
them upon receiving MIDI messages from the front-end.
The prototype tabletop used for the development and
initial performances was custom built in the University of
Manitoba’s Human-Computer Interaction lab. It consists
of a dual-core Windows XP machine, a ceiling-mounted
projector, and a Polhemus electromagnetic motion tracker
equipped with four styli to track input from four simultane-
ous participants. In lieu of a proper tabletop computer, Wall-
Balls can be controlled with one or more ordinary USB mice
plugged into a desktop computer, thanks to the SDG toolkit
made available by the University of Calgary’s iLab [12].
4. Features of WallBalls
As the name implies, the main features of WallBalls are vir-
tual walls and balls; together, these elements combine to
produce sound.
1 Programs built with idenTTop can be easily adapted to run on any sur-
face that is able to recognize which user has performed a given action. The
DiamondTouch is one such compatible machine [2].
4.1. Walls
The action takes place in a play area punctuated by a grid
of dots. Walls are drawn by connecting any two dots on the
grid. Walls are associated withsamples, and each sample
with a color scheme; thus, the color(s) of a wall indicates
the sound it makes. If two walls partially overlap, tapping
one brings it to the front.
The grid is surrounded by indestructible gray walls that
make no sound. All other colors of walls can make
sound—but only when struck by a ball.
4.2. Balls
Balls are constrained to travel in one of sixteen directions,
allowing precise and consistent control. Players can add and
remove balls from play at will. Alternatively, balls in play
can be picked up and thrown again. A ball may be set on
a trajectory whereby it cycles indeﬁnitely, or it may careen
unpredictably. (Friction and gravity do not exist in the Wall-
Balls universe.)
There are four types of balls. Each ball is associated with
a certain effect, and certain balls are associated with special
behaviors. The appearance of each ball reﬂects its charac-
teristics. For instance, theecho ball is painted with con-
centric circles. When this ball strikes a wall, it applies a
delay (echo) effect to the sample played. The blue, semi-
transparentghost balldoes not bounce off walls in play. In-
stead, it ﬂoats through them, sounding each sample with a
reverberation effect.
The third ball, thebuzzsaw, adds an element of entropy to
the system. Each wall can only sustain a certain number of
hits from a buzzsaw before it is destroyed. Each hit weakens
the wall, which shrinks the wall’s width by a few pixels and
reduces the loudness of subsequent sounds. Finally, there is
anormal ballwith no special behavior and a suitably bland
brown appearance.
Figure 2. WallBalls in action on our tabletop.
79
4.3. Tools
WallBalls takes advantage of the familiar palette interface
metaphor, which contributes signiﬁcantly to its learnabil-
ity. A palette presents a grouped collection of options, each
activated by a single touch. WallBalls uses two types of
palettes: one is used to select a tool, and the other allows
players to choose which sample will be associated with
newly drawn walls. To support multiple simultaneous users,
we extended the traditionally single-user palette concept.
Each player’s current selection on each palette is marked
with one of four colors, which is used throughout the appli-
cation to identify that player. Palettes of the same type are
linked, such that when a player chooses a new option, that
choice is updated across all related palettes.
Note that each of the tools only affects walls. Balls can
be grabbed, thrown, or removed (by dragging them out of
the play area) at any time, using any tool.
The pencil tool allows players to add new walls to the
table by drawing lines between points on the grid. When
a player draws a wall, that wall assumes the color of that
player’s currently selected sample. Once a wall has been
drawn, it can be moved with thehand tool. Every wall can
be moved elsewhere on the grid by simply dragging its end-
points, which appear as protruding squares.
To delete a wall from the play area, a player selects the
trash can tool, then taps the wall to be removed. The paint
brush tool presents an alternative to deletion: when ac-
tive, touching a wall changes its sample (and corresponding
color) to match the player’s current selection.
The hand saw toolis used to inﬂict damage upon walls
manually. As such, it permits localized volume reduction.
(Each tap with the hand saw causes as much damage as a hit
from the buzzsaw.) Finally, thelock toolenables players to
prevent damage to any wall with a single tap. A second tap
with the same tool removes the lock, along with the corre-
sponding gray halo that identiﬁes each locked wall.
It is important to note that none of these tools confers
any ownership rights upon its user. For example, anyone
can unlock a wall, regardless of who locked it. Players must
learn to negotiate conﬂict by working together, rather than
by restricting their purported collaborators. Thus WallBalls
(and improvisation in general) constitutes a model not only
for collaborative social interaction, but also for more ﬂexible
and inclusive political dialogue.
4.4. Other Features
During WallBalls development, we took every opportunity
to augment the basic functionality of the application with
useful additional features, many of which arose from the
brilliant feedback of our test players. These features serve to
enrich the WallBalls experience and contribute to the overall
“feel” of the instrument.
4.4.1. Sample Selector
Between sessions, a handy interface allows players to
browse the ﬁle system for W A V , AIFF and MP3 ﬁles and
build banks of twenty samples that can be rapidly loaded
into WallBalls. Thus players can arrive at a session with
a thumb drive full of samples and quickly assemble sound
banks on the ﬂy. We see this capacity for customization of
samples to be one of the most important features of the in-
strument, since it gives players the power to adapt WallBalls
to their needs—regardless of style, experience or intent.
4.4.2. Spatial Audio
WallBalls lends itself ideally to experimentation with spa-
tial audio. At present WallBalls provides up to four dis-
crete channels of sound, hardware permitting. In its default
conﬁguration, a sound triggered by a ball-wall collision at a
particular location on the display is mapped to an equivalent
position in a 2D sound space. Various alternative mappings
are also possible.
4.4.3. Democratic Clear
The initial prototype of WallBalls provided no easy means
for clearing the play area, which often proved frustrating.
Yet we recognized the danger of granting any one player the
power to prematurely destroy a collective work in progress.
Inspired by the “social borders” described by Morris [8], we
incorporated special clear buttons which only work when
pressed simultaneously by a majority of the players.
4.4.4. Speed Slider
The speed slider allows for global control of ball speed. By
dragging the slider to the right, all balls accelerate, causing
a more rapid succession of samples. By sliding to the left,
ball speed is reduced. At the midpoint, the balls stop; be-
yond the midpoint, they travel in the opposite direction. For
convenient access, WallBalls has two speed sliders, which
are synchronized such that only one may be used at a time.
5. WallBalls Technique and Theory
Group improvisation is not just an approach to musical per-
formance; it is also a highly complex social activity with far-
reaching implications. Appropriate WallBalls playing tech-
niques are therefore context dependent—integrally linked to
group dynamic, and to the loaded samples.
For casual musicians or novice WallBalls players, we
have assembled a set of pentatonic piano tones. By con-
straining the available pitches to those of a pentatonic scale,
we eliminate the possibility of any intervallic dissonance
stronger than a major second, thereby maintaining a rela-
tively open and stable pitch space. More adventurous play-
ers may bring their own sounds to the table (literally), en-
abling entirely new, more elaborate avenues of expression.
With a bit of practice, players can learn to throw balls
precisely. Cyclic paths are useful to produce familiar mu-
sical elements such as ostinati and drones. Alternatively,
80
balls can be ﬂung wildly and unpredictably. Eventually,
most balls will stray slightly from a given course, introduc-
ing subtle and progressive variations in rhythm, until they
miss a wall and pursue another path entirely. Thus WallBalls
is inherently aleatoric in nature, making it an ideal platform
for chance music.
WallBalls allows an incredibly wide range of artistic ex-
pression. A session may be sparse, involving just a few
walls or balls, or so dense that collisions occur many times
per second. In the former case, players may choose to ex-
plore the spaces and silences between events, investigating
time in a meditative, introspective manner. In the latter case,
players may choose to focus upon higher-level features of
the aggregate sound like changes in dynamics, timbre and
rhythmic intensity, instead of attending to the triggering of
individual samples.
Regardless, the goal—which is the same across all types
of performance—is to master technique in order to move
beyond it. As legendary trombonist George Lewis notes,
. . . improvisation is about . . . interaction and behav-
ior as carriers for meaning. On this view, notes, tim-
bres, melodies, durations, and the like are not ends in
themselves. Embedded in them is a more complex,
indirect, powerful signal that we must train ourselves
to detect. [7]
The core interface of WallBalls features extensive func-
tionality and a plethora of opportunities for experimenta-
tion. One especially interesting class of interaction strategy
that frequently arose is role-playing. During the debut Wall-
Balls performance, for example, one of the players assumed
sole control of the speed sliders, while the two others shared
the responsibility of placing walls and launching balls. By
switching roles between pieces, the performers were able to
maintain artistic focus in a variety of contexts.
More importantly, role-playing served to raise the inten-
sity of collective focus, or what is sometimes described as
“collective consciousness.”2 This is really the beauty of
WallBalls: The interface does not merely facilitate group
creativity—it helps players transcend the conﬁnes of indi-
vidual awareness, elevating them, if only momentarily, to a
more universal realm of collective awareness.
6. Current and Future Work
In November 2008, The University of Manitoba’s eXperi-
mental Improv Ensemble (XIE) introduced WallBalls to an
enthusiastic reception at the Faculty of Music. The group
also demonstrated the instrument in the university’s expan-
sive Engineering Atrium, where passers-by had the opportu-
nity to test WallBalls in a spatially rich audio environment.
Still, we get the sense that we have not yet fully explored
and exploited WallBalls, and continue to entertain all sorts
2 For a thoughtful discussion of collective consciousness as it applies to
free improvisation, see [1].
of possibilities. These include relatively minor alterations to
the instrument, such as free-form wall drawing, a grouping
function for composite wall structures, and a more exten-
sive array of templates. We are also entertaining more radi-
cal functions and applications such as a portable, interactive
GPS version of the instrument that would utilize hand-held
devices. As with all creative endeavors, the capabilities of
WallBalls appear to be limited solely by our imagination.
7. Acknowledgements
We would like to thank XIE members Kevin Curtis, Luke
Nickel and Heidi Ugrin for their invaluable suggestions and
tireless commitment to the project. We also wish to ac-
knowledge the ﬁnancial support of the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada.
References
[1] J. B. Burrows. Musical archetypes and collective conscious-
ness: cognitive distribution and free improvisation. Critical
Studies in Improvisation /´Etudes critiques en improvisation,
volume 1, No. 1, 2004.
[2] P. Dietz and D. Leigh. DiamondTouch: A multi-user touch
technology. In Proceedings of the 14th Annual Symposium
on User Interface Software and Technology, 219–226, 2001.
[3] S. Fels and F. V ogt. Tooka: Explorations of two person in-
struments. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Confer-
ence on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 1–6, 2002.
[4] T. Iwai. Composition on the table. In SIGGRAPH ’99 Elec-
tronic art and animation catalog, page 10, 1999.
[5] S. Jord `a. Interactive music systems for everyone: Exploring
visual feedback as a way for creating more intuitive, efﬁcient
and learnable instruments. In Proceedings of the Stockholm
Music Acoustics Conference, 2003.
[6] M. Kaltenbrunner, S. Jord `a, G. Geiger, and M. Alonso. The
reacTable*: a collaborative musical instrument. In Proc.
15th IEEE International Workshops on Enabling Technolo-
gies: Infrastructure for Collaborative Enterprises, 2006.
[7] G. E. Lewis. V oyager: improvised duos between human and
computer musicians. Liner notes. Avant/Disk Union, 1993.
[8] M. R. Morris. Social borders: Mediating group dynam-
ics through interface design. Ambidextrous Magazine: The
Stanford University Journal of Design, 36–37, Winter 2006.
[9] Y . Nishibori and T. Iwai. Tenori-on. In Proceedings of the
6th International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical
Expression, 172–175, 2006.
[10] S. Sandler. Audiotouch. http://ssandler.wordpress.com.
[11] N. Schnell and M. Battier. Introducing composed instru-
ments, technical and musicological implications. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2nd International Conference on New Inter-
faces for Musical Expression, 1–5, 2002.
[12] E. Tse and S. Greenberg. Rapidly prototyping single display
groupware through the SDG toolkit. In Proceedings of the
Fifth Australasian User Interface Conference, volume 28,
101–110, 2004.
[13] D. Wessel and M. Wright. Problems and prospects for inti-
mate musical control of computers. InProceedings of the 1st
Workshop On New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 2001.
81