Disky: a DIY Rotational Interface
with Inherent Dynamics
Karl Y erkes
University of California,
Santa Barbara
yerkes@mat.ucsb.edu
Greg Shear
University of California,
Santa Barbara
greg.shear@gmail.com
Matthew Wright
University of California,
Santa Barbara
matt@create.ucsb.edu
ABSTRACT
Disky is a computer hard drive re-purposed into a do-it-
yourself USB turntable controller that oﬀers high resolution
and low latency for controlling parameters of multimedia
performance software. Disky is a response to the challenge
“re-purpose something that is often discarded and share it
with the do-it-yourself community to promote reuse!”
Keywords
turntable, dial, encoder, re-purposed, hard drive, scratch-
ing, inherent dynamics, DIY
1. INTRODUCTION
We describe Disky, a USB turntable controller, as a do-
it-yourself project oﬀering high resolution, low latency per-
formance and built using household tools and inexpensive
components. Firmware for the microcontroller and example
software are available online further lowering the technical
barrier for entry.
Consumer waste such as personal computers, VHS ma-
chines, and CRT monitors is discarded by the ton every
year making these materials inexpensive and easy to ﬁnd
– ideal for do-it-yourself projects. Speciﬁcally, Disky uti-
lizes the mechanical parts found in obsolete hard-disk drives
meeting all of our design criteria: accessible, reliable, low-
cost, and high-performance. In this, Disky is a response to
the challenge “re-purpose something that is often discarded
and share it with the do-it-yourself community to promote
reuse!”
We begin by describing the device’s hardware, software,
and latency, then describe several applications including
turntable scratching and non-obvious uses, and end with
diagrams and step-by-step instructions for building a Disky.
2. THE DEVICE
Disky (Figure 1) is a rotatable control surface built from a
common computer hard drive. When the surface is rotated,
position, direction, speed, and presence of human touch are
reported to the host computer.
Disky’s rotating platters have the inherent ability to store
physical energy that will dissipate through friction. The
sound produced by many acoustic instruments decays over
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME2010, 15-18th June 2010 Sydney, Australia
Copyright 2010, Copyright remains with the authors.
Figure 1: A Disky
time; this behavior is commonly imitated in electronic syn-
thesizers, e.g., with ADSR envelopes. Mapping Disky’s ro-
tational speed to loudness is one way to achieve this tradi-
tional behavior, and other mappings may also return inter-
esting results. The tactile aspect of these dynamics is also
important: the inertia of the system resists change to its
state requiring proportional physical eﬀort.
2.1 Hardware
There are several components used to modify a hard drive
to create Disky. Two reﬂective photo interrupters located
beneath the hard drive platters face upward to “read” a
quadrature encoder pattern (Figure 9). This pattern is
printed on paper and glued to the underside of the bot-
tom platter. The photo interrupters come pre-assembled
on a chip (Pololu enc01a 0J1216) with two Schmitt triggers
that condition the signal for the digital inputs of a micro-
controller. Though this is a rather expensive part (approx-
imately $15 USD), it greatly simpliﬁes assembly.
An Atmel QT113 detects change in capacitance caused
by human touch anywhere on the hard drive platters or
chassis. The touch sensor and two Schmitt trigger digital
outputs are connected to separate input pins on an AT-
MEGA based PRJC Teensy microcontroller package. All
of these components are small enough to be secured to the
hard drive platform eliminating long, vulnerable connecting
wires and simplifying the form factor.
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
150
Figure 2: Latency test apparatus
2.2 Software/Communication
Communication between the microcontroller and the host
computer is accomplished with the PJRC rawhid library.
This library provides ﬁne control over queuing, timeouts,
and bandwidth guarantees to allow low-latency communi-
cation.
2.2.1 Microcontroller Firmware
The main loop of the ﬁrmware checks the state of the pins
that read the quadrature pattern and the touch sensor. This
loop has a worst-case period of approximately 30 us. The
system state (position, velocity, and presence of touch) is
calculated and packed into a 16 byte packet. This packet is
placed in a queue of size 1, which is checked by the host at
a period of approximately 1 ms. The queue is overwritten
with a new packet each time the system state changes, so
only the most recent packets get to the host computer.
2.2.2 Host Computer Software
After opening the Disky device, the host-side software
must check the USB HID queue for Disky packets at some
period less than or equal to 1 ms or packets will accumu-
late in the queue. In the Max/MSP and Pd examples, this
means banging the [disky] object with a [metro] object us-
ing period of 1 ms or less. The other examples use a thread
that repeatedly reads from the USB HID queue and then
sleeps for 900 us.
2.3 System Latency
Low latency is critical for a performer’s ability to express
through an interactive real-time instrument. A major de-
sign goal was to identify signiﬁcant delay along the control
signal path and minimize it wherever possible.
We measured the end-to-end latency using the stereo-
digital-recorder paradigm [7] in which the acoustic sound
from physically contacting an input device, thestimulus,i s
recorded to the ﬁrst channel of a stereo audio track, and
the audio output of the host application, theresponse,i s
recorded to the second channel. Both of these signals are
recorded using standard microphones connected to a single
audio interface such that error introduced by this technique
aﬀects all of the data equally and cancels diﬀerentially. A
MATLAB script then ﬁnds the time between events in the
two channels of a long stereo recording containing many
stimulus/response pairs. This method provides “an indis-
putable measure of total system latency not based on any
software’s opinion of the current time” [7].
Manually setting a turntable in motion requires the user
to touch the platter and thrust in the desired direction of
Figure 3: Histogram of latency in milliseconds from
stimulus to microcontroller (left) and from micro-
controller to audio output (right)
rotation, relying on the friction between skin and the platter
to transfer energy. This interaction is not inherently per-
cussive and lacks the appropriate attack necessary for this
analysis method. In order to produce a more percussive
sound, a plastic spindle was glued to the top platter and
used as a striking surface (Figure 2). A simple ﬂick with a
mechanical pencil was suﬃcient to set the disc in motion,
the sound of which was easily recorded by a microphone
into thestimulus channel.
In order to separate the latency of the Disky hardware
from the latency of the USB connection and sound-producing
application software, we created an intermediate signal by
modifying the ﬁrmware to toggle the logic state of an output
pin on the microcontroller whenever a signal was detected
from the photo interruptors (immediately before sending a
HID message to the host computer). The output pin was
wired directly to a small audio driver that, with each state
change, produced a deﬁnite click. This sound was also eas-
ily detected by another microphone and recorded into the
microcontroller channel.
Finally, a lightweight Max patch output an impulse through
the computer speakers with each HID message it received.
This audio signal was recorded by a third microphone into
theresponse channel.
From these three channels the MATLAB script deter-
mined the latency of the system as split in two stages. The
ﬁrst stage, between the stimulus and the microcontroller
signal, contributed 4 ms latency on average with a standard
deviation of 1.7. The second stage, between the microcon-
troller signal and the audio output from the host computer,
contributed 5 ms latency on average with a standard devia-
tion of 1.7 (Figure 3). The end-to-end latency of the entire
system was 9 ms on average with a standard deviation 2.4.
Out of the 401 data points there were 4 outliers in the ﬁrst
stage between 7 and 8 ms, and 8 outliers in the second stage
between 9 and 24 ms. These points, all more than 2 stan-
dard deviations above the mean, were removed for visual
clarity of the histogram, but their presence in these results
calls for further investigation. The host computer was an
Apple MacBook Pro 2.2 GHz Intel Core 2 Duo running Mac
OS 10.6 and Max 5.0.6.
10 ms maximum latency and±1 ms maximum jitter are
common target values for real-time computer-based instru-
ments [6]. Disky’s total average latency of 9 ms falls within
this range, but the variability of the latency is well above
the 1 ms target. We suspect that the outliers in the sec-
ond stage are operating system anomalies and are beyond
the current scope of this project. A comparison of the his-
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
151
tograms suggest that most of the jitter is introduced before
the microcontroller signal and is likely a result of the vary-
ing starting position of the encoder pattern with respect to
the optical sensor. Consider the situation in which an edge
in the encoder pattern is immediately adjacent to the opti-
cal sensor: movement in one direction will produce a signal
almost instantly, whereas movement in the opposite direc-
tion will produce no output until the platter rotates enough
for the far edge to reach the sensor. It follows that the jitter
of this stage is dependent on the speed of the gesture be-
ing performed, is only present when starting from rest, and
may be reduced by increasing the resolution of the encoder
pattern.
3. APPLICATIONS
This section presents a sampling of explorations that make
use of Disky’s deﬁning attributes, both inherent and inten-
tional: touch sensitivity, inﬁnite rotation, and the ability to
store and dissipate kinetic energy over time.
3.1 Scrubbed Media
Turntables were initially made popular as performance
instruments by DJs, and Disky’s most obvious use is in em-
ulating an analog turntable for mix or scratch DJing. The
user’s interaction with Disky will certainly diﬀer from that
with a motorized turntable, however alternative modes of
operation can compensate for this diﬀerence. The ﬁrst is
“Transport Mode” where the accumulative angular posi-
tion of the platter maps directly to playback position in the
recording. This mode allows the user to move quickly back
and forth through the music in search of an appropriate
transition point (otherwise known as “cueing”). Once this
point has been found the user simply removes her hand from
the conductive platter (and hence, the capacitive touch sen-
sor) immediately resuming playback. Disky’s low latency
and responsiveness to subtle movements allows for scratch-
ing in this mode. We would like to perform user studies
with turntable DJs to see how well their skills translate to
Disky, particularly in light of the size diﬀerence between a
Disky platter and a 12 inch record.
The second mode of operation is “Nudge/Drag Mode” in
which platter speed temporarily alters playback rate. The
act of mixing often requires the performer to re-align the
rhythmic phase of two songs playing at the same tempo,
and this is achieved on a traditional motorized turntable by
nudging the record forward in the direction of rotation, or
dragging a ﬁnger along the edge of the platter, momentarily
increasing or decreasing playback rate. This interaction is
approximated by mapping Disky’s instantaneous speed to
change in playback rate: clockwise motion temporarily in-
creases the tempo by a small amount, and counterclockwise
motion decreases it.
We acknowledge HDDJ, another turntable interface made
from a re-purposed hard drive [5]. Instead of a printed en-
coder pattern and optical sensors, HDDJ determines the
platter’s speed from the oscillating voltage created when
the electric motor is spun by hand. With fewer modiﬁca-
tions necessary, HDDJ is an easier project and therefore
more accessible to the DIY user. However the motor pro-
duces a signal only once every 30 degrees, a much lower
resolution than Disky. According to the HDDJ developers
this drawback makes the interface suitable only for mixing,
not scratching.
Similar to the DJ application, Disky may be useful in
audio/video editing workstations as a transport device. We
envision a non-linear mapping of the accumulative angular
position of the platter to cursor position, such that faster
rotational speeds cause a larger change in cursor position
per change in angular position.
3.2 Granular Synthesis
This instrument was designed for live granulation of a
predominantly melodic source signal, e.g., piano or voice,
to explore the space between harmonic and textural sounds.
The audio engine continuously records the input signal into
a 10-second circular buﬀer from which grains are read.
The qualities of a physical interface to a software synthe-
sizer can easily come as an afterthought leaving the user
to interact with the system via a QWERTY keyboard and
pointing device or a generic bank of sliders and knobs. It
was an important design goal to allow performance that
resembled neither “oﬃce work” [8] nor “recording studio
work,” for the interface to visually reﬂect the state of the
synthesis model, and for the output sound to decay to si-
lence when the performer’s hands leave the instrument.
Disky’s own physical dynamics add sonic character that
is unspeciﬁed by the software: platter speed is mapped to
grain density such that high speeds produce many grains
triggered in rapid succession. A spinning disc sustains the
sound output absent persistent user input, but friction grad-
ually removes energy from the system. As the disc slows,
fewer and fewer grains are produced, their separation in
time increasing until the disc stops and no more grains are
played. Of course, the user controls the disk’s motion by
hand and may manually sustain or damp the motion in per-
formance.
A long (50 cm) pressure-sensitive touch strip augments
the hardware for this application: position on the touch
strip is mapped to position within the source sample from
where grains are sliced, and pressure determines both grain
amplitude and attack time, where high pressure results in
loud grains with fast attacks. Stereo position and width can
also be adjusted through the GUI but are not intended for
live manipulation during a performance.
Strengths of the system include interaction where the size
and forcefulness of a gesture is reﬂected in the output mak-
ing clear the relationship between the visual and the au-
dible aspects of the performance, and minimal reliance on
the GUI allows for eye contact between performers. It was
diﬃcult, however, to determine current position within the
granulation buﬀer based on ﬁnger position on the strip be-
fore any sound was produced. Also, friction between the
performer’s ﬁnger and the touch strip during high pressure
sliding gestures was problematic but was easily, though per-
haps not elegantly, remedied by a cotton glove.
Inherent dynamics of a physical system were also used in
a granular synthesis context by Hartman et al. in the Swing
Set, an apparatus of three pendulums [3]. The motion of
one pendulum was mapped to the motion of the cursor in a
granulation buﬀer, and the position of the other pendulums
were mapped to additional synthesis models, the outputs
of which were all mixed together. The decaying oscillations
of the pendulums and the resulting rhythms contrast to
Disky’s behavior and a system employing both may prove
interesting with the proper mappings.
3.3 Rotational Scanning Synthesizer
Written in openFrameworks, this synth interprets images
from a live camera (Figure 4). It scans through a circular
section of the image along a radius whose angle is controlled
by Disky. Intensity values along this radius are mapped
to a wave-table which is played at a constant period. It
is intended that a whiteboard, sketchbook, or some other
drawing apparatus be used as the live image, so that this
system can allow the composer/performer to map images
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
152
Figure 4: Live image scanning synthesizer
Table 1: Parts to buy
Description Manufacturer Part Price
Wheel Encoder Pololu 1217 $14.95
Microcontroller PJRC teensy $18.00
Touch Sensor Atmel QT113 $4.00
Hard drive – – $2.00
Total – – $38.95
in a 2d polar space to sound. This is somewhat similar to
the Circular Optical Object Locator [2] but with explicit
control of angle rather than a constant rotation and with a
diﬀerent sound mapping.
Future work on this synth will include mapping radius
color values to the amplitudes of partials (additive synthe-
sis) and to ﬁlter coeﬃcients (subtractive synthesis).
4. CONSTRUCTION
This section shows how to make a Disky as a DIY project.
4.1 Parts / Cost
Table 1 is a list of parts to buy and Table 2 is a list of
tools, supplies and resources to secure in preparation for
construction.
4.2 Find. Dismantle. Save.
The ﬁrst step in building Disky is to ﬁnd and disman-
tle several hard drives. Many parts in 3.5 inch computer
hard drives are useful for Disky and other projects. Collect
the bushings, platters, screws, magnets, spindle assemblies,
motors, and circuit boards.
Extra platters are useful when gluing patterns to plat-
ters goes wrong. While gluing patterns, motors are used as
guides. Bushings serve as spacers when adjusting the num-
Table 2: Materials, Tools, Equipment
Description Manufacturer Part Price
Calipers Harbor Freight 93293-1VGA $19.99
Super glue Devcon 29005 $2.00
Spray glue Elmer’s E-451 $5.99
Soldering iron – – –
Quality printer – – –
Total – – $27.98
Figure 5: A hard drive that is good for Disky
Figure 6: A hard drive that is not so good for Disky
ber of platters on a Disky and are also useful when adjusting
the distance between the sensors and the pattern.
Future work on Disky will use the spindle assembly of the
hard drive to produce sonic and tactile feedback. Consider
leaving the spindle assembly in place.
4.3 Select the Best Hard Drive
While dismantling hard drives, look for qualities that
would make a good Disky. Choose a drive that is pleas-
ing to look at and feels nice to touch. Generally there are
2 forms of hard drive chassis. One form consists of a rel-
atively ﬂat platform covered by a sort of hat-shaped cap
(Figure 5). These are good for Disky because they allow
tactile access to the edge of the platters. The other form
of hard drive chassis (Figure 6) blocks access to the edge of
the platters and they generally have sharp protrusions that
could injure the enthusiastic user.
Some hard drive motors have strong magnets that the
user can feel as the platters are turned. These prevent
smooth, uniform spin and are generally undesirable for Disky.
Throw the platters and let them settle. If the platters ro-
tate back and forth before they come to rest, consider using
a diﬀerent hard drive.
The ability to stack more or fewer platters on a Disky
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
153
Figure 7: Mounting sensor
Figure 8: Soldering connections
allows the user to change the inertial characteristics. If this
is desirable, look for a hard drive that can accept a variable
number platters.
4.4 Steps for building
4.4.1 Mount Sensor Assembly
Inspect the hard drive chassis for a good place to glue
the sensor. Position the sensor near the outer edge of the
platter such that the photo-interrupters are in line with a
radius as shown in Figure 7. If necessary, drill holes through
the chassis to allow space for wiring the sensor to the mi-
crocontroller.
4.4.2 Mount/Wire Microcontroller
Solder microcontroller to sensor as seen in Figure 8.
4.4.3 Make/Mount Encoder Pattern
Download the encoder pattern tool from karlyerkes.com/disky.
Use calipers to measure the distance from the outer edge of
the platters to the center of the outer photo-interrupter as
shown in Figure 11. The encoder pattern tool will use this
measurement to create a printable pattern. Print the pat-
tern on non-glossy, white paper using a high-quality printer
with deep blacks. With a razor knife, cut out the center
Figure 9: Cutting pattern
Figure 10: Gluing pattern
Figure 11: Measure from sensor center to platter
edge
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
154
Figure 12: Platter elevation
Figure 13: Making shims
of the pattern as shown in Figure 9. Cut carefully along
the outside of the printed circle to get a uniform, centered
circular cut.
Place a platter on a free motor as seen in Figure 10. Spray
a very thin layer of glue on this platter, using a spent toilet-
paper roll to protect the motor from the glue. Guide the
prepared pattern onto the motor and then use another plat-
ter to compress it against the gluey platter.
4.4.4 Adjust Pattern Elevation
The reﬂective photo-interrupters work optimally when
they are mounted approximately 0.6 mm from the encoder
pattern (see Figure 12). Adjust this distance using shims
made from thick paper (see Figure 13). Make sure the plat-
ters are tightened down, then measure the gap with your
eye by comparing to calipers set to 0.6 mm. Take care not
to tighten the bottom platter down onto the optical sensor.
4.4.5 Test
Connect Disky to your computer with a USB cable. Down-
load and run one or more of the Disky examples found at
karlyerkes.com/disky.
5. FUTURE WORK
In future work we will attempt to implement course and
ﬁne control of the variable reluctance motor to complete
the turntable metaphor. We will try to implement haptic
force-feedback using this motor in the style of D’Groove [1]
and Verplank’s PLANK [4]. We will increase the resolution
of the pattern and plan a formal user evaluation.
6. REFERENCES
[1] T. Beamish, K. Van Den Doel, K. MacLean, and
S. Fels. Dgroove: A haptic turntable for digital audio
control. Proc. of ICAD, Boston, MA,2 0 0 3 .
[2] T. Hankins, D. Merrill, and J. Robert. Circular optical
object locator. InProceedings of the 2002 conference
on New interfaces for musical expression,p a g e2 .
National University of Singapore, 2002.
[3] E. Hartman, J. Cooper, and K. Spratt. Swing Set:
Musical Controllers with Inherent Physical Dynamics.
InProceedings of the 2008 conference on New
interfaces for musical expression,2 0 0 8 .
[4] B. Verplank, M. Gurevich, and M. Mathews. The
Plank: designing a simple haptic controller. In
Proceedings of the 2002 conference on New interfaces
for musical expression, page 4. National University of
Singapore, 2002.
[5] N. Villar, H. Gellersen, M. Jervis, and A. Lang. The
ColorDex DJ system: A New Interface for Live Music
Mixing. InProceedings of the 7th international
conference on New interfaces for musical expression,
page 269. ACM, 2007.
[6] D. Wessel and M. Wright. Problems and prospects for
intimate musical control of computers.Computer
Music Journal,2 6 ( 3 ) : 1 1 – 2 2 ,2 0 0 2 .
[7] M. Wright, R. Cassidy, and M. Zbyszy´ nski. Audio and
Gesture Latency Measurements on Linux and OSX. In
Proceedings of the ICMC,p a g e s4 2 3 – 4 2 9 ,2 0 0 4 .
[8] D. Zicarelli. Music for mind and body.Electronic
Musician, 7(2):154, February 1991.
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
155