Proceedings of the 2002 Conference on New Instruments for Musical Expression (NIME-02), Dublin, Ireland, May 24-26, 2002
Creating Sustained Tones with the Cicada's Rapid
Sequential Buckling Mechanism
Tamara Smyth
CCRMA
Department of Music
Stanford Univeristy
Stanford, California
tamara@ccrma.stanford.edu
Julius O. Smith III
CCRMA
Department of Music
Stanford Univeristy
Stanford, California
jos@ccrma.stanford.edu
ABSTRACT
The cicada uses a rapid sequence of buckling ribs to initi-
ate and sustain vibrations in its tymbal plate (the primary
mechanical resonator in the cicada’s sound production sys-
tem). The tymbalimba, a music controller based on this
same mechanism, has a row of 4 convex aluminum ribs (as
on the cicada’s tymbal) arranged much like the keys on a
calimba. Each rib is spring loaded and capable of snapping
down into a V-shape (a motion referred to as buckling), un-
der the downward force of the user’s ﬁnger. This energy
generated by the buckling motion is measured by an ac-
celerometer located under each rib and used as the input
to a physical model.
Keywords
Bioacoustics, Physical Modeling, Controllers, Cicada, Buck-
ling mechanism.
INTRODUCTION
Though many bioacoustic systems are similar to those found
in musical acoustics [4], the cicada’s use of a sequence of
rapidly buckling ribs to excite and sustain tones is rather
unique. Neither the buckling mechanism itselt, nor the use
of discrete impulses to sustain musical tones, seem to be
used by any traditional musical instruments. Musical instru-
ments generally require the player to supply continuous en-
ergy to sustain a tone, as in the continuous motion of the arm
while bowing a string instrument, or the continous blowing
required to sustain a note on a wind instrument. Discrete ex-
citations mechanisms such as plucking or striking generally
produce tones that decay after a period of time.
In this research, a music controller based on the cicada’s
buckling mechanism was developed, so that its potential as
a musical instrument could be explored. It provides a me-
chanical user interface to an already existing physical model
of the cicada’s sound production mechanism [4], allowing
the user to manipulate the computer model’s parameters in
a meaningful and intuitive way.
A public demonstration of the device showed that people
were captivated by the the responsiveness of the mecha-
nism itself (as this was an early stage in the device, there
was still no sound). The way the spring loaded mechanism
caused the ribs to bounce back up at the user everytime they
were buckled, created an animated excitement in some users
and seemed to prove the importance of physical stimuli in
user intefaces (something which is, perhaps, too often over-
looked).
Figure 1: The tymbalimba
This paper will brieﬂy review the cicada’s rapid sequential
buckling mechanism (which is used to excite the primary
mechanical resonator of the sound production system), and
discusses how this mechanism is incorporated in the de-
velopment of a musical controller for an existing physical
model of the cicada [4]. Other issues, such as interfacing
the mechanical model to the physical model, will also be
discussed.
THECICADA’SRAPID SEQUENTIAL BUCKLING MECH-
ANISM
Thecicada uses a rapid sequence of buckling ribs to ex-
cite the primary resonator of its sound producing mecha-
NIME02-1
Proceedings of the 2002 Conference on New Instruments for Musical Expression (NIME-02), Dublin, Ireland, May 24-26, 2002
nism [1]. Buckling is a nonlinear phenomenon that results
when an inward force applied to a convex form causes it to
spring into a concave form [3] (see ﬁg 2).
F
Figure 2: Inward buckling of a tymbal rib
When the force is no longer present, as is the case when the
muscle relaxes, the rib is free to spring back to its original
shape, ready to be buckled again.
The cicada’s primary sound production organ, the tymbal,
is equipped with a series of convex ribs that collapse under
the force of a contracting muscle [3]. The tymbal plate,
the primary resonator, is immediately set into vibration after
the ﬁrst buckling rib. Each subsequent buckling sustains
the vibration of the plate, allowing the cicada to produce a
sustained tone.
THE MECHANICAL MODEL
The tymbalimba, like the cicada’s tymbal, consists of 4 con-
vex aluminum ribs arranged in a sequence, much like the
keys on a calimba, so that each rib ﬁts comfortably under
the hand’s ﬁngers (the spacing between the ribs is adjustable
to suit the user).
When a user applies a sufﬁcient downward force to a rib, it
buckles (see ﬁgure 3). The energy signal generated by this
motion will depend on variables such as the force used and
the speed of the ﬁnger’s motion. As in the case of the tymbal
ribs, when the user removes his/her ﬁnger, the model’s rib
will spring back to its original shape.
Depending on the species of Cicada, the rate of muscle con-
tractions can occur as frequently as 200 Hz. Of course, the
neurogenically initiated muscular contractions of the cicada
give it quite an advantage over a human. It would be absurd
to expect a human to buckle the mechanical ribs as quickly
as a cicada – it certainly wouldn’t be long before the pain of
repetitive strain injuries was felt. The mechanical controller
therefore, aims to capture the energy generated by the buck-
ling of the ﬁrst rib – based on this signal, the sequence can
be generated by the physical model. This solution allows a
human to experiment with a unique sound producing mech-
anism, and the unique sound that results.
Since there are 4 ribs to buckle on the controller, the user
does not have to repeat the buckling motion on the same rib
(again, an ergonomic adjustment). Rather, the user wishes
to initialize each buckling sequence more quickly, s/he can
“drum” the ﬁngers over all 4 ribs.
Figure 3: The controller’s buckling motion
As the idea of the controller is to capture the buckling ex-
citation mechanism itself, and not necessarily the ability
of nature’s ﬁnest virtuoso of this mechanism, the speed at
which the user buckles the rib is left up to musical experi-
mentation. What is important is that the user’s single motion
initiates a sequence of several energy impulse (generated by
the physical model) that will allow the production of a sus-
tained tone.
The user can change the signal generated by the buckling
ribs, by varying the gesture of the attack (speed of motion
or force used). The cicada changes the amount of energy
released by changing the curvature of the ribs [2]. This
also may be accomplished in the controller by changing the
NIME02-2
Proceedings of the 2002 Conference on New Instruments for Musical Expression (NIME-02), Dublin, Ireland, May 24-26, 2002
length of the bottom spring that holds the two parts of the
rib in place. A shorter spring gives more curvature to the
rib, making it more difﬁcult to buckle. As a result, more
energy will be released by the ﬁrst rib and a greater number
of ribs will buckle in the sequence (by the physical model).
This is, however, a decision that must be made before a per-
formance, much in the same you decide upon certain reeds
or strings before playing traditional musical instruments.
INTERFACING TO THE PHYSICAL MODEL
What is measured by the controller is not the force input of
the user, but rather the energy produced by the ribs that are
buckled by the user. Accelerometers under each rib mea-
sure the energy generated by the buckling motion and, after
passing through a signal conditioning circuit, provide an in-
put excitation signal to the physical model. Based on this
signal, the computer model will then determine the result-
ing buckling sequence.
The controller provides a more accurate input signal to the
physical model than the arbitrary impulse signals previously
being used [4] and, because the user is playing a real me-
chanical system, s/he is not denied haptic information im-
portant when playing a musical instrument.
Physical modeling synthesis tends to be extremely parameter-
rich, often requiring too much attention to individial vari-
ables to be suitable for real-time performance. The pre-
viously developed physical model of the cicada ([4]) suf-
fered from this problem when determining the parameters
of a rather complex system of buckling ribs. How many
ribs should buckle? What is the rate of buckling? What is
the rate of muscle contractions (the time before re-starting
the sequence of buckling ribs)? What is the energy differ-
ence between the IN and OUT buckling cycle or between
the buckling of the ﬁrst and last rib?
Just as the cicada varies each of these parameters during
vocalization, so should the user be able to manipulate, in
real-time, all the factors that determine the physical model’s
sound. Of course, it is impossible to be aware of, let alone
control, so many individual parameters when playing any
musical instrument (electronic or acoustic). And since it is
generally not desirable to remove functionality from a phys-
ical model by eliminating some of its parameters (just to
make it more controllable), it would be useful if these pa-
rameters could be obtained from functions representing one
single action or gesture which the user could learn to do in
various ways to produce different results.
By buckling one rib, the user uses one motion to produce
a signal that is sent to the physical model. From this input
signal, the physical model can derive many of its parameter
values without subjecting the user to the daunting task of
tweaking a myriad of knobs and buttons. From one gesture,
the model obtains information about the envelope of the im-
pulse (which effects both timbre and volume in the sound),
the number of ribs that will buckle in the sequence (which is
derived from the amount of energy in the signal, and, since
each rib can be mapped to a pitch, frequency information
can also be obtained. Since the parameters are determined
by one motion of the user, they will change only as the mo-
tion changes. With time and practice, the user will eventu-
ally learn how varying the motion changes the quality of the
sustained tones of the systhesizer, and will be much more
successful in playing the instrumnet.
BUILDING THE MODEL
As much of the work in this project involved designing and
building the mechanical controller, a section is included de-
scribing the methods used.
Machining Methods
The parts of the model were machined from aluminum (6061-
T6) on a CNC mill at Stanford University’s Product Real-
ization Lab (PRL). Fixturing of the ribs (T-parts) was done
with each part attached to a block of aluminum via socket-
cap screws. Each screw was placed at each of the 3 tips of
the T-parts, taking advantage of the need for holes in these
positions to place the axial shafts.
Figure 4: Fixturing the T-part for CNC machining
Figure 5: A side view of the T-part when ﬁxtured for
CNC machining
NIME02-3
Proceedings of the 2002 Conference on New Instruments for Musical Expression (NIME-02), Dublin, Ireland, May 24-26, 2002
Obtaining the Signal from the Buckling Ribs
Accelerometers are placed under the T-parts, with the wiring
hidden in thin channels to reduce their visability. Since it is
only the envelope of the signal that is needed (scaling will
take place in the computer), the accelerometers provide the
desired signal generated by the buckling ribs, with very little
need of additional signal conditioning.
The output of each of the 4 accelerometers is sampled us-
ing an analog to digital converter (MAX1270) before being
sent on its own channel to the Basic Stamp microcontroller.
The output of the Basic Stamp is then sent through the com-
puter’s serial port and received through a Pd [5] serial obe-
ject. This buckling signal is then available as input to the
physical model.
FUTURE WORK
An addition to the instrument, currently in progress, will
allow the user to change the sounding pitch with the right
hand, while controlling the buckling mechanism with the
left. It is an extension of the base plate, and will contain 4
linear force sensing resistors (FSR) (one for each octave).
Specially formed grooves in the plate will allow the user to
easily locate the tempered placement of pitches on the FSR,
while still permitting the ﬁnger to slide between the them.
Future work may also include creating different sizes of the
controller. For example, it may be interesting to create a
scaled down version so that it ﬁts easily in one hand, and
buckling occurs when one “makes a ﬁst”.
CONCLUSION
Thetymbalimba goes beyond simple on-off triggering de-
vices. Measuring the energy generated by the mechanical
controller, provides the physical model of the cicada with an
input signal that accurately represents the user’s gestures, as
well as the buckling motion of the ribs. Not only does this
eliminate the incumbrance of controlling the countless indi-
vidual parameters normally associated with physical mod-
els, but it allows the user the satisfaction of playing a re-
sponsive haptic interface – and hearing the results of the
intriguing sustained tones of the cicada’s vocalization.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Many thanks to the teaching assistants at Stanford’s Product
Realization Lab (PRL). They gave endless help and sugges-
tions during the development of this model.
REFERENCES
1. H. C. Bennet-Clark. Tymbal mechanics and the control of
song frequency in the cicada Cyclochila australasiae. Journal
of Experimental Biology, 200:1681–1694, 1997.
2. A. C. Ewing. Arthropod Bioacoustics. Cornell University
Press, Ithaca, New York, 1989.
3. N. Fletcher. Acoustic Systems in Biology. Oxford University
Press, New York, New York, 1992.
4. T. Smyth and J. Smith. A musical instrument based on a bioa-
coustic model of a cicada. In Proceeding of ICMC 2001. In-
ternational Computer Music Conference (ICMC), 2001.
5. www.pure data.org.
NIME02-4