 Polus: The Design and Development of a New, 
Mechanically Bowed String Instrument Ensemble 
 
Blake Johnston 
johnstblak@myvuw.ac.nz  
Victoria University 
Wellington, New Zealand  
 
Henry Dengate Thrush 
dengathenr@myvuw.ac.nz  
Victoria University 
Wellington, New Zealand 
 
Ajay Kapur 
kapuraj@ecs.vuw.ac.nz 
Victoria University 
Wellington, New Zealand  
        Jim Murphy 
      murphyjame@myvuw.ac.nz  
         Victoria University 
           Wellington, New Zealand  
      Tane Moleta 
      moletatane@myvuw.ac.nz 
       Victoria University 
       Wellington, New Zealand  
ABSTRACT 
This paper details the creation, design, implementation and uses 
of a series of new mechanically bowed string instruments. 
These instruments  have been designed with the objective of 
allowing for multiple parameters of musical expressivity, as 
well as including the physical and spatial features of the 
instruments to be integral aspects of their perception as 
instruments and sonic objects . This paper focuses on the 
hardware design, software implemen tation, and present musical 
uses of the ensemble. 
 
Keywords 
Robotic Bowed String Instrument, Sound Installation, Spatial 
Instrument Design, Arduino, MIDI, Bow Wheel.  
1. INTRODUCTION AND RELATED 
WORK 
The history of mechanical bowing mechanism goes back to C. 
V. Raman’s work, in 1920. With the aim of conducting detailed 
research on the mechanical conditions necessary for obtaining a 
steady tone, Raman developed a system of moving a violin at a 
constant rate perpendicular to a fixed bow. With this system, 
different bows could be tested and different parameters could 
be isolated to show their effects on the resulting sound [1].  
 
This system allowed for others to undertake qualitative research 
on the differences between the sound and frequency response of 
different violins. F. A. Saunders conducted multiple studies, 
including using Raman’s system to examine the differences 
between the frequency response of famous Stradivarius violins 
and other violins, to examine what sounding characteristics 
were responsible for the Stradivarius’ hallowed reputation [2].  
 
Since this work, there have been many new systems built that 
are driven for artistic purposes, rather than scientific research 
purposes. Ajay Kapur gives a broad and comprehensive 
overview of robotic string instruments [3], including Mubot [4], 
a modular robotic system that is able to perform multiple 
instruments, including the violin and  cello. The performing 
mechanism is split into two parts  for the violin and cello 
implementations: the bow operating mecha nism, and the 
fingering mechanism. The  bow operating mechanism uses a 
traditional bow, and the mechanism positions the bow so that it 
can move between each string, and control the bow pressure of 
the bowing stroke. The frett ing mechanism is modeled on the  
human hand, and has two fingers that can slide down the neck 
the instrument. These fingers can push against the string to stop 
them, controlling pitch content.  
 
A more recent instrument , which departs from the traditional  
design model of human interaction  with an existing instrument, 
is Godfried-Willem Raes ’s Hurdy [5], which is one of the vast 
robotic instruments supported by the Logos Foundation.  Hurdy 
is a bowed bass instrument , which uses a rotating loop of bow 
material that excites the string as it mo ves around it. The 
bowing speed and pressure can be controlled,  as well as the 
direction of rotation.  
 
The name alludes to the Hurdy gurdy, the string instrument that 
was popular in the renaissa nce period  and uses a crank-turned 
rosined wheel to act as a bow. A keyboard is used to stop the 
strings at different nodes, and the bowing wheel rotates to 
excite the strings.  The concept of a bowing wheel is abstractly 
implemented by Raes’s Hurdy, and similarly, by an ensemble 
of human performers named  The Bowed P iano Ensemble . 
Nylon fishwire strands are rosined and then looped around each 
string of a grand piano. The performers of the ensemble bow 
notes by pulling one end of the looped fishwire, pulling it 
around the string causing it to vibrate.  
 
The design of the Polus instruments  uses the abstract ideas of 
the bowing wheel, but provides a new interaction between the 
bowing wheel and a string through the movement of the wheel.  
Important design motivations were the ability to have a range 
of musical expression, fr om dynamics to different bowing 
techniques. Additionally, it was importan t for the spatial and 
visual elements of the instruments to be strongly related to the 
sonic aspects, creating not only an instrument, but also  an 
interesting sonic, visual and physic al object. 
  
2. DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT 
2.1 Bowing Mechanism  
A prototyping stage was first conducted to explore which 
system would allow for the most expressive behavior, as well 
as be the most elegant implementation. Three models were 
created, diagrammatically s hown below. 
 
The first method uses a traditional bow piv oting at a point off 
center on a wheel. When the wheel is rotated by a motor, the 
bow moves laterally, and is weighted down at one end to 
reduce bouncing. Although this method has a strong visual 
correlation between the movement of the mechanism and its  
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on 
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME’14, June 30 – July 03, 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
557
sound production, its lack of control over dynamics meant that 
it was very limited in terms of m usical expressivity. 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Three methods of robotic bowing mechanisms, 
numbered from top to bottom, left to right.  
 
The second method , consisting of two spools, each powered by 
a separate motor, allows for more expressive control, as the 
pressure exerted on the string can be carefully controlled by the 
relationship between the two motors. By rotati ng both motors 
in the same direction at the same speed, an even tension can be 
exerted on to the string. By rotating one motor faster than the 
other, this force can be controlled as the length of  the bow is 
shortened. Although this method was able to produ ce a range of 
dynamics, its shortcoming was the reliance on the bow string 
always being in contact with the string, hindering resonance 
and sustain. 
 
The last method shown was the one ultimately pursued, using a 
bowing wheel that is rotated by a motor to p roduce friction on a 
string. The bowing wheel is attached to a rotating arm, which is 
controlled by a motor to exert more pressure on to the string. 
This allows for the force and also speed of bow to be controlled 
by a performer. This method allows for the  greatest range of 
musical expressivity out of the three, and is also visually 
communicative.  
 
The first instrument built was crafted by hand, and used a 
bearing system to align the bowing wheel. The bowing arm is 
rotated through a geared system. The firs t mechanism can be 
seen below. 
 
 
Fig. 2. First bowing mechanism and instrument design  
 
After the first implementation, we developed the design of the 
bowing mechanism so that it could be easily reproduced, and 
perform precisely. The minute imperfections o f handcrafting 
can create unevenness is the behavior of the bowing wheel, and 
so a more stable method was devised.  
 
To ensure that the bowing mechanisms are as precise as 
possible, CNC routing was used to minimize measurement 
error. The result is a series of interlocking parts, which can be 
assembled without glue. This allows the mechanisms to be 
extremely versatile, as each part can be swapped with a  
 
Fig. 3. Components and assembly of bowing mechanism.  
 
counterpart if need be, and can be dissembled easily. At the 
center of the mechanism, a mounting plate alig ns all the parts in 
plane, to ensure smooth rotation of the bowing arm.  
 
2.2 Instrument Bodies 
The instrument bodies were designed to directly correlate to the 
pitch of the sound produced by the instrumen t. Each instrument 
has a resonant box, which has three spatial dimensions. Each 
dimension is based on the wavelength of a unique pitch, with 
the dimensions of the whole ensemble creating a subset of the 
G♮, A♮, and C♮ harmonic series. The figure below show s the 
dimension to frequency relationship of the ensemble.   
 
 
Fig. 4. Dimension and frequency relationships for the ensemble  
 
By creating structures that strongly reinforce certain notes , the 
resonant bodies have a strong effect on the resulting sound. 
Standing waves are created in the resonant cavity, and these 
support the pitch of the instrument. The sonic result is that the 
bodies reverberate the sound  creating a rich and sonorous tone.  
 
3. ELECTRONICS 
3.1 Hardware  
Each instrument uses the same set of hardware parts, to allow 
for control over the behavior of the bowing mechanism. This 
includes two motors, an Arduino with a motor driver , a custom 
built PCB shield, and a hardware MIDI communication system.  
3.1.1 Arduino 
The electronic hardware comprises of three mai n components. 
The heart of the electronics is controlled by an Ar duino, which 
allows for communication of data, as well as numerous digital 
inputs and pulse-width modulating outputs.  
 
Attached to the Arduino ar e two shields , which expand its 
functionality. One of these shields, the Vicmoto, a motor shield 
developed by Victoria University, Wellington, is responsible 
for driving the motors. The Vicmoto is based on Sparkfun’s 
xy
z
xy
z
xy
z
xy
z
xy
z
xy
z
x: 440mm- 780Hz
y: 300mm- 1144Hz
z: 875mm- 392Hz
x: 360mm- 954Hz
y: 250mm- 1372Hz
z: 655mm- 523Hz
x: 348mm- 986Hz
y: 292mm- 1176Hz
z: 520mm- 660Hz
x: 402mm- 854Hz
y: 374mm- 915Hz
z: 780mm- 440Hz
x: 346mm- 990Hz
y: 361mm- 951Hz
z: 583mm- 588Hz
x: 312mm- 1100Hz
y: 194mm- 1770Hz
z: 438mm- 784Hz
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
558
Ardumoto, a motor shield that allows for the control of two DC 
motors. The direction  and speed of rotation of each motor can 
be controlled independently through a L298 H-bridge.  
 
The third shield is a custom made  board, which supports an 
encoder, hardware MIDI connectors, and various simple control 
sensors. 
 
 
Fig. 5. Electronic components used on each instrument. 
 
3.1.2 Motors and Encoder  
Each instrument uses two 12V DC brushed gear motors, one 
with an integrated quadrature Hall E ffect encoder. The bow 
wheel uses a 50:1 ratio gearbox, which allows for a good range 
of dynamics and speed of dire ction change. The bowing arm 
uses a slower motor, with a 67:1 gear ratio that provides more 
torque. This motor also integrates an encoder, which is used in 
a control feedback loop to inform the behavior of the bowing 
arm.   
3.2 Software Implementation 
Each instrument includes an Arduino, which takes in MIDI data 
from a master source, and then interprets this data accordingly.  
Fig. 6. Signal flow of the communication system  
 
3.2.1 Calibration 
When the instruments are first powered, they wait in a 
calibration mode, which is essential to the positioning system 
of the bowing arm. The motors are disabled in this mode, and 
the user manually moves the bowing arm to calibrate the home 
position away from the string, and the limit position on the 
string. To store these positio ns, a button can be pressed for each 
position on the custom board, or a designated MIDI note can be 
sent, and the encoder value will then be stored. This then gets 
used in the implementation of the behaviors, which uses the 
incoming encoder data to determi ne its movement. Only once 
both positions have been stored does the instrument become 
active, and ready to play.  
3.2.2 Communication System 
Each instrument uses a M IDI IN and MIDI THRU connector to 
connect each instrument to a common bus . MIDI data is 
received f rom a central source, and each instrument has a 
unique MIDI channel to receive on. By using MIDI, we are 
easily able to expand the system in the future, as the output of 
the central source is easily expanded. MIDI is also suited for 
communication over long  distances, crucial for the 
spatialisation of these instruments.  
 
3.3 User Control 
Two different control systems have been implemented to 
control the  behavior of the bowing mechanism. The first 
method allows the user to have direct control over each 
parameter of movement. The second method provides the user 
with a set of abstract behaviors, based on traditional bowing 
techniques, which can be triggered and have a range of 
parameters that can be dynamically controlled.  
 
3.3.1 Direct Motor Control  
In this mode, the use r can map a MIDI control surface to 
directly control the possible motor movement parameters. The 
parameters to control for each bowing mechanism are direction 
of each of the two motors, and speed of rotation of  each of the 
motor shaft s. The resolution of t he speed control is limited by 
the 8 -bit pulse width modulation resolution of the Arduino, 
resulting in 255 discrete steps. This provides the user with four 
parameters per bowing mechanism.  
 
A possible control method, easily implemented on a wide range 
of MIDI control surfaces is using MIDI Note on  and off 
messages to control direction of motor rotation, and MIDI 
control change messages for controlling th e speed of the motor 
rotation. Although this method allows the user to have precise 
control over every parameter of the mechanisms movement, 
control over multiple instruments at once can become complex 
and difficult on traditional MIDI control surfaces. 
 
With this in mind, a hardware solution has been developed that 
allows for the four parameters of each instrument to be 
controlled with a single finger. The design is based off a 
traditional keyboard, augmented with a slide potentiometer to 
give multiple axis of control. The design concept can be seen 
below. 
Fig. 7. Design concept for a hardware interface co ntroller. 
 
3.3.2 Behavioral Motor Control  
In this mode, the user can specify a range of mechanism 
behaviors. These behaviors mirror some of the traditional 
bowing techniques use d by string players, as well as  some 
behaviors that embrace the uniqueness of the bow ing 
mechanism system.  
3.3.2.1 Behaviors 
A simple continuous tone can be produced with a variabl e 
intensity. The intensity is controlled through the relationship of 
Instrument 
Selector
Data 
Interpretation
Control
Parameters
Wheel
Motor
Swing Arm
Motor
Motor 
Encoder
MIDI
In
MIDI
Thru
MIDI
Source
Instrument
Control
Logic
Instrument
Control
Logic
Instrument
Control
Logic
Instrument
Control
Logic
Instrument
Control
Logic
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
559
the pressure imparted by the bowing arm, and the speed of the 
bowing wheel. The two combine to cont rol the dynamic of the 
sound, however, the relationship between the two parameters 
allows for more than just dynamics. A fast rotation of the 
bowing wheel with only a small amount of pressure produces a 
pure sound, similar to the technique of fluatando. Conversely, 
strong pressure with a fast rotation of the bowing wheel 
produces a loud, full-bodied sound. 
 
During a held note, multiple behaviors can be performed. The 
articulation of the note can be changed through a change of 
direction of the bowing wheel. This subtle effect can be used as 
a method of accenting rhythmic figures . Similarly, Tremolo 
bowing can be specified, with the depth of each stroke, pressure 
onto the string and speed of bowing arm controllable.  
 
The position of the bowing arm can be spec ified between a 
home position, away from the string, and a n on-the string 
position. This serves the purpose of controlling the resonance 
with the string, allowing for the string to ring out, and elongate 
the resonance of the note. Alternatively, leaving th e bowing 
mechanism on the string dampens the resonance of the note.  
 
Swinging the bowing arm into the string allows for percussive 
strikes. In this action, the bowing wheel can be spun to create a 
louder strike, as well as the force of the strike  controlled by 
changing the speed of the arm onto the string.  
 
3.3.2.2 Control Interface  
This range of behaviors provides the user with a great range of 
expressive music detail for each instrument, but also provides a 
problem of how to control a great range of parameters 
intuitively.  
 
Extending the spatial concerns of the design of the instruments, 
a spatially informed touch interface has been developed  to 
control the ensemble. The interface consists of a virtual space, 
containing two types of moveable objects. Each instrument is 
represented as a unique object and can be moved around the 
space dynamically, and grouped together freely.  
 
Behaviors are also displayed as objects and stored outside of 
the space. When the user drags an object through the space, the 
proximity of  behavior object is calculated to all instrument 
objects, and the controls various parameters of each behavior. 
By dragging the held note in close prox imity of one instrument 
the necessary data is sent to the instrument to produce a held 
note. The diagram below shows the design of this virtual space 
with interactive visual elements.  
 
Fig. 8.  Design expression for a software touch interface 
controller. Relational data is leveraged from spatial proximity 
between objects, which are then used as control data.  
4. COMPOSITIONS AND FUTURE 
WORK 
The creation of these instruments has allowed for a great range 
of exciting new sonic possibilities with installations and 
performances in  a range of contexts . A major design 
consideration that is inherent to the Polus instruments is their 
freedom to be positioned around a space. This portability 
means the instruments spatial position can become an integral 
aspect of a piece or sound experience, and most importantly, 
allows for the spatial considerations of the instruments and 
performing space to be explored. 
 
The sound palate created by the ensemble is quite unique, with 
a rich diversity of timbres, from pure held tones, to dark, 
grating scratch tones being able to be produced. With each 
instrument having independent control, t hese sounds can be 
blended throughout the ensemble, and through out space.  
 
The two existing software implementation s allows for a range 
of interactions, with live performance and installation contexts 
strongly considered. The direct control method allows for an 
experimental approach, where a performer can freely interact 
with each parameter of control. This method has proven to be 
valuable to learning what the instruments can do, and for 
composing with the available sound palate. However, without 
custom-built hardware, this system is more suited to control 
over only a few instruments concurrently.  
 
The behavioral method is strongly suited to experimenting with 
the relationships between instruments, as controlling multiple 
instruments at once is well suited . This means that the spatial 
and sonic relationships within the ensemble can be interacted 
and explored. 
 
With the development of these control methods, we hope to 
expand and explore the possibilities of this ensemble. With this 
degree of control, the  ensemble is capable of producing 
interesting sonic works, which harness the uniqueness of the 
interaction of this bowing mechanism with a string. However, 
the sonic possibilities are only one element to be explored. An 
important aspect of the future  exploration will be the 
relationship between the physical and visual aspects of the 
instruments, and the space that they occupy. We aim to produce 
a multi-sensorial experience, which integrates multiple 
mediums of experience as integral aspects of an art work.  
5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Thanks to Victoria University for their suppo rt with funding 
and facilities, Sean Anderson and Jason Edwards for their help 
with the Vicmoto shield. 
6. REFERENCES 
[1] Raman, C.V., “Experiments with Mechanically played 
Violins”, Proceedings of the Indian Association of 
Cultivation of Science. 6:19 -36, 1920.  
[2] Saunders, F.A. “The Mechanical Action of Violins”, 
Journal of Acoustic Society of America, 9:81-98, 1937.  
[3] Kapur, Ajay. "A History of Robotic Musical 
Instruments." Proceedings of the International  Computer 
Music Conference. 2005. 
[4] Kajitani, Makoto. "Development of musician robots in 
japan." Proceedings of the Australian Conference on 
Robotics and Automation . 1999. 
[5] Maes, Laura, Godfried-Willem Raes, and Troy Rogers.  
"The man and machine robot orchestra at 
logos." Computer Music Journal . 35.4, 2011.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
560