PHYSMISM: A control interface for creative exploration of
physical models.
Niels B ¨ ottcher
Medialogy
Aalborg University
Copenhagen
Lautrupvang 15, 2750
Ballerup, DK
nib@media.aau.dk
Steven Gelineck
Medialogy
Aalborg University
Copenhagen
Lautrupvang 15, 2750
Ballerup, DK
sgel05@media.aau.dk
Stefania Seraﬁn
Medialogy
Aalborg University
Copenhagen
Lautrupvang 15, 2750
Ballerup, DK
sts@media.aau.dk
ABSTRACT
In this paper we describe the design and implementation of
the PHYSMISM: an interface for exploring the possibilities
for improving the creative use of physical modelling sound
synthesis.
The PHYSMISM is implemented in a software and hard-
ware version. Moreover, four diﬀerent physical modelling
techniques are implemented, to explore the implications of
using and combining diﬀerent techniques.
In order to evaluate the creative use of physical models,
a test was performed using 11 experienced musicians as test
subjects. Results show that the capability of combining the
physical models and the use of a physical interface engaged
the musicians in creative exploration of physical models.
Keywords
Physical models, hybrid instruments, excitation, resonat or.
1. INTRODUCTION
T o synthesize sounds using physical models means to un-
derstand the physics of sound production mechanism and
simulate it using numerical algorithms. Physical modeling
techniques provide the possibility to add new perspectives
to the constant search for novel interesting sounds present
in the world of electronic music.
Diﬀerent physical modeling techniques have been researche d
for decades [8, 13, 4], but they have not been completely
accepted in the performance and production of electronic
music compared to many other synthesis techniques.
Only a few and not completely successful attempts have
been implemented in commercial synthesizers. It appears
that physical modeling techniques have been mostly used in
the academic milieu.
In this paper, we are interested in investigating the rea-
sons for the lack of use of physical models in commercial
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of thi s work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided th at copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage an d that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To cop y otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, re quires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME07, New Y ork, USA
Copyright 2007 X-XXXXX-XX-X/XX/XX
Figure 1: The ﬁnal look and feel of the PHYSMISM
was among other things inspired by old analogue
synthesizers.
synthesizer.
After talking to diﬀerent musicians experts in electronic
music, we realized that physical models have not been uti-
lized to their full potential. This might be due to the lack
of musically interesting implementations of the technique .
Most of the physical models we have encountered focus
mainly on the interactive aspects of physical modelling or
the ability to simulate an existing acoustic instrument as
accurately as possible. If one were to only focus on the sonic
qualities of a sound itself without being concerned with acc u-
rate simulation of physical mechanisms, would it be possibl e
to further explore the musical potentials of physical model s?
Many physical models have been created, emulating acous-
tic instruments and physical phenomena found in nature. A
lot of characteristics of the natural instruments have now
been captured and a diversity of physical models has been
developed. Most of the physical models produce sound like
an original acoustic instrument with the possibility to change
the physical parameters and characteristics of the instru-
ments. Would using these models to keep the characteris-
tics of the existing instruments, but then merging them with
something completely diﬀerent, help to enhance the creativ e
exploration of physical modelling?
In the early 60s the so-called modular synthesizers were
introduced.1 These synthesizers gave the users the possi-
1http://moogmusic.com/history.php
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
31
bility to have full control of the sounds they produced and
to combine the diﬀerent parts of the synthesis techniques
themselves instead of simply using a preset from the fac-
tory. T ogether with the synthesizers followed a variety of
manuals concerning how to combine diﬀerent oscillators, en-
velopes, ﬁlters and so forth, to reproduce existing sonorit ies
such as bells or bird sounds. Several musicians used such
synthesizers to simply reproduce sounds existing in nature ,
while others tried to create their own experimental sonori-
ties. Some users followed the manuals, while others tried to
experiment with the modules as part of a creative process.
The output produced consisted of artiﬁcial electronic sounds
far from the every day sounds or existing instruments.
The initial idea behind this research is that the same
creative process could be achieved when exploring physical
modelling sound synthesis.
In order to achieve this goal, the possibilities as well as
the beneﬁts and drawbacks of physical modelling synthesis
have been explored and analyzed.
2. RELATED WORK
2.1 Interfaces for physical models
A lot of diﬀerent attempts have been made to create con-
trollers for physical models, both within the commercial an d
the scientiﬁc world.
The ﬁrst commercial synthesizer using physical modelling
techniques was the Yamaha VL1 synthesizer, which was ﬁrst
released in 1995. This synthesizer was especially satisfac tory
for wind instruments. The design of the synthesizer was very
similar to a typical keyboard with diﬀerent buttons and slid-
ers but is also included a quite accurate breath controller.
The physical models were based on the digital waveguides
technique [13]. It was possible to change the size of diﬀer-
ent wind instruments as well as to choose between diﬀer-
ent kinds of excitations (single reed, double reed, jet reed ,
bow...). Using the breath controller one was able to control
parameters like breath pressure, throat formant, tounging ,
embouchure and scream. The synthesizer was very suitable
for expressive performance by skilled wind players.
The Yamaha VL1 synthesizer never became really popu-
lar, and the production of it stopped shortly after the intro -
duction.
Another commercial synthesizer using physical modelling
was the Korg Prophecy, 2 released in 1996. This synthesizer
also simulated acoustic instruments, but not with the same
precision as the VL1 synthesizer. One of the interesting
issues regarding this synthesizer is that it was one of the ﬁr st
synthesizers to use physical modelling to emulate analogue
synthesizers.
An example of a software synthesizer using physical mod-
elling is Reaktor 5. 3 The physical modelling sound synthesis
used is based on modal synthesis [1]. The software synthe-
sizer enables the user to control a lot of diﬀerent parameter s
mostly related to the resonators of the models.
Another small software program recently developed is Mod-
elonia4 from Nusofting. The Modelonia software synthe-
sizer is a pure physical modelling synthesizer and it uses a
plucked string and a blown bore model respectively as the
2http://www.korg.com
3http://www.native-instruments.com
4http://nusofting.liqihsynth.com/Modelonia.htm
basic sound source. The Modelonia synthesizer also allows
cross-synthesis between the two models.
Non-commercial controllers of physical models often try
to simulate real acoustic instruments and in many cases they
focus on providing the user with precise excitation devices ,
which are as close as possible to the way the original instru-
ment is excited.
Perry Cook has developed diﬀerent interfaces such as ﬂute
controllers, wind instrument controllers and many others.
An example of one of Perry Cooks interfaces used to control
physical models is the Nukelele [7]. The Nukelele is a control
device using among other things two linear force sensitive
resistors to control the excitation of a physical model of a
string.
Another example developed by Cook is the Squeezebox
[7]. The Squeezebox is an accordion, which controls a human
voice model. Diﬀerent sensors attached to the accordion as
well as the accordion itself, control the breathing, pitch and
articulation of vowels and consonants of the human voice
model.
In [9] the human voice is used to control a physical model
of a plucked bass guitar.
Physical models have also been implemented in virtual re-
ality projects. In [11] a physical model of a drum membrane
is controlled and visualized in a virtual reality environme nt.
The physical model is based on the 2D waveguides technique
[14].
2.2 Compositions using physical models
Even though physical modeling sound synthesis has been
studied for decades, it appears that composers are mainly
using other synthesis techniques when producing electroni c
music. This could be due to the fact that other techniques
such as granular synthesis, sampling or frequency modula-
tion often produce richer sounds than physical models have
provided so far.
However, some composers have been working with physi-
cal modelling. Most commonly used in compositions is the
use of physical models to extend possibilities oﬀered by tra-
ditional instruments. One of the pioneers of the use of phys-
ical models in compositions is David Jaﬀe. In his pieceSili-
con Valley Breakdown, premiered in Venice during the Inter-
national Computer Music Conference 1982, a physical model
of a plucked string implemented using the Karplus-Strong
algorithm [10] is extended to reach unreal dimensions, such
as the length of the Golden Gate bridge. Another pioneer in
the use of physical models in creative applications is Chris
Chafe. In [5], he reviewed the work of himself and other
composers regarding this topic.
Paul Lansky also used physical models in his creations. In
[5] he describes how he has enjoyed using the physical model
of a ﬂute by Perry Cook, using a 20 feet long tube with a
diameter of 3 feet as the resonator in some of his pieces.
Other composers are using replica extended models to
achieve abnormal excitation. An example is the piece Pipe
Dream by Gary Scavone, written in 2003. In this piece,
Scavone uses a physical model of a saxophone, over-blowing
the excitation.
Other examples of creative and alternative use of physical
models in compositions include hybrids of physical models,
where composers combine diﬀerent resonators or excitation s.
As an example, S-Trance-S by Matthew Burtner is a piece
where a saxophone acts as a controller for a physical model
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
32
of a string [3].
As another example, Voice of the Dragon by Juraj Kojs
is a composition where physical singing tubes interact with
virtual ones, simulated using physical models [12].
3. PHYSMISM
The PHYSMISM, shown in Figure 1, is an interface de-
signed to investigate how physical models can be controlled
and used creatively. Based on the review presented in the
previous section, a set of goals for what the sound synthe-
sizer should be able to implement, was proposed.
The goal of the sound synthesis engine is to implement
many diﬀerent physical models, in order to make this device
a generalized interface. Moreover, we are interested in sim-
ulating real instruments, with the possibility to vary thei r
parameters in order to make them extend limitations of the
real world. F urthermore, we want to allow the possibility to
use the same excitation device to control diﬀerent models.
Finally, we are interested in combining diﬀerent physical
models in an intuitive way.
3.1 Implementation of physical models
In the PHYSMISM, each model chosen represents a diﬀer-
ence in sound, technique, complexity, resonator, and excit er.
This is mainly in order to show the diversity of physical mod-
els. F or the current prototype the following physical model s
were chosen:
• A turbulence model , which implements a one di-
mensional waveguide [13] with a non-linear excitation
[13].
• A stochastic model , which implements the PhISM
model [6] having a randomized stochastic excitation.
• A friction model , based on one dimensional waveg-
uides with a complex non-linear excitation, described
in [12].
• An impact model , based on two dimensional waveg-
uides [14] with a simple nonlinear excitation.
The models were written in C and compiled as Max/MSP 5
externals in order to control and combine them inside the
Max/MSP environment. The users had the possibility to
control four parameters related to the resonator.
4. HARDW ARE INTERFACE
4.1 Resonator control
Two control stations with four dials each were imple-
mented, shown in Figure 2. The user was then able to assign
whichever model he wanted to a control station. Each con-
trol station had a model chooser, which assigned the model
to the station.
4.2 Excitation devices
5www.cycling74.com
Figure 2: The control stations on the PHYSMISM
allows the user to see which parameters and models
he is controlling.
Figure 3: The blowing excitation device is created
using a fan attached to a dynamo for measuring the
amount of wind blown.
4.2.1 Blowing
In order to give the user the capability of creating a blow-
ing excitation, a ﬂute device was implemented, shown in
Figure 3. A small fan was attached to a dynamo in order
to measure how hard the user was blowing into the device.
When the user was blowing at the fan the dynamo turned
and created detectable voltage, which was used to control
the excitation of the turbulence model. The device itself was
borrowed from [2], where it was used to control a physical
model together with a graphical virtual reality ﬂute.
4.2.2 Rubbing
In order to control the friction model an excitation device
was created using two slider potentiometers and a pressure
sensor, as shown in Figure 4. The device was created in
order to give the user the same input capabilities as if he was
rubbing his hand over a surface. The left-right motion was
detected by the ﬁrst slider, which was placed horizontally
on the device. The pressure sensor located on top of the
device detected the pressure applied to the surface. Finally,
in order to simulate the capability of rubbing on diﬀerent
areas of the surface, the second slider was placed verticall y
on the device. The three sensors were used to control the
velocity, bow position and force inputs of the friction mode l
respectively.
Figure 4: The rubbing excitation device is imple-
mented with a two dimensional slider with a pres-
sure sensitive ball on top.
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
33
Figure 5: The crank implemented for exciting the
stochastic model is attached to a dynamo.
Figure 6: The hitting exciter is implemented with
two drum pads. Inside each drum pad there is a
pressure sensor, which picks up the force applied by
the user.
4.2.3 Grinding
In order to excite the stochastic model, a crank was cho-
sen, as shown in Figure 5. The user rotated the crank to
simulate a grinding motion. The velocity of this motion was
mapped to the number of beans in the stochastic model. The
crank was attached to a dynamo, which worked exactly like
the one used for the blowing excitation device. The crank
was implemented because it gave the user the capability of
creating a continuous motion with a meaningful gesture.
4.2.4 Hitting
The percussive excitation part consists of two custom-
made drum pads, shown in Figure 6. Inside each pad a
pressure sensor was placed, which detected the force ap-
plied to the pad. In order to detect a hit, the signal was
thresholded and peak detected.
4.3 Combining the models
In order to combine the models we decided to take the
output sound from one model and use it as an input for
another model, thereby creating the possibility of obtaini ng
diﬀerent hybrid models. In this way the second model is not
excited by the energy from the user, but by the sound from
the ﬁrst model. This feature demanded some extra work
concerning the implementation of the actual models. All
the models needed a sound input. This sound input needed
to have a signiﬁcant impact on the sound produced, in order
to avoid the eﬀect of just adding the two models together.
In order to let the user combine the models a patching
system very similar to the old analogue modular synthesizer s
was implemented. The user was capable of patching two
models together, one being the output, and one being the
input model, using a patching cord to connect the models.
The patching system was implemented on the hardware
interface using 8 mini-jack cable inputs, as shown in Figure
7. One patching cord with two mini-plugs, one at each end,
was used to establish the connection from one model to an-
other. The mini-jack inputs were used as on/oﬀ switches.
These on/oﬀ signals were processed and mapped inside the
Max/MSP environment in order to establish whether a con-
Figure 7: The patching cord system is implemented
using 8 mini-jack inputs. They act as on/oﬀ switches
that establish whether or not they are connected.
nection was made, and if so between which two models.
4.4 Extra features
It was chosen to add a sequencer to the interface, to enable
the test subjects to get a feel of how sounds created using
the PHYSMISM could be used in a context.
A decision was made to supply the sequencer with 4 tracks,
each with a 10 second sound buﬀer. The user was able to
create a loop for each buﬀer, using three parameters: loop
start, loop length, and loop speed.
4.5 The overall setup
Because of the many tasks carried out by Max/MSP , namely
the many ingoing and outgoing data streams (sensors, dis-
plays, sequencer, sound) running the whole interface on one
laptop was too computational intensive. Dividing the tasks
between two laptop computers solved this problem. The
computers were connected via a hub, creating a small LAN.
The ﬁrst computer was processing the sound and had all
the excitation devices connected, while the other computer
took care of the connection between Max/MSP and all the
hardware devices of the PHYSMISM.
5. TESTING THE PHYSMISM
The PHYSMISM interface was tested with 11 professional
musicians. In order for the musicians to feel comfortable in
playing with the interface, the tests were performed in the
musicians’ own studio or working environment.
After ﬁlling in a questionnaire concerning the subjects’
level of musical experience, the subjects were asked to get
familiar with the interface for approximately 25-30 minutes
and try to understand the possibilities of the instrument.
After the short practice session, subjects were asked to im-
provise with the PHYSMISM for about ﬁve minutes. During
the whole test period, observations and additional comments
from the test persons were annotated.
After having practiced with the instrument, test subjects
were asked to ﬁll in a questionnaire.
Additionally, changes in the control values and excitation
devices were recorded in Max/MSP as text ﬁles and later
analyzed in Matlab6.
5.1 T est results and discussion
One of the goals of the testing procedure was to allow
the musicians to be creative with the interface, while being
able to gather quantitative data obtained by recording the
gestures of the player.
6http://www.mathworks.com/
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
34
In order to facilitate creativity, we did not ask the test
subjects to perform speciﬁc tasks with the PHYSMISM,
but rather we allowed them to explore its potential while
observing their behavior.F or this reason, the quantitativ e
data obtained by analyzing the gestures of the performer
provided too diverse information among the subjects, to be
useful enough for the ﬁnal analysis.
On the other hand, the ﬁnal questionnaire was extremely
useful in providing insights concerning our original quest ion
on the creative possibilities provided by physical models.
When asked what are the basic elements which a physical
model should contain, in order to improve its creative use,
all subjects agreed on the need of having a large number of
parameters to control.
As an example, the impact model, in which only two con-
trol parameters could be varied (frequency of the resonator
and impact force) was considered rather uninteresting by al l
subjects.
Another problem observed with the impact model was
the high predictability of the sound produced, which con-
tributed to make it uninteresting after a very short amount
of time. On the other hand, models which created rather
rich, unpredictable and complex sonorities like the friction
model were appreciated by most of the test subjects.
The impact model was perceived as interesting only when
very low frequencies were generated, since it created a warm er
and powerful bass sound.
Concerning the combination of the physical models, it is
interesting to notice that many subjects expressed the fact
that models with few control parameters became much more
interesting when combined with other models. As an exam-
ple, using the rich sonorities of the friction model as input
device for the drum resonator, opened up several interest-
ing novel sonic possibilities. Even the impact model and
turbulence model, which were the two lowest rated models,
became interesting when combined.
We were also interested in understanding if the users ap-
preciated playing with a physical interface while controll ing
physical models. We noticed that subjects got easily ad-
justed to the physical interface, and appreciated especially
the natural interactions it provided. Subjects found espe-
cially the crank rather interesting, since it provided a very
intuitive and eﬀective way of interacting with the particle
model.
T able 5.1 summarized the characteristics of physical mod-
els in order for this technique to become interesting from a
musical perspective, according to the data gathered from
our test subjects.
Although some of the observations made by the test sub-
jects were rather expected, it is noneless interesting for u s to
observe that they are shared by several musicians, regardle ss
of their level of expertise with sound synthesis and physica l
models.
As a ﬁnal observation, we were interested in understand-
ing if the musicians would have been interested in using the
PHYSMISM in a live situation. Half of the subjects said
they would, commenting that they appreciate the possibil-
ity of creating diﬀerent sounds with lots of choices of control.
The subjects who did not feel the desire to use the in-
terface in a live situation, commented on the diﬃculties in
predicting the behavior of some knobs and input devices
(which was also due to the limited time used in practic-
ing with the interface), and the fact that they did not like
Positive Negative Application
Many parameters F riction
F ew parameters Impact
Predictability Impact
Unpredictability F riction
Low frequencies Impact
Combined models F riction+Impact
Bi-manual control Physical interface
Natural interaction Physical interface
Clear interaction Crank
Table 1: Summary of the positive and negative fea-
tures of the diﬀerent physical models as expressed
by the test subjects.
the musical quality of the sound produced. Again, as ex-
pected, such ﬁnal comments were mostly provided by musi-
cians more experienced with classical pop music rather than
contemporary electroacoustic music.
6. CONCLUSION
The starting point of our research was the exploration of
the possibilities for improving the creative use of physica l
modelling sound synthesis.
The creative use of physical modelling was reviewed, in-
cluding topics such as compositions using physical models
and the existing musical interfaces for the sound synthesis .
Based on the review a set of possible factors for improv-
ing the creative use of physical modelling was proposed. In
order to test the relevance of the proposed factors a novel
interface for controlling physical models, the PHYSMISM,
was designed and implemented. Even the impact model and
turbulence model, which were the two lowest rated models,
became interesting when combined.
The PHYSMISM was implemented with four diﬀerent ex-
citation devices, which allowed the user to either blow, gri nd,
rub or hit on the interface in order to produce sound.
An additional patching system for combining the diﬀerent
physical models was also implemented. In order to control
the diﬀerent resonator parameters of the models, parameter
controls were implemented with the possibility of changing
four diﬀerent parameters on each model.
F our diﬀerent physical modelling techniques were used in
order to explore the implications of using diﬀerent physica l
modelling techniques. The implemented models included a
turbulence model, an impact model, a friction model and a
stochastic model.
Finally, a test was performed with 11 diﬀerent musicians,
in order to evaluate the creative use of physical modelling.
The test showed that especially the models with signiﬁcant
possibilities of variation of sonorities were desirable. S ome
of the models had an element of unpredictability and this
seemed to enhance the creative use of the models and the
application.
The eﬀect of combining the physical models was also eval-
uated and it showed that some of the more simple and un-
popular models, became much more interesting for the users
when they were combined with other models.
It seems possible to use physical modelling much more in
modern music production if more creative interfaces and ap-
plications to control and combine the models are developed.
This sound synthesis technique has a lot of potential for
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
35
creative use, and the musicians seemed much more positive
towards the technique after having tried the PHYSMISM.
In testing the PHYSMISM, we found it diﬃcult to com-
bine its creative use with a formal testing methodology. We
also noticed that most of the results provided by the musi-
cians were strongly contextual to the kind of musical back-
grounds they had.
7. FUTURE WORK
Alternative solutions for controlling physical modelling as
well as the possibilities of combining the models should be
considered as an important ﬁeld of research because they
improve an understanding of the musical potentials.
An essential element of physical modeling is the simula-
tion of existing musical instruments. However, if an accura te
and complex model is developed and the simulation does not
go beyond emulation of the real counterpart, it is most likely
that the use of physical modelling will be overlooked, espe-
cially within the electronic music community.
We share the opinion that many of the existing applica-
tions using complex physical models are interesting from a
researchers perspective. Most of the time these models ap-
pear less interesting for a creative electronic musician, b e-
cause the interactive and complex possibilities do not clea rly
appear in the interface or immediate output.
Physical modelling could have lots of potential, but, in
order to achieve a more creative use of this synthesis tech-
nique, it is important to establish a stronger communicatio n
between scientists and musicians. There is no doubt that
introducing more alternative and interesting application s or
interfaces for physical modelling would increase their cre -
ative use.
Another interesting issue regarding physical modelling is
the possibility of natural interaction and a very tight conn ec-
tion between gestures and sound. Physical modelling oﬀers
a great potential in this direction, because of the way the
sound is produced.
We believe that the PHYSMISM serves as an important
inspiration of how to implement physical modelling for mu-
sical and creative exploration.
8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank the 11 musicians who
participated to the testing session.
9. REFERENCES
[1] J. Adrien. The missing link: modal synthesis.
Representations of musical signals., pages 269–298,
1991.
[2] N. B¨ ottcher, S. Gelineck, L. Martinussen, and
S. Seraﬁn. Virtual reality instruments capable of
changing physical dimensions in real-time. Proc.
Enactive, 2005.
[3] M. Burtner and S. Seraﬁn. The Exbow MetaSax:
Compositional Applications of Bowed String Physical
Models Using Instrument Controller Subsititution.
Journal of New Music Research, 31(2):131–140, 2002.
[4] C. Cadoz, A. Luciani, and J. Florens.
CORDIS-ANIMA. A modeling and simulation system
for sound and image synthesis. The general formalism.
Computer Music Journal, 17(1):19–29, 1993.
[5] C. Chafe. Case Studies of Physical Models in Music
Composition. Proceedings of the 18th International
Congress on Acoustics.
[6] P . Cook. Physically Informed Sonic Modeling
(PhISM): Synthesis of Percussive Sounds. Computer
Music Journal, 21(3):38–49, 1997.
[7] P . Cook. Principles for designing computer music
controllers. Proceedings of the 2001 conference on New
interfaces for musical expression, pages 1–4, 2001.
[8] P . Cook. Real Sound Synthesis for Interactive
Applications. AK Peters, Ltd., 2002.
[9] J. Janer. Voice-controlled plucked bass guitar through
two synthesis techniques. Proceedings of the 2005
conference on New interfaces for musical expression,
pages 132–135, 2005.
[10] K. Karplus and A. Strong. Digital synthesis of
plucked-string and drum timbres. COMP. MUSIC J.,
7(2):43–55, 1983.
[11] T. M¨ aki-Patola. User interface comparison for virtua l
drums. Proceedings of the 2005 conference on New
interfaces for musical expression, pages 144–147, 2005.
[12] S. Seraﬁn and J. Kojs. The voice of the dragon: a
physical model of a rotating corrugated tube. Proc.
DAFX, 2003.
[13] J. Smith III. Physical audio signal processing. Julius
Orion Smith III Homepage, 2004.
[14] S. Van Duyne and J. Smith. Physical modeling with
the 2-D digital waveguide mesh. Proc. Int. Computer
Music Conf, pages 40–47, 1993.
Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME07), New York, NY, USA
36