Mocean
Maia Marinelli
maia@northeastproject.net
Jared Lamenzo
jml401@nyu.edu
New York University, ITP
721 Broadway, 4th Floor
New York, NY 10003
(+1) 917/405-4352
Liubo Borissov
liubo@nyu.edu
ABSTRACT
Mocean is an immersive environment that creates sensory
relationships between natural media, particularly exploring
the potential of water as an emotive interface.
Keywords
New interface, water, pipe organ, natural media, PIC
microcontroller, wind instrument, human computer interface.
1. INTRODUCTION
The human body is mostly water.  We live in water for the first
nine months of our lives. Being close to water, to play with it,
is an innate desire.  Mocean frames a time and a space to
explore our lost memory in a literal way.
As an interactive installation, Mocean invites members of the
audience to touch, stir and play with water in a clear tank. The
movement of water is translated into movement of air in an
array of antique organ pipes suspended above the water. The
sound of the organ pipes envelops the person stirring the
water: movement echoed in the water’s waves and ripples.
2. DESCRIPTION
Mocean uses approximately 40 organ pipes connected to
blowers via a sculptural tubing structure. Each blower
activates a module pipes. The installation’s dimensions can be
adapted to different spaces. A water tank is positioned at torso
level, and the organ pipes hang from the tubing, speaking near
ear level. Video cameras placed below the tank send images to
a computer, which analyzes the movement of the water and
sends commands to a custom microcontroller board.   The
microcontroller then turns the blowers on and off.  The air from
the blowers is routed through clear tubing to the organ pipes.
The spatial arrangement of the pipes is a function of the
physical dimensions of the tank; the sensation of moving
sound around by moving water in particular ways is created by
the pipe placement. As the interaction with the water develops,
the user gains an intuition about the spatial and tonal
arrangement of the pipes and the natural rhythms of the
system--Mocean becomes a musical instrument.
3. EVOLUTION OF MOCEAN
The Mocean project began in 2003 as an exploration of
organic interfaces. The idea was to use a natural medium, water,
to produce electronic sound and control video. Later, the video
was replaced with the projection of the water itself. The piece’s
acoustic nature and the connections among wind, water, and
movement, led the organ pipes’ use for the sound element.
The approach taken was inspired by the 1868 Henry Erben
tracker pipe organ, and located in St. Patrick’s Old Cathedral in
New York City, where Jared Lamenzo is Organist. Before the
advent of gas/steam/water-powered bellows, young men were
paid to turn or pump the bellows. Some of the most interesting
and beautiful sounds are created when stops are not fully open
or closed.  Based on compositional sketches done on the
Erben, a collection of 19th-century organ pipes was started.
Using the variable pressure produced by a series of digitally
controlled blowers, it was possible to capture different sorts of
frequency/amplitude envelopes from the pipes: sounds that
matched the water interface.  The additional harmonics
produced in the different modules create an environment in
which the wind is sensed.
4. EXPERIENCE
The user is able to engage Mocean in a variety of ways. One can
brush or skim the water, dip one’s arms in deeply, sprinkle
water about—each person has a way to play it.  Continued
exploration is rewarded; as the blowers become activated more
often, the sound of the pipes becomes louder and of longer
duration.  The water continues moving after one stops playing
Mocean, making a connection between the water and the air
motion.  Different portions of the tank activate different
modules of pipes.  The experience’s duration is up to the user.  
5. REFERENCES
[1] Mocean Project, http://www.organicinterfaces.com.
[2] Ochse, Orpha. The History of the Organ in the United
States .  Indiana University Press, Bloomington, IN 1988.
[3] Tanaka, A. Musical Performance Practice on Sensor-Based
Instruments. In Wanderley, M.  & Battier, M., editors,
Trends in Gestural Control of Music. IRCAM, 2000.
[4] Wessel, D. and Wright, M. Problems and Prospects for
Intimate Musical Control of Computers. Computer
MusicJournal Vol. 26, Issue 3, Fall, 2002.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
NIME’05, May 26-28, 2005, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Copyright  remains with the authors.
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
272