Voice-controlled plucked bass guitar through two
synthesis techniques
Jordi J aner
IUA-MTG
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona
jjaner@iua.upf .es
ABSTRACT
In this paper we present an example of the use of the singing
voice as a controller for digital music synthesis. The analy-
sis of the voice with spectral processing techniques, derived
from the Short-Time Fourier Transform, provides ways of
determining a performer's vocal intentions. We demonstrate
a prototype, in which the extracted vocal features drive the
synthesis of a plucked bass guitar. The sound synthesis stage
includes two dierent synthesis techniques, Physical Models
and Spectral Morph.
Keywords
Singing voice, musical controller, sound synthesis, spectral
processing.
1. INTRODUCTION
Digital music synthesis allows a wide range of sounds and
permits a high degree of control over the sound generation
process. It overcomes physical (in acoustic instruments) or
electronic (analog synthesizer) limitations in terms of con-
trol. The exibility of control has led to the emergence of
numerous musical controllers, more innovative than the tra-
ditional keyboard approach, ranging from accelerometers to
video cameras. The captured data is then converted to some
protocol that controls the synthesis engine. Traditionally,
this protocol was MIDI, but Open Sound Control (OSC) is
gaining more and more acceptance in the Computer Music
community, as well as in the industry.
Singing voice qualities have been exploited in the history
of music since ancient times. The emotion transmitted by
an opera singer is indubitable, probably due to the fact that
the voice is per se an organic musical instrument. It is not
the aim of this paper to study in detail the characteristics
and qualities of the singing voice as a musical instrument.
Rather, we address the high degree of expression and the
nuances of the singing voice in order to exploit it as a musical
controller. Music Technology has tackled the singing voice
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’05, May 26-28, 2005, Vancouver, BC, Canada. Copyright remains
with the author(s).
mainly from the analysis / synthesis perspective, putting
eorts in \inventing" a computer that sings as a human.
Another topic, in which the singing voice is involved, is score
following systems [12].
1.1 Voice as a Controller
In the work presented here, the singing voice acts as a
controller. The system examines the characteristics of the
captured acoustical signal, which at its turn, drives the pa-
rameters of a synthesis engine. Other approaches of \sound-
controlled sound synthesis" are found in the literature. Tris-
tan Jehan [8] presents a system developed at MIT which
uses the timbre characteristics of a continuous input stream
to recreate the output with characteristics of another pre-
analyzed instrument. In another approach by Miller Puck-
ette et al. [13], the goal is to map a low-parametric timbre
space of an input audio stream onto a pre- analyzed out-
put audio stream in real-time. Also related to this work,
we should include PitchToMidi systems, which were rst
introduced in the 80's as hardware devices. For our pur-
poses, though, MIDI presents mainly two limitations. First,
it is an event-based protocol, and the voice -as many other
instruments- varies its sounds in a continuous manner. Sec-
ond, the available bandwidth oers an insucient time res-
olution.
The plucked bass guitar is, in terms of timbre complex-
ity, simpler than other solo instruments such as a violin or
a trumpet. This simplicity let us focus on basic control as-
pects. Furthermore, we want to stress that the goal of the
presented work is not to build an accurate bass guitar syn-
thesizer, but rather to explore the possibilities of the voice
driven synthesis.
2. VOICE FEATURE EXTRACTION
The rst step before using the voice as a controller is to
decide which features we want to extract. It is obvious that
even a naive user can control eciently the phonatory sys-
tem, producing a wide range of sounds. Actually, the sim-
ple action of speaking involves continuous variations of the
breathing pressure, vocal folds tension or tongue position, to
name a few. The chosen features include basic attributes,
such as pitch and energy, in addition to other timbre de-
scriptors.
2.1 Voice Processing techniques
Several techniques have been developed over the years to
study the human voice. Most research is related to the
eld of speech processing, but the study of the singing voice
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
132
has brought also additional approaches. Basically, all these
methods, though, rely on the source/lter approach, in which
the phonatory system is seen as a coupled excitation (mod-
ulated air-ow) and a resonator (vocal tract cavity).
In this work we use a Phase-Vocoder based method for
voice analysis and also for the spectral morph synthesis. The
Phase Vocoder was rst developed by Flanagan [4] in 1966
at Bell Laboratories, and was used for speech processing.
Later, in its FFT form was brought to musical applications
by J.A. Moore and M. Dolson. M. Puckette proposed the
Phase-Locked Vocoder [11], which introduces phase- locking
between adjacent pairs of FFT channels. A further step in
the Phase-vocoder development is the new algorithm pro-
posed by J. Laroche in [10]. This technique allows direct
manipulation of the signal in the frequency domain. Some
of the application are pitch-shifting, chorusing and harmo-
nizing. The underlying idea behind the algorithm is to iden-
tify peaks in the Sort-Time Fourier Transform, and translate
them to new arbitrary frequencies of the spectrum. Here,
the spectrum is divided in several regions around peaks.
This technique was integrated in the Spectral Peak Process-
ing (SPP) framework [1] by Bonada and Loscos. It performs
a frame based spectral analysis of the audio, giving as output
of the STFT, the harmonic peaks and the pitch, as depicted
in gure 1. For the pitch detection, we used the technique
developed by Cano et al. described in [2]. Basically, the SPP
considers the spectrum as a set of regions, each of which be-
longs to one harmonic peaks and its surroundings. The main
goal of such technique is to preserve the local convolution
of the analysis window after transposition and equalization
transformations. Common transformations include pitch-
shift and equalization (timbre modication).
Figure 1: SPP Analysis process.
2.2 Set of extracted features
Essentially, vocal gestures can be of three dierent kind in
the voice production mechanism, depending on whether its
origin is either in the breathing system (subglottal pressure),
glottis (glottis settings), or in the vocal tract (vocal tract
shape). In this approach, we propose the following classi-
cation based on control aspects: Excitation, Vocal Tract,
Voice Quality and Context.
A more detailed description of the feature extraction algo-
rithms, which derive from the SPP Analysis, appears in an
article by the author [7]. Excitation descriptors are elemen-
tal for the user, since they are related to the instantaneous
sung energy and fundamental frequency. In a further step,
we nd the voice colour or voice timbre. For voiced sounds,
the timbre is associated to a particular vowel. We assume
that a vowel can approximately determined by its two rst
formant frequencies. A very simple algorithm based on spec-
tral centroid, will estimate these frequencies approximately.
In addition to the introduced features, two algorithms esti-
mating Voice Quality were developed. Although these two
algorithms need further research, it is a good start-point
for controlling other aspects of the output sound. Finally,
we include the Context features, which includes the \At-
tack unvoiceness" descriptor. Assuming that a note consists
of a pitched sound, this descriptor attempts to determine
whether the attack of the note was unvoiced or not. The
initial motivation for this descriptor is to use it for deter-
mining the harshness of the synthesized note's attack. In
our case of a bass guitar, it might be related to the dier-
ences between a soft ngered and a sharp slap electric bass.
3. PLUCKED-BASS GUITAR SYNTHESIS
The sound of a plucked bass guitar consists of impulsive
notes that decay exponentially in time. Due to the long note
decay time, bass players usually damp the vibrating string
with the nger before plucking a new note. In the previous
section we have proposed a set of attributes that derive from
a spectral analysis of the voice signal, which delivers infor-
mation at a given frame rate. Making an analogy, we could
handle this information as it would come from other multi-
parametric sensors such as a body- gesture device that sends
tracking information continuously. On the other hand, as
pointed out in the literature [5], the design of digital musical
instruments involves a very important layer, the Mapping.
We propose a general model valid for dierent instruments,
as well as dierent synthesis techniques. Regarding the syn-
thesis process, in the system here implemented we aimed
to compare two dissimilar techniques, Physical Models and
Spectral Morph.
3.1 Mapping issues
Once we have the input parameters available, the next
task is to set up a meaningful strategy to link these para-
meters to controls of the synthesis algorithms. This action
is commonly known as mapping. Although, here we present
the synthesis of a single instrument, the bass guitar, it is part
of a more general research on voice-controlled virtual instru-
ments. In this sense, we propose a general model of mapping
that can deal with dierent instruments and dierent syn-
thesis techniques. The gure 2 shows the mapping process
in which a rst layer deals with the synthesized instrument,
and a second layer that is connected to the synthesis engine.
In the table 1, we justify this concept with some examples.
Instrument dependency
Pitch Tessitura (bass vs. violin)
Pitch deviations (violin vs. piano)
Volume Continuous (ute)
Impulsive (plucked guitar)
Timbre variations Instantaneous (piano attack)
Continuous (violin)
Synthesis technique dependency
Simple oscillator frequency and amplitude
Physical Models Length, Excitation force,
Air-ow pressure, etc.
Spectral Models Sinusoidal partials amplitude
and frequency, etc.
Table 1: The Mapping layer consists of two sub-
layers, which adapt the input parameters depend-
ing on the instrument sound and the synthesis tech-
nique.
In our case, the instrument dependent mapping is unique,
since only one instrument is considered. From the Energy
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
133
Figure 2: The mapping of the voice features is a two-
step process: Instrument dependant and synthesis
technique dependant
feature, we dened a note onset signal that triggers a note
depending on the energy's derivative. The Pitch feature
is transposed one octave lower and passed as continuous
parameter, thus allowing pitch deviations. A quantization
function for simulating the inuence of the frets is foreseen,
but not yet integrated in the current implementation.
3.2 Adapting the Karplus-Strong String Algo-
rithm
This algorithm was invented by Kevin Karplus and Alex
Strong, and was published in the Computer Music Journal
in 1983 [9]. The success of such algorithm lies in its low-
computational cost, which allowed at that time to synthesize
in real-time a plucked-guitar with a substantial quality with
cheap processors. It is worth to mention that in 1983 the
rst PCs were introduced; and the digital music synthesis in
real-time required large and expensive computers only found
in big research centres.
Although we have mentioned here Physical Models, orig-
inally this algorithm was based on the Wavetable Synthesis
technique, which repeats number of samples generating a
periodic signal. Instead, the Karplus-Strong algorithm in-
troduces a variation by averaging two successive samples
Yt = (Yt N + Yt N  1)=2, and writing the resulting sample
in the wavetable. This can be seen, thus, as a delay line
with length N . It simulates a rigidly terminated string with
losses, generating a periodic sound with decay. The delay
line is initialized with random values (+A/-A) for simulating
the plucking action. The pitch is determined by the length
of the delay line. At CCRMA, researchers experimented si-
multaneously with the Karplus-Strong algorithm, proposing
some extensions, and analyzing it in terms of a digital l-
ter. The extensions developed by D. Jae and J.O. Smith
[6] overcame several limitations of the original algorithm.
We adapted this algorithm in order to be controllable by
the voice, as depicted in the gure 3. Unlike the original
algorithm, in which the delay line is lled by noise, we feed
the Karplus-Strong delay line with the transient (attack) of
Figure 3: Bass synthesis with Physical Modelling.
The input voice is used as excitation signal for the
Karplus-Strong algorithm.
the sung note. Good results were achieved by attacking a
note with a short impulsive consonant. In our bass syn-
thesizer system, the implementation of the Karplus-Strong
Algorithm is taken from the STK Library [3]. From the
rst mapping sublayer, we get the triggering signal, which
is related to the energy envelope of the user's voice, and the
estimated pitch. When the trigger is active, N samples of
the input voice passes through and ll the delay line. The
actual size of the delay line (N ) is determined by the esti-
mated pitch.
During the design process, we noticed that sample contin-
uation problems appeared in form of \clicks" in the output
waveform, when changing from one note to another. This is
caused while a note is still fading out, and a new excitation
signal is fed into the delay line. In order to minimize this
eect, we introduce a second string in our model. The trig-
gering stage send the excitation signal alternatively to one
of the two strings, sounding more natural.
3.3 Spectral Morph algorithm
Our Spectral Model approach combines a sample-based
synthesis with transformations, based in the Spectral Peak
Processing (see section 2.1). A particularity of our sample-
based algorithm is that it works in the frequency domain.
Basically, depending on the input voice's parameters, a sound
template track is selected from the database. Each template
track contains all spectral frames from a single note. Then,
we read sequentially the spectral frames and apply some
transformations. Finally, the processed spectral frames are
converted to time domain through the inverse Fourier trans-
form.
Figure 4: The voice features select a track from the
database. The stored track's spectral frames are
transformed and nally converted to the time do-
main.
For our bass synthesizer implementation, we set up a very
small database consisting of 12 template tracks (one note
sample), considering two playing techniques. The tracks
are analyzed o-line in the spectral domain, and stored in
the database in form of binary les containing spectral data
(complex spectrum, harmonic peaks, estimated pitch, etc.).
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
134
All tracks have been labelled by hand according to its char-
acteristics. Currently, only three features were annotated:
Pitch, Dynamics andAttack Type. The pitch values are spec-
ied in Hz, Dynamics and Attack Type range is [0::1]. In
the case of Dynamics, 0 corresponds to a pp sound, and 1
to a . The attack type is instrument dependant. Concern-
ing bass sounds, we decided to classify two types of sounds
depending on the plucking technique soft ngered or slap.
Regarding the mapping for the spectral morph model al-
gorithm, a retrieval method calculates the minimum Euclid-
ean distance between the Input Vector (Pitch, Loudness and
Attack Unvoiceness) and the database elements. In a fur-
ther step, we start reading the spectral frame of the selected
track. Since we are dealing with a very small database, few
combination of loudness and pitches are available. There
are two types of transformations: transposition and gain.
Another factor that must be taken into account is the
timing. The pre-analyzed template tracks have a certain
duration, a certain number of spectral frames. In our sys-
tem, though, the performer's voice controls the synthesized
sound. Hence, is the input voice which decides the output
duration. We mark manually a sustain point (frame). After
a note is triggered, we read frame by frame until the sus-
tain frame is reached. Then, this frame is read repeatedly,
considering phase continuation, until the user releases" the
sung note. During the sustain, pitch bend can occur. and
only one note sample is read from the database at a given
time.
3.4 Implementation description
The proposed system was implemented as a stand-alone
C++ application running in real time on a o-the-shelf com-
puter. We used the CLAM 1 development framework, and
the PortAudio2 library for the audio interface along with
ASIO3 drivers. The internal algorithms parameters were:
windowsize = 2048, and hopsize = 256. The real mini-
mum latency of our set up (virtual audio wire) was 11ms.
For the Physical Modelling approach, we observed a latency
of 26 ms. In the Spectral Morph technique, the latency
raises up to 34ms. Note that the latency in the latter case
is increased due to the FFT and IFFT process, in which a
latency of half window size is unavoidable.
4. CONCLUSIONS
The achieved results showed that, in terms of computa-
tion requirements, such a system can be utilized as a virtual
instrument in a real-time performance situation. Neverthe-
less, this rst approach is still limited in terms of musical
control, and therefore needs further development. Among
the two synthesis techniques integrated, Physical Models has
in this case much less computational and memory cost than
the Spectral Morph approach. The quality of the synthesized
sound, a plucked bass guitar, is in both techniques accept-
able. However, since we plan to extend this system to other
musical instruments, Physical Modelling technique requires
for each instrument a completely dierent algorithm, which
implies extra design eort. Instead, the Spectral Morph ap-
proach is more scalable, in which adding new instruments
1http://www.iua.upf.es/clam
2http://www.portaudio.com/
3Audio Stream I/O (ASIO) is trademark of Steinberg,
GmbH.
requires only to provide a set of recorded note samples to
the database, and to adapt the mapping layer.
5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research has been partially funded by the EU-FP6-
IST- 507913 project SemanticHIFI.
6. REFERENCES
[1] J. Bonada and A. Loscos. Sample-based singing voice
synthesizer by spectral concatenation. In Proceedings
of Stockholm Music Acoustics Conference 2003,
Stockholm, Sweden, 2003.
[2] P. Cano. Fundamental frequency estimation in the
SMS analysis. In Proceedings of COST G6 Conference
on Digital Audio Eects 1998, Barcelona, 1998.
[3] P. Cook and G. Scavone. The Synthesis Toolkit
(STK). http://ccrma-www.stanford.edu/software/stk.
[4] J. Flanagan and R. Golden. Phase vocoder. Bell
Systems Technology Journal, 45:1493{1509, 1966.
[5] A. Hunt, M. Wanderley, and M. Paradis. The
importance of mapping in electronic instruments
design. In Proceedings of the Conference on New
Instruments for Musical Expression NIME, Dublin,
Ireland, 2002.
[6] D. Jae and J. Smith. Extensions on the
Karplus-Strong plucked-string algorithm. Computer
Music Journal, 7(2):56{69, 1983.
[7] J. Janer. Feature extraction for voice- driven
synthesis. In 118th AES Convention, Barcelona, 2005.
[8] T. Jehan. Perceptual Synthesis Engine: An
Audio-Driven Timbre Generator, 2001.
[9] K. Karplus and A. Strong. Digital synthesis of
plucked-string and drum timbres. Computer Music
Journal, 7(2):43{55, 1983.
[10] J. Laroche and M. Dolson. New Phase-vocoder
techniques for pitch-shifting, harmonizing and other
exotic eects. In Proceedings of IEEE Workshop on
Applications of Signal Processing to Audio and
Acoustics, New Paltz, New York, 1999.
[11] M. Puckette. Phase-locked vocoder. In Proceedings of
IEEE Workshop on Applications of Signal Processing
to Audio and Acoustics, Mohonk, New York, 1995.
[12] M. Puckette. Score folowing using the sung voice. In
Proceedings, International Computer Music
Conference, San Francisco, 1995.
[13] M. Puckette. Low-dimensional parameter mapping
using spectral envelopes. In Proceedings, International
Computer Music Conference, Miami, 2004.
Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada
135