A Reactive Environment for Dynamic Volume Control
Dalia El-Shimy
Centre for Intelligent Machines
3480 University Street
Montréal, Québec
dalia@cim.mcgill.ca
Thomas Hermann
CITEC, Bielefeld Univeristy
Universitätsstraße 25
Bielefeld, Germany
thermann@techfak.uni-
bielefeld.de
Jeremy R. Cooperstock
Centre for Intelligent Machines
3480 University Street
Montréal, Québec
jer@cim.mcgill.ca
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we discuss the design and testing of a reactive envi-
ronment for musical performance. Driven by the interpersonal in-
teractions amongst musicians, our system gives users, i.e., several
musicians playing together in a band, real-time control over certain
aspects of their performance, enabling them to change volume lev-
els dynamically simply by moving around. It differs most notably
from the majority of ventures into the design of novel musical in-
terfaces and installations in its multidisciplinary approach, draw-
ing on techniques from Human-Computer Interaction, social sci-
ences and ludology. Our User-Centered Design methodology was
central to producing an interactive environment that enhances tra-
ditional performance with novel functionalities. During a formal
experiment, musicians reported ﬁnding our system exciting and
enjoyable. We also introduce some additional interactions that can
further enhance the interactivity of our reactive environment. In
describing the particular challenges of working with such a unique
and creative user as the musician, we hope that our approach can
be of guidance to interface developers working on applications of
a creative nature.
1. INTRODUCTION
According to Jordà, the fact that it is not easy to deﬁne the role
of a computer in live performance the way one can with tradi-
tional acoustic instruments is an indication that we are still in the
“Stone Age” of technology-aided music creation [14]. In fact, this
challenge is a recurring theme when examining New Musical In-
terfaces (NMIs) in general, a term by which we describe novel
gestural controllers, sound installations and sonic environments.
When listening to traditional musical instruments, there is a con-
crete, visible and mechanic relationship between the movements
of an instrument’s body and the qualities of the resulting sound,
allowing both musicians and listeners to develop a clear cognitive
link between the excitatory input and the ensuing auditory output.
On the other hand, digital musical instruments exhibit a decou-
pling between the their gestural controllers and sound generators.
In fact, Croft likens this distinction to the practice of acousmatic
music, asserting that “what is known to be the source is visible but
remains perceptually detached” [5]. Such a phenomenon places
the additional responsibility of designing a mapping between in-
put and output onto the instrument’s creator. While this can lead
to a wealth of creative experimental NMIs, many are in reality pe-
culiar, and are only used by their respective creators. Fels et al.
attribute this problem to a lack of transparency, one of the qualities
of mapping that provides an indication of the psychophysiological
distance, in the mind of the player and the audience, between the
input and the output of an instrument [7]. The more transparent a
mapping, the more expressive a device can potentially be, and the
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’12,May 21 – 23, 2012, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
more rewarding is the experience of playing for both musicians and
audiences. Naturally, this begs the question: What makes a new in-
strument easy to learn, enticing or, most importantly, rewarding?
Many authors advocate for the use of metaphor as a driving force
behind a mapping’s design: by referring to elements that are con-
sidered “common knowledge”, the mapping can ideally be made
transparent to all parties. We wish to take this approach further,
and argue that arriving at the appropriate metaphors can be best
accomplished through a User-Centered Design (UCD) methodol-
ogy based on the key principles of usability outlined by Gould:
early and continual focus on users, empirical measurement of us-
age and iterative testing [10]. While the ﬁeld of music technology
has long beneﬁted from research in Human-Computer Interaction
(HCI), we believe in the merit of reversing this relationship: there
is much insight that interface developers stand to gain from the
design of New Musical Interfaces. In fact, we regard the develop-
ment of NMIs as a highly specialized challenge in User-Centered
Design. Musicians are unique users. Their needs can be difﬁcult
to establish, given that new instruments, controllers or sonic envi-
ronments do not exist to serve a concrete purpose in the same way
as, for example, a document editor. Furthermore, the nature of
performance imposes strict constraints on any interaction design:
musicians’ hands, eyes and ears are almost always occupied. As a
result, all considerations of usability design bear an added level of
complexity, and many traditional input and output paradigms can
be deemed unsuitable.
We chose to explore these challenges by applying the key prin-
ciples of usability described by Gould to the design of a reactive
environment for musical performance. Rather than introducing a
novel musical instrument, our objective was to create a new per-
formance environment that captilizes on the interpersonal interac-
tions amongst musicians, allowing them to directly inﬂuence each
other’s volumes by moving about their space. Through the design,
development and evaluation of our system, we realized that no sin-
gle discipline provided all the answers, and found ourselves in-
corporating techniques from various ﬁelds into our methodology:
engineering design to implement the system, HCI to methodolog-
ically involve our users, ludology to evaluate how enjoyable they
found our reactive environment, and social science research to de-
velop a better understanding of musicians. The remainder of this
paper describes how our system evolved in a manner that ensured
our target user, the musician, remained front and center through all
phases of the project.
2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORKS
2.1 Collaborative Musical Interfaces
Ensemble performance has always been been considered a highly
social and interdependent art form. In a closed causal loop, a musi-
cian’s state is continuously inﬂuenced by the feedback he receives
from his peers and audience and, in turn, his output will come to
affect those around him. Nonetheless, while musicians can inﬂu-
ence each other a great deal, the level of control over this inﬂuence
is rather limited. For example, a soloist can steer her collaborators
towards a musical idea in which she is interested, but this type of
inﬂuence is more of a suggestion; she has no direct control over the
other musicians’ instruments, and there is no guarantee that they
will consent to her desire [19].
The increasing use of computing technology in performance,
however, has made possible the construct of direct electronic com-
munication channels between instruments, allowing perfomers to
take fully active roles in determining not only their own musical
output, but that of their peers as well [20]. To describe collabora-
tive interfaces where players can inﬂuence, share and shape each
other’s music in real-time, Weinberg coined the term “Intercon-
nected Music Networks” (IMNs). Such networks, he posits, “bear
the promise of using technology to enhance the social context of
music performance and enrich its social ritual roots” [19]. This
notion was popularized in the 1970s by the League of Automatic
Music Composers, who became the ﬁrst group to write interde-
pendent computer compositions where frequencies were mapped
from one computer to generate notes in another. The group evolved
into The Hub in 1986, and improved their communication schemes
through the use of MIDI data exchanged by a central computer.
However, participation in early IMNs was typically not a simple
process. In the case of The League, for instance, the majority of
interdependent connections between players were based on low-
level elements, requiring possession of specialized musical skills
and technical knowledge in order to partake meaningfully in the
process [20]. Furthermore, the interactions proved to be overly
complex for audiences to understand.
In recent years, more approachable varieties of collaborative in-
terfaces have emerged to offer even novices the possibility of col-
lectively creating music [3]. For instance, Jordá’s Faust Music
On-Line (FMOL) allowed users to create their own compositions
using a simple Graphical User Interface (GUI) before uploading
them for others to access and manipulate [14]. The goal of the
project was “introducing the practice of experimental electronic
music to newcomers while trying to remain attractive to more ad-
vanced electronic musicians”. Similarly, Barbosa’s Public Sound
Objects allowed participants to partake in an on-going collabora-
tive sonic performance by manipulating simple objects in a public
online space [1].
Interactive sound installations are another example of collabo-
rative interfaces designed with public accessibility in mind. For
instance, as an alternative to the often undesirable “Muzak” heard
in public spaces, the Intelligent Street allowed users to request
changes via mobile text messages. The overall result was to turn
visitors of a space from passive consumers to active participants
creating their own aural landscape [15]. As another example, the
Control Augmented Adaptive System for Audience Participation
(CAASAP) was a project designed to examine a variety of ways
in which audience members could make use of mobile phones to
become part of the music-making process [18]. Finally, Feldmier
et al. created low-cost wireless motion sensors that enabled them
to estimate the level of activity of a large scale crowd . The data
could be used subsequently to generate music and lighting effects,
thus essentially allowing members of the crowd to drive the music
to which they danced [6].
As collaborative interfaces respond to the interpersonal interac-
tions amongst participants, their design should ideally be informed
by a thorough understanding of common user behaviours. We be-
lieve that this can best be achieved through UCD methodologies.
In fact, a number of developers have successfully taken a user-
centric approach to the design of novel musical interfaces, as we
further discuss in the following section.
2.2 Musical HCI
As Gentner explains, system developers and engineers often fall
into the trap of believing that an ideal interface is one that reﬂects
a system’s underlying model [9]. A user, however, generally has
no interest in or understanding of a system’s inner workings, but
is more concerned with completing a particular task using the sys-
tem. Thus, in spite of the designer’s best intentions, the result from
the user’s point of view can become a “bad interface”. Developers
of novel musical interfaces are not immune to this phenomenon.
Jordá identiﬁes idiosyncrasy as the biggest problem with new mu-
sical controllers, stating that many NMIs wind up only being used
by their own creators [14]. Furthermore, Geiger et al. explain that
since mapping strategies for novel controllers suffer from “missing
interface standards and little design experience”, a “try-and-error
approach” is more often than not adopted by developers [8].
The search for a solution to such issues has led to the emer-
gence of “music-oriented HCI” research, where the development
of new sensing tecnologies, creation of mapping strategies and
user involvment in design are heavily driven by HCI know-how.
For instance, Bau et al. relied on participatory design methods
from HCI for the development of the A20, a polyhedron-shaped,
multi-channel audio input/output device. Throughout the design
of the A20, the authors held participatory workshops where non-
technical users were invited to explore the system’s potential as
a collaborative personal music player [2]. Similarly, Geiger et al.
employed participatory design techniques in the early design phase
of the VRemin, a set of 3D interfaces for a virtual Theremin [8].
The Do It Yourself Smart Experience (DIYSE) Project is another
another example of HCI methodologies used in the design of a
musical interface. Johnston et al. also used participatory design
throughout the development of an interactive environment that en-
courages musical exploration [13]. Consistent with Geiger et al.
[8], the authors found “no clear pre-existing requirements for soft-
ware of this kind” and therefore adopted an exploratory approach.
2.3 Applying UCD to Music
While the systems described in the previous section were designed
through user-centered approaches, they were evaluated iteratively
against pre-conceived benchmarks established by the developers
themselves. In other words, the designers had decided a priori
what would be important for the user, rather than starting with the
necessary “early focus on users” to establish these requirements.
Our approach, instead, had the ﬁrst author gain a full understand-
ing of her users through lengthy observations, interactions and
non-leading interviews, all described below. As a result, all de-
sign criteria, benchmarks and goals were tailored to reﬂect exactly
what the user, rather than the designer, found important. Further-
more, our experience shows that while a user-centered approach to
musical interface design can be effective, it does not paint the full
picture. Iterative user testing may tell us the how, but its ability to
explain the why behind a user’s actions, decisions and behaviours
can be rather limited. As a result, we have drawn on know-how
from a number of disciplines to arrive at a thorough understand-
ing of our user, an understanding we believe is critical towards
desgining a truly satisfying, rewarding and engaging performance
environment.
3. UNDERSTANDING THE USER
3.1 User Observation
In keeping with Gould’s principles, our ﬁrst step was to develop
a thorough understanding of our users and the tasks we expect
them to accomplish. To this end, we gathered extended “ﬂy-on-
the-wall” style video footage of musicians playing together in a
relaxed environment. The participants we worked with and ﬁlmed
varied in terms of expertise and the length of time they had been
practicing music with each other. Since our focus was not on the
creation of a new instrument, but on augmenting effective group
performance with existing instruments, we were particularly inter-
ested in the interpersonal interactions amongst the musicians rather
than the musician-instrument interactions. We worked with a total
of 15 different musicians in ﬁve bands, who were ﬁlmed over a
period spanning a few months.
As a general pattern, musicians who had performed together for
longer periods tended to interact with one another through more
physically pronounced movements. For instance, they were more
likely to move closer during parts of a song where they felt a de-
sire to “groove” with one another. During such periods, they also
commonly assumed similar body postures. On the other hand, mu-
sicians who had played together less frequently mostly communi-
cated through sustained glances and synchronized head bobbing
movements. Finally, we noted that adjusting volumes mid-session
was often a cumbersome task for ensemble performers. Typically,
all levels were tuned before the start of performance, and any de-
sired adjustments could only be undertaken between songs, after
having been discussed amongst and agreed upon by band mem-
bers. During stage performance, even this level of control is re-
moved from the musicians, and typically relegated to a soundman.
Rank Interview Analysis Musician Survey
1 Interaction with other musi-
cians
Enjoyment
2 Enjoyment Self-expression
3 Self-expression Creative engagement
4 Creative engagement Interaction with other musi-
cians
5 Improving technical ability Improving technical ability
6 Putting on a live show Putting on a live show
7 Pursuing a professional ca-
reer
Pursuing a professional ca-
reer
Table 1: Values of importance to performers ranked in accor-
dance to the outcomes of our interview analysis and survey of
musicians.
3.2 Non-leading Interviews
While the video footage provided insight regarding the what and
how, we had yet to fully appreciate the why behind many of the
musicians’ actions. Thus, to uncover this type of information, we
decided to speak directly to a sample of our target population. In
order to avoid any bias, we decided against a question-and-answer
style of discussion, opting instead to conduct non-leading inter-
views. We spoke with six musicians, one female and ﬁve male,
ranging in age from 18 to 42. Two were jazz musicians, while the
rest performed various types of rock music.
3.2.1 Content Analysis
Each interview was transcribed, and a Grounded Theory (GT) method-
ology was applied. GT, a common technique used in qualitatitive
social science research, operates on the notion that theories can be
extracted from a given data set, in contrast to the scientiﬁc method,
where hypotheses are formulated prior to data collection. Since we
wanted to avoid forming or validating any pre-conceived notions
about our users’ needs and desires prior to fully analyzing the con-
tent of the interviews, this made GT suitable for our needs. We be-
gan by performing a content analysis. During a process known as
“coding”, any quotes alluding to motivations or values held by the
musicians, behaviours, or preferences were assigned a descriptive
tag. After all interviews had been coded, a list of all tags used dur-
ing the process was compiled. Any tags we considered sufﬁciently
related were then grouped and assigned a new encompassing tag,
thereby reducing the overall set of tags down to a more manage-
able size of seven: Creative Engagement, Interaction with other
musicians, Improving Technical Ability, Putting on a Live Show,
Self-Expression, Professionalism and Enjoyment. Subsequently,
all quotes representing a particular value were grouped together,
and assigned a weight between 0 and 1, representing the impor-
tance of that value to the user, or how strongly they felt about it.
The weights were then summed, with the ranking of the impor-
tance of these values shown under the “Interview Analysis” col-
umn of Table 1.
3.2.2 Validation
Validation is a component of qualitative research that involves check-
ing at some level the accuracy of one’s outcomes. Since our goal
was to determine what exactly is important to musicians, we de-
cided to survey a number of them to determine how well the out-
come of our content analysis procedure matched the consensus
of actual musicians. Our brief online survey presented musicians
with the list of seven values identiﬁed during our content analy-
sis, and asked that they rank these values in order of importance.
The survey was completed by 21 students, six female and 15 male,
between the ages of 21 and 40.
Although not matching exactly, the results shown under the “Mu-
sician Survey” column of Table 1 correspond reasonably closely
to our initial analysis. The only signiﬁcant difference is the sur-
vey ranking of “Interaction with other musicians” in fourth place,
whereas the interview analysis placed this ﬁrst. The values listed
in Table 1 would later become important when establishing bench-
marks for our formal user experiment, described in Section 6.
4. DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
4.1 System Overview
Having gained a clearer understanding of our users, our subsequent
goal was to begin deﬁning some useful functionalities for our sys-
tem. As a primary guideline, we wanted the system to be driven
by the interpersonal interactions between musicians. Furthermore,
we noted that a common problem for musicians is to balance and
adjust the mix they receive, as they often wish to hear their own or
a peer’s instrument a bit louder than the rest for self-monitoring.
During live performance, it is normally impossible for them to
accomplish this in an interactive manner, or without affecting all
other members of the ensemble. Thus, we anticipated that provid-
ing greater levels of control than traditional performance environ-
ments afford would be a desirable feature for our users. Finally, we
wanted all such controls to be transparent and, therefore, our map-
pings had to adhere to a clear metaphor. As a result, we identiﬁed
Dynamic V olume Mixing (DVM) as the principal feature for our
reactive environment: as two musicians get closer to one another,
they perceive each other’s volumes to become louder.
Assume that M musicians are interacting, each located at posi-
tion ⃗ xi ∈R2,i = 1,...,M . Furthermore, assume that the musi-
cians produce the source audio signals si(t).
Using DVM, we describe the mix mi(t) that the musician ire-
ceives by mi(t) =
M∑
j̸ =i
aijsj(t), where aij = f(∥⃗ xi −⃗ xj∥) is
given by a function that increases monotonously if the argument
falls below a thresholdθ. Practically, an exponential function mod-
els a linear increase on the decibel scale and matches users’ expec-
tations.
Naturally, to experience such changes, musicians must receive
their audio mix through headphones, which is typically the case in
studio situations. DVM increases the musicians’ overall sense of
control by enabling them to create their own individualized mixes,
a job typically assigned to a soundman during live performance. It
capitalizes on common behaviours exhibited by musicians to ad-
dress particular needs that became apparent to us during our obser-
vations. Furthermore, DVM is based on an exaggerated property
of sound that we experience everyday: sound sources closer to us
are perceived to be louder in volume. Therefore, it satisﬁes the
design guidelines established above.
4.2 System Implementation
After painting a clearer picture of our users, our subsequent goal
was to implement and validate our Dynamic V olume Mixing fea-
ture. We developed our prototype using SuperCollider for audio
manipulation, and a ceiling-mounted webcam, providing its video
output to the OpenCV library, for user tracking. The conﬁguration
of our preliminary prototype can be seen in Figure 1.
4.2.1 Position Detection
Our colour detection algorithm, written in C++, utilizes a number
of functions from the OpenCV library. First, a Logitech HD Pro
C910 wide angle USB webcam is attached to the ceiling. Then,
each musician is given a bright t-shirt of a different colour (such as
red, blue or green) to wear, taking care to ensure that the area seen
by the camera does not include other objects containing the colours
we wish to detect. We then specify a range that encompasses each
colour’s hue, saturation and value (HSV). Subsequently, images
captured by the camera are processed by a thresholding function
that returns a binary image, representing the pixels where the spec-
iﬁed HSV values were detected. Using OpenCV , we can calculate
the area occupied by these pixels (zeroeth order moment), as well
as their centroids (ﬁrst order moments) along each of the image’s
two axes. Finally, dividing each ﬁrst order moment by the area
yields the detected object’sx and y co-ordinates. The position val-
ues are then broadcast via Open Sound Control (OSC), and can be
used by SuperCollider to determine each player’s invidual audio
mix.
4.2.2 Audio Setup
Each musician is asked to wear a pair of Sennheiser HD Pro 280
closed headphones, which are plugged into the output channels of
an RME Hammerfall Multiface II audio interface. To evaluate our
Dynamic V olume Mixing function, the instruments used with this
Figure 1: System Overview for Current Prototype. The dashed
box titled “user” represents components given to each partici-
pating musician.
prototype were all electric rather than acoustic, and fed to the in-
put channels of the Hammerfall audio interface. Thereby, we could
ensure that the modiﬁed audio mix played back to each musician
is not overshadowed by the actual sound of the instruments them-
selves. All audio streams are then processed, individualized mixes
are created in SuperCollider, and played back through each musi-
cian’s headphones. The distance between performers is continu-
ally calculated as the Euclidean distance between their respective
color blob centroids, as returned from the Position Detection al-
gorithm. If two musicians move closer to one another, decreasing
this distance below a pre-determined threshold, they perceive each
other’s volumes as louder than the rest of the group.
5. PRELIMINARY USER FEEDBACK
We asked a jazz trio consisting of a singer, guitarist and keyboardist
to test the DVM feature and give us their thoughts. At the end of
the performance, the singer eagerly told us that she found the sys-
tem to be very exciting, and that she had in fact moved closer to
each musician during their solos in order to better “focus” on what
they were playing. She added that during traditional rehearsal, she
was often frustrated at her lack of control over other musicians’
volumes: the sound levels, while optimal for other players, could
at times be less than ideal for her. Having the ability to create her
own personalized sound mix was therefore quite helpful. Finally,
the musicians reported having fun while interacting with our sys-
tem. Seeing as the preliminary feedback was mostly positive, we
decided to conduct a formal experiment in order to quantitatively
assess the effects of DVM on musical performance.
6. FORMAL USER EXPERIMENT
Our ﬁrst objective was to determine the benchmarks against which
our system should be tested. Since the procedure described in Sec-
tion 3.2 helped uncover a number of values musicians found im-
portant, we knew it was critical to determine how well our system
performed against each of those categories. Nonetheless, Hix and
Harston advise that the number of usability goals tested in qualitia-
tive experiments be kept low, citing 2-3 as an ideal ﬁgure that helps
prevent testing and analysis from overwhelming developers [11].
Furthermore, only the top 4 entries could, to a certain extent, be
measured during an experiment, as the remaining ones would re-
quire long-term monitoring of participants. Thus, we decided that
our formal user experiment should help determine whether the Dy-
namic V olume Mixing feature met the following benchmarks:
•Enjoyment: Musicians should enjoy themselves while in-
teracting with our system. In order to quantify enjoyment,
we turn to ludology, where “ﬂow” and “immersion” are of-
ten evaluated during game studies and have successfully been
used as indicators of a player’s overall sense of pleasure (see
[4][17][12]). In particular, we used a modiﬁed version of
IJsselsteijn’s Game Experience Questionnaire [12], which
evaluates a player’s state through a series of general ques-
tions that can be extended easily beyond gaming applica-
tions.
•Creative Engagement: Musicians should be able to explore
new grounds and enhance their sense of creative engage-
ment. A questionnaire was specially created, where users
were asked to rate their perceptions of the most basic com-
ponents of creative engagement. Examples include whether
they discovered or learned anything new, felt inspired, did
something unexpected or took risks.
•Self-Expression: Musicians should also be helped to ex-
press their musical moods and ideas. Similar to our eval-
uation of creative engagement, a questionnaire was created
to elicit the musicians’ perceptions of basic qualities of self-
expression. Examples included whether they felt understood,
whether they were able to express their moods, feelings and
ideas either verbally or musically, whether they felt their in-
dividuality had been preserved within the group and whether
the performance reﬂected any aspects of their personalities.
•Interactions amongst musicians: One of our primary ob-
jectives, of course, is to support an increased level of inter-
actions between musicians. In addition to the GEQ’s Social
Presence questionnaire component, which focused primarily
on the behavioural involvement amongst musicians, we also
looked at the position data collected throughout the perfor-
mance to determine how often the musicians moved closer
towards one another.
Musicians were asked to choose a number of songs familiar to
them, and jam for approximately half an hour, once in a tradi-
tional, non-augmented fashion, and once with our system’s Dy-
namic V olume Mixing functionality. This notion is an example of
the “Adjection/Intensiﬁcation” strategy described by Ravasio et al.
for conducting qualitative research in HCI [16]. The idea is to iso-
late and determine the effects of dynamic volume control on the
musician’s perceptions of creativity, enjoyment, self-expression
and interaction. For better comparability, the musicians heard each
other through closed headphones in both cases, although, natually,
the volume mix was static in the non-augmented case. Further-
more, since our experience indicates that it often takes musicians
some time to gain momentum and feel comfortable, or “warm up”,
we did not want to interrupt them between every song to switch
experimental parameters. Therefore, we only switched conditions
once during the session, after approximately half an hour of perfor-
mance, at the end of the currently played piece. This helped ensure
that each jam session peaked and ended organically, thereby pre-
serving the ecological validity of the performance. Although a bal-
anced order of presentation of conditions would be superior from
the perspective of a valid comparison, we wanted to make sure that
in the limited time frame of the experiment, the musicians had am-
ple opportunity to play under the DVM condition, identifying any
signiﬁcant usability issues that may be of concern.
6.1 Band 1
We ﬁrst invited a 4-piece band, consisting of vocals, guitar, drum
machine, and keyboard synthesizer to test our system. The mu-
sicians were between 22 and 28 years old, two female and two
male, and had performed together in the past. However, the test
session quickly uncovered a number of areas that needed improve-
ment. The vocalist took the most advantage of the DVM feature, as
she moved around the room to explore the shifting volumes. Her
actions, however, seemed to frustrate the guitarist and drummer,
who felt that they could not “get away” from what was happen-
ing around them. Analysis of position data helped shed some light
on the issue: throughout the session with DVM, a threshold of
250 cm was set, meaning that two musicians would begin experi-
encing volume changes when the distance between them dropped
below that value. This threshold was appropriate during our work
with the jazz trio, described ealier. However, it proved to be un-
suitable for a four-piece ensemble, as the initial distances between
the musicians were already below the threshold when they began
playing. Thus, we learned that any threshold used needed to be
tailored to the size of the ensemble using the system. Furthermore,
we concluded that the musicians needed a clearly marked default
position to which they could return, should the volume changes be-
come overwhelming. After these changes had been incorporated,
we set out to evaluate our improved system.
6.2 Band 2
We tested our improved system with a 3-piece rock band consist-
ing of bass, lead guitar, and rhythm guitar. The musicians were
between 27 and 31 years old, all male, and had performed together
in the past, rehearsing and playing live shows regularly for nearly
two years. We monitored the distances between members of the
ensemble during the session without DVM and found that they
appeared to be comfortable at separations of approximately 230–
250 cm, i.e., not trying to move closer together at these distances.
Therefore, we determined 225 cm to be a reasonable threshold to
set for the DVM session.
Figure 2: Comparison of levels of ﬂow, behavioural involve-
ment, creativity, and self-expression, reported by musicians,
without DVM (in blue) and with DVM (in orange).
Data was collected post-session through the questionnaires, as
well as in-session through video footage and position tracking.
The participants were highly encouraged to think out loud, and
express any feelings or concerns they had regarding their perfor-
mance.
6.2.1 Questionnaire Analysis
Figure 2 compares the musicians’ perceptions of ﬂow, behavioural
involvement, creativity and self-expression with and without DVM.
The scores assigned to each factor were tabulated from the musi-
cians’ responses to questions pertinent to the various facets of that
factor. Overall, the DVM feature fared quite well across the board,
leading to a majority of the performers reporting an equal or im-
proved experience with DVM on all factors.
6.2.2 Data Analysis
As seen in Figure 3, during the session without DVM, the musi-
cians did not venture far from their starting positions. The only
notable exception was an instant when the rhythm guitarist brieﬂy
wandered across the performance space, before returning to his
original post. In contrast, however, when DVM was used, how-
ever, all three musicians were far more adventurous, making full
use of the performance space.
6.2.3 Footage Analysis
Through a content analysis of our video footage, we were able to
gain more insight into the musicians’ impressions of our system.
First, even though the musicians were given a description of the
DVM feature before the start of the session, they were quite pleas-
antly surprised when they began interacting with the system. They
began by moving all around the space to “get a feel” for the vol-
ume shifts. When they were more comfortable, they started taking
better advantage of DVM, with the rhythm guitarist and bassist, for
instance, huddling around the lead guitarist as he played a solo, as
can be seen in Figure 4. Thus, our system helped increase the level
of interpersonal interactions amongst them. All three musicians
reported ﬁnding the system quite novel and exciting. The rhythm
guitarist commented explicitly that he had never experienced any-
thing similar, and was quite happy to be given the opportunity to
participate in our test session. Finally, the lead guitarist suggested
that we use a metronome in the future, as he found it a bit difﬁcult
to keep time at certain points.
Figure 3: Overview of positions of rhythm guitarist (in red),
lead guitarist (in blue) and bassist (in green) without and with
DVM, sampled at 1-second intervals.
Figure 4: A 10-minute overview of the distance between the
lead guitarist and the other musicians. Two instances of solos
have been circled.
7. INTERACTION ENHANCEMENTS
The next step in the development of our system is to continue with
the iterative process of testing and modiﬁcation. While DVM met
our established benchmarks reasonably well for the rock trio de-
scribed above, we have to conﬁrm these results by evaluating it
further with other ensembles.
In addition, motivated by the positive feedback from the mu-
sicians, we have developed new ideas how to enhance the inter-
activity of the system further. We introduce and outline two ap-
proaches: (i) Enhanced Stereo Panning, and (ii) Orientation-based
Sound Mixing.
7.1 Enhanced Stereo Panning
Enhanced Stereo Panning (ESP) takes the formalism for DVM es-
tablished in Section 4.1, and extends the mix for musician ito a
2D-vector ⃗ mi = (mLi,mRi), representing the left and right audio
channels. This allows us to create interactive, spatially structured
sound mixes. As we naturally orient towards sound sources we are
particularly interested in, ESP likewise enables an intuitive navi-
gation of the mix. Other musicians deemed to be of less interest
are in turn routed to one’s spatial periphery, left or right, according
to their position. The formalism to create this effect is to compute
mki(t) =
M∑
j̸ =i
akijsj(t)where k∈{L=left,R=right}, and akij are
now channel-wise mixing coefﬁcients that depend both on the dis-
tances to other musicians j and the orientation of musician i. We
introduce the unit length vector ⃗ ei, which points from the right to
the left ear. An intuitive approach is to set
akij = aij
2
(
1 +bk
(⃗ xi −⃗ xj)
∥⃗ xi −⃗ xj∥·⃗ ei
)2
, (1)
with bL = −1, b R = 1. The scalar product between the dif-
ference vector and the ear-connection vector is within the range
[−1,1] and the ( )2 ensures that the overall energy of the source
signal remains constant when orienting the head towards a musi-
cian.
Certainly, the implementation of this technique demands the
sensing of the musician’s head orientation in real-time, which we
have already tested using custom-built sensors. Although it is de-
batable whether this approach is appropriate for mixing, partic-
ularly when users move their heads quickly to the rhythm, e.g.,
“head banging”, we argue that this ESP effect can be muted grad-
ually and dynamically if the vector ⃗ ei changes too fast.
7.2 Orientation-based Sound Mixing
We can even go a step further by combining ESP and amplitude
mixing into an Orientation-based Sound Mixing (OSM) feature,
modifying Equation 1 so that the head rotation not only causes
a stereo panning of the mixed sound signals, but also emphasizes
the level according to its angular distance to the frontal position. In
this scenario, the better a musician ﬁts into an angular bandwithσ,
the louder their source signal will be. For that only the coefﬁents
aij in eq. 1 need to be redeﬁned as
aij = f(∥⃗ xi −⃗ xj∥) ·g
( ⃗ xi −⃗ xj
∥⃗ xi −⃗ xj∥·⃗ ni
)
(2)
where a good choice for g() is a bell-shaped function such as
g(y) = b+ exp(−y2/σ2) . The σ parameter allows adjustment
of the angular width of the level emphasis area and ballows ad-
justment of the ambient level of sound sources outside the peak.
This orientation-based sound mixing is particularly interesting for
those musicians whose mobility is rather limited by their instru-
ment, such as the keyboarder or drum player.
8. CONCLUSION
We described the development of a reactive environment for per-
formance that allows musicians to change each other’s perceived
volumes dynamically by moving about their space. More than
an exercise in engineering design, our approach was truly multi-
disciplinary, drawing on user-centered approaches from Human-
Computer Interaction, qualitative research methodologies from so-
cial sciences, and evaluation techniques from ludology. Through
extensive user observations and non-leading interviews, we were
able to create a thorough portrait of our target users that remained
front and center during all phases of development. A quantitative
evaluation of the resulting system with a rock trio proved that our
system has the potential to increase musicians’ sense of ﬂow, cre-
ativity, self-expression and behavioural involvement. In addition,
it can increase the interpersonal interactions amongst members of
an ensemble. We also introduced additional interactions, such as
Enhanced Stereo Panning and Orientation-based Sound Mixing,
that we plan to integrate into our reactive environment. Through
the iterative testing and modiﬁcation process mandated by UCD,
we hope to continue reﬁning and expanding our reactive environ-
ment, thereby offering musicians additional novel functionalities
that extend beyond traditional performance.
9. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank Karola Pitsch of the Conversation
Analysis Group at Bielefeld University for sharing her expertise,
and Adriana Olmos from the Shared Reality Lab at McGill Uni-
versity for her invaluable help and advice. The research described
here was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Re-
search Council of Canada.
10. REFERENCES
[1] Àlvaro Barbosa and M. Kaltenbrunner. Public Sound
Objects: A Shared Musical Space on the Web. In
Proceedings of International Conference on Web Delivering
of Music (WEDELMUSIC 2002), pages 9–15. IEEE
Computer Society Press, 2002.
[2] O. Bau, A. Tanaka, and W. E. Mackay. The A20: Musical
Metaphors for Interface Design, volume 8, pages 91–96.
2008.
[3] T. Blaine and S. Fels. Contexts of collaborative musical
experiences. In NIME’03, pages 129–134, 2003.
[4] N. Bushnell. Relationships between fun and the computer
business. Commununications of the ACM, 39:31–37, August
1996.
[5] J. Croft. Theses on liveness. Organised Sound, 12(1):59–66,
Apr. 2007.
[6] M. C. Feldmeier. Large Group Musical Interaction using
Disposable Wireless Motion Sensors. PhD thesis,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2002.
[7] S. Fels, A. Gadd, and A. Mulder. Mapping Transparency
Through Metaphor: Towards More Expressive Musical
Instruments. Organised Sound, 7:109–126, August 2002.
[8] C. Geiger, H. Reckter, D. Paschke, F. Schutz, and C. Poepel.
Towards participatory design and evaluation of
theremin-based musical interfaces. In Proceedings of the
2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression,
pages 303 – 306, Genova, Italy, June 2008.
[9] D. R. Gentner and J. Grudin. Why Good Engineers
(Sometimes) Create Bad Interfaces. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human factors in Computing
Systems, pages 277–282, New York, NY , USA, 1990.
[10] J. D. Gould and C. Lewis. Designing for Usability: Key
Principles and What Designers Think. Communications of
the ACM, 28:300–311, March 1985.
[11] D. Hix and H. R. Hartson. Developing user interfaces:
ensuring usability through product & process. Wiley
professional computing. J. Wiley, 1993.
[12] W. IJsselsteijn, W. Van den Hoogen, C. Klimmt, Y . De Kort,
C. Lindley, K. Mathiak, K. Poels, N. Ravaja, M. Turpeinen,
and P. V orderer. Measuring the experience of digital game
enjoyment. In Proceedings of Measuring Behavior, 2008.
[13] A. Johnston, L. Candy, and E. Edmonds. Designing and
evaluating virtual musical instruments: facilitating
conversational user interaction. Design Studies,
29(6):556–571, 2008.
[14] S. Jordà. FMOL: Toward User-friendly, Sophisticated New
Musical Instruments. Computer Music Journal, 26:23–39,
September 2002.
[15] H. Lörstad, M. d’Inverno, and J. Eacott. The intelligent
street: responsive sound environments for social interaction.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI International Conference on
Advances in Computer Entertainment Technology, pages
155–162, New York, NY , USA, 2004.
[16] P. Ravasio, S. Guttormsen-Schar, and V . Tscherte. The
qualitative experiment in HCI: Deﬁnition, occurrences,
value and use. Transactions on Computer-Human
Interaction, pages 1–24, 2004.
[17] P. Sweetser and P. Wyeth. Gameﬂow: a model for evaluating
player enjoyment in games. Computer Entertainment, 3:3–3,
July 2005.
[18] K. Tahiroglu. Dynamic social interaction in a collective
mobile music performance. In Proceedings of the 2009
International Conference on Computational Science and
Engineering, pages 854–859, Washington, DC, USA, 2009.
[19] G. Weinberg. The Aesthetics, History, and Future
Challenges of Interconnected Music Networks. Proceedings
of the 2002 International Computer Music Conference,
pages 349–356, 2002.
[20] G. Weinberg. Interconnected Musical Networks: Toward a
Theoretical Framework. Computer Music Journal,
29:23–39, June 2005.