Stage- vs. Channel-strip Metaphor - Comparing
Performance when Adjusting Volume and Panning of a
Single Channel in a Stereo Mix
Steven Gelineck
Aalborg University CPH -
Department of Architecture,
Design and Media Technology
A.C. Meyers Vænge 15
2450 KBH SV
stg@create.aau.dk
Dannie Korsgaard
Aalborg University CPH -
Department of Architecture,
Design and Media Technology
A.C. Meyers Vænge 15
2450 KBH SV
dmk@create.aau.dk
Morten Büchert
Rhythmic Music Conservatory,
Copenhagen
Leo Mathisens Vej 1, Holmen
1437 Copenhagen K
morten@mortenbuchert.com
ABSTRACT
This study compares the stage metaphor and the chan-
nel strip metaphor in terms of performance. Tradition-
ally, music mixing consoles employ a channels strip control
metaphor for adjusting parameters such as volume and pan-
ning of each track. An alternative control metaphor, the
so-called stage metaphor lets the user adjust volume and
panning by positioning tracks relative to a virtual listening
position. In this study test participants are given the taskto
adjust volume and panning of one channel (in mixes consist-
ing of three channels) in order to replicate a series of simple
pre-rendered mixes. They do this using (1) a small physical
mixing controller and (2) using an iPad app, which imple-
ments a simple stage metaphor interface. We measure how
accurately they are able to replicate mixes in terms of vol-
ume and panning and how fast they are at doing so. Results
reveal that performance is surprisingly similar and thus we
are not able to detect any signiﬁcant diﬀerence in perfor-
mance between the two interfaces. Qualitative data how-
ever, suggests that the stage metaphor is largely favoured
for its intuitive interaction - conﬁrming earlier studies.
Author Keywords
User Interfaces, Usability Testing, Stage Metaphor, Mix-
ing, Interface, Evaluation, Channel Strip, Multitouch, Mu-
sic Production
ACM Classiﬁcation
H.5.5 [Information Interfaces and Presentation] Sound and
Music Computing, H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Pre-
sentation] User Interfaces—Input devices and strategies.
1. INTRODUCTION
Traditionally, user interfaces for mixing music (mixing con-
soles) have employed the channel strip metaphor for control-
ling volume, panning and other audio eﬀects. An alternative
to this channel strip metaphor is thestage metaphor-s e e
Figure 1. Here the diﬀerent channels in a mix are repre-
sented by virtual widgets, which can be positioned relative
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of thisw o r kf o r
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage andt h a tc o p i e s
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copyo t h e r w i s e ,t o
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’15,May 31-June 3, 2015, Louisiana State Univ., Baton Rouge, LA.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
to a virtual listener [1, 3, 8, 14]. David Gibson was the ﬁrst
to introduce a serious mixing tool implementing the stage
metaphor in a virtual 3D interface called the Virtual Mixer
[7]. Gibson and others [1, 5] argue that this way of mixing
is potentially more intuitive since it corresponds to the way
one would listen to sound (perceiving distance and direc-
tionality) in the real world [11]. While some evaluations [1,
4] indicate that the stage metaphor might be more intuitive
than the channel strip metaphor, there has never been a
quantitative performance comparison between the two in-
terface types. This paper takes a step back attempting to
evaluate whether there is a diﬀerence between how fast and
how accurately one is able to position a sound in a stereo
mix using the stage metaphor compared to using the chan-
nel strip metaphor. In other words, here we focus on the
usability in terms of performance, as opposed to the user
experience.
Figure 1: When employing the stage metaphor, vol-
ume and panning of an audio channel is determined
by distance and angle in relation to a virtual lis-
tening point. Here the diﬀerences between stage
metaphor channel positions (left) and channels con-
trolled using a traditional channel strip metaphor
(right) are illustrated.
The paper is organised as follows. Section 2 discusses re-
lated works within evaluation of control interfaces in general
leading to the chosen methodology. Section 3 presents the
actual experimental setup followed by results in Section 4.
Finally, in Section 5 the results are discussed and concluded
upon.
2. EVALUATIONS WITHIN NIME
Evaluation of musical devices, controllers, interfaces orin-
struments has been a growing concern within NIME. Wan-
derley and Orio [15] suggested several diﬀerent methods
for evaluation of input devices inspired by research carried
343
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
out within the ﬁeld of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI).
They proposed using simpliﬁed musical tasks for more ob-
jective evaluation of musical devices. Good overviews of dif-
ferent evaluation approaches are provided in [10] and [13].
Examples of where simple musical tasks have been used for
evaluation of musical input devices include Marshall et al.
[12], who compared input gestures for pitch modulation or
Collicutt et al. [2], who compared four diﬀerent input de-
vices in order to estimate diﬀerences in player actions.
Especially the discussion of how simple a musical task can
be when evaluating an interface for musical expression, is
interesting to us. The answer to this question really depends
on what is evaluated and for which intended context. For
our purpose, we wish to measure how well users are able to
place a sound in a mix using the two control metaphors, as
described above. Although placing a sound in a mix seems
like a simple task to do, it is more complex when carried
out in the context of mixing music in the studio or live.
The challenge for us has been to develop a musical task
that represents a real musical goal in a certain context. In
other words, our evaluation method must try to abstract
the situation in which a producer, sound designer or audio
technician has a musical idea (or thought) and tries to carry
out that idea swiftly and accurately. At the same time we
must simplify the experiment as much as possible in order
to limit biases.
These considerations led to the following overall exper-
imental setup. Test participants listen to a stereo track
consisting of three separate channels of audio. Each chan-
nel is gained and panned diﬀerently. One of the channels is
the test-channel that we ask the test-participants to repli-
cate. After listening carefully, the test participant is asked
to replicate the mix he or she heard.
We knew that the task should include more than the sin-
gle channel in order to provide a reference for the chan-
nel that was to be manipulated. The number of additional
channels (three) was chosen because it represented the min-
imum amount of channels that would still give a feeling of
actually mixing a piece of music as opposed to just posi-
tioning a sound (it turns out that we may have simpliﬁed
the task too much - more about this in Section 5).
3. EXPERIMENT
As explained earlier the goal of the experiment was to com-
pare the channel strip metaphor to the stage metaphor when
it comes to performance. The research questions were: are
users (1) more/less accurate and/or (2) faster/slower in
placing a single sound in a stereo mix when using the stage
metaphor opposed to using the channel strip metaphor.
3.1 Methodological concerns
Each test-mix consisted of three channels, one of which had
to be manipulated by the test participant. For each trial
the test participant was asked to listen to a pre-rendered
mix of the three channels (for instance drums, keyboards
and bass), each with a diﬀerent gain and panning. Partici-
pants were then asked to mix a piece of music with the same
audio content as they had just heard, only focusing on one
of the three channels. The other two channels were ﬁxed in
the correct positions, and the third channel (the one partic-
ipants were asked to manipulate) started out being centred
and gained to zero.
We chose to conduct the test using two diﬀerent over-
all tracks, each containing diﬀerent channels of audio—one
contained bass, keyboards anddrums,t h eo t h e rc o n t a i n e d
drums, congas andguitar—tracks in bold were the ones
being manipulated. This was done to reduce any inﬂuence
that a certain music type might have on the performance
outcome. Each test participant went through several trials
with diﬀerent tracks, using diﬀerent interfaces in a semi-
randomised order.
An issue that often arises when comparing traditional in-
terfaces with novel counterparts is that participants are of-
ten used to working with traditional interfaces. This gives
the traditional interface an obvious advantage over the novel
one. In order to explore this issue it was decided to test on
both novice users (users with a musical background but with
no mixing experience) and expert users (users with mixing
experience of 3 years or more). This would let us estimate
the eﬀect of having experience with one interface over the
other.
Figure 2: Interface used to represent channel strip
metaphor mixing (left) and interface used to repre-
sent stage metaphor mixing (right).
3.2 Apparatus
Two tracks were set up in Ableton Live1 each containing
three mono channels. A Max2 patch was built to receive
input data from the control interfaces and to push that to
Ableton Live for controlling volume and panning of each
channel as well as for controlling simple playback. Addi-
tionally, the Max patch was used to store performance pa-
rameters for each trial. The two control interfaces used
were (1) the Launchpad XL by Novation and (2) a custom
built iPad app implementing the stage metaphor (see Fig-
ure 2). The iPad app was a simpliﬁed version of the Music
Mixing Surface presented earlier by the authors [6]. The
layout is kept as simple as possible with a virtual listener in
the bottom center, three circles representing each channel,
and buttons for controlling playback and for starting and
stopping each trial. Circle distance to the listening position
was mapped to MIDI Volume value in Ableton Live and
circle angle to the listening position was mapped to MIDI
Pan value in Ableton Live (an angle of -90 degrees corre-
sponded to MIDI value 0 and +90 degrees corresponded to
MIDI value 127). Max communicated with the Launchpad
XL through standard MIDI and with the iPad app through
Open Sound Control (OSC). See Figure 3 for an overview
of the data-ﬂow. Beyerdynamic DT 770 headphones were
used for audio output from Live (and from Quicktime, in
the case of the pre-rendered mix).
The reason we separated the audio engine from the con-
troller was to make sure the experiment was not biased be-
cause of diﬀerences in audio quality. The reason for choos-
ing the Launchpad XL and the iPad was to have a compact
setup where both controllers were of similar size. We con-
sidered exchanging the Launchpad XL with an iPad app
with virtual sliders and knobs (as used in [6]) in order to
keep everything but the control metaphor equal between
the two interfaces. However, we decided to use an interface
with tangible sliders and knobs because it was a better rep-
resentation of atraditionalinterface. Especially the rotary
knob used for panning on traditional mixing consoles is not
1https://www.ableton.com2http://www.cycling74.com
344
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
well replicated in GUI versions, where one normally grabs
the knob by touching down and performs either a vertical
slider motion or a directional angular motion to manipulate
the associated value up or down.
Max/MSP
- data translation 
- register task completion time
- register pan/gain values
Ableton Live
- 2 different sessions
- Audio Out
Launcpad XL
- 6 sliders (gain)
- 12 potmeters (pan)
- MIDI out
iPad app
- 3 virtual widgets - position (gain/pan)
- buttons for start/stop/reset
- OSC over WIFI
Quicktime Player
- playback of pre-rendered mix 
(target mix)
AUDIO OUT (headphones)
Figure 3: Overview of the overall system.
3.3 Test procedure
Experiments were carried out over two days. 15 participants
(2 female, 13 male) took part in the evaluation (7 experi-
enced and 8 novices). Each test took approximately 15-20
minutes. Initially, test participants ﬁlled in a questionnaire
regarding demographics, including their musical and mix-
ing experience. They were then presented with the overall
test procedure. Each participant went through three setups
-o n ep r a c t i c es e t u pa n dt h e no n es e t u pf o re a c hi n t e r f a c e .
Each setup was a combination of an interface (Launchpad
or iPad) and a piece of music (Drums or Guitar). For each
setup the participant went through 5 trials, each with a dif-
ferent mix of the three channels3.F o r e a c ht r i a l t h e y w e n t
through the following steps:
• Participants practiced 1-3 times until comfortable with
how the interface worked and what to listen for. After
that the actual trial could begin.
• First they were asked to listen to a prerecorded mix.
They were told to listen carefully to especially the
channel for which they were supposed to replicate the
volume and panning.
• After listening for 8 seconds, they turned to the in-
terface. They were asked to hit a button starting the
audio. They proceeded to adjust volume and panning
of the target audio channel. When satisﬁed, they were
asked to hit a stop button, which also registered their
task completion time and the values for volume and
panning. (They were not told that they were timed).
• They then went on to the next trial as explained above.
Finally, the participants were asked to comment on their
experience, especially noting the diﬀerence between using
the two interfaces and guessing which interface they were
most accurate with.
4. RESULTS
Each of the 15 participants provided 5 trials for each of
the two interfaces. This gives a sample size of 75 for each
interface. For each sample, scores were calculated as the
3go to http://media.aau.dk/~stg/nime15_data.htmlto
listen to each mix and see target MIDI values for each trial
absolute diﬀerence between the MIDI value of the correct
placement (the vol/pan setting used for the reference mix)
and the MIDI value of the registered placement (vol/pan set
by the participant). If the participant for instance listened
to a mix where the drums were panned to the right (MIDI
value: 93) and afterwards adjusted the pan of the drums
to the center (MIDI value 64), he or she would obtain a
score of|64-93|=2 9 . T h el o w e rt h es c o r e ,t h eb e t t e rt h e
performance.
Figure 4 shows mean scores and 95% conﬁdence intervals
for volume and panning for both iPad and Launchpad. No
statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences were found.
Figure 4: Means and 95% conﬁdence intervals for
iPad and Launchpad scores. The lower the score,
the better the performance.
Figure 5: Means and 95% conﬁdence intervals for
expert and novice volume scores. Notice that vol-
ume scores diﬀer more for Launchpad than for iPad.
The similarities between the scores for iPad and Launch-
pad were clear also when looking at expert and novice users
separately. For both groups there was no signiﬁcant diﬀer-
ence between using iPad and Launchpad. When comparing
the groups to each other, there was a signiﬁcant diﬀerence
between their ability to adjust panning in general (expert:
6.0 / novice: 10.7). There was also a diﬀerence between
their ability to adjust volume (expert: 5.0 / novice: 6.3),
but not statistically signiﬁcant. Comparing task comple-
tion times also showed no signiﬁcant diﬀerences, both when
regarding novice and expert users separately and as a whole.
Interestingly, the volume scores for novices and experts
were similar for iPad (seevol expert iPadand vol novice
iPad in Figure 5), while the diﬀerence between novice and
expert volume scores for the Launchpad was more explicit
(seevol expert Launchpadandvol novice Launchpadin Fig-
ure 5). This may suggest that expert users are better at ad-
justing volume than novice users when using the Launchpad
but only marginally better when using the iPad. This makes
al o to fs e n s e ,s i n c eb o t he x p e r t sa n dn o v i c e sh a v en op r a c -
tice using the iPad interface (resulting in only marginally
diﬀerent scores). However, this is merely suggested, as the
diﬀerence measured between expert and novice Launchpad
volume scores falls short of statistical signiﬁcance (p=0.12).
5. DISCUSSION
We were not able to detect any signiﬁcant diﬀerence be-
tween using the two interfaces for this simple mixing task.
345
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
The only statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence was found be-
tween novice and expert users’ ability to adjust panning in
general.
The fact that no diﬀerence was found does not mean that
no diﬀerence exists. While we were very careful to avoid
biases in this experiment there might have been biases in
regards to learning. It seemed that users would get more
and more comfortable with the task the more trials they
performed – this was also stated by some of the test partici-
pants. We did try to regard only the last 5 trials (out of 15)
for each participant to see if this would yield any statistical
signiﬁcance, but the tendencies were the same.
After each evaluation session the test participants were
asked which interface they thought they performed best
with. Also here participants were mostly in doubt. Only a
few dared make a decision and these revealed no tendency.
While most of the participants had the feeling that they
performed equally well with the two interfaces, most said
that they found the stage metaphor interface more intu-
itive, enjoyable or inspirational to work with. Two of the
expert users stated that they were surprised about how easy
the interface was to learn. One directly stated:”. . I want
to start mixing this way.”
There were discussions about the diﬀerence between be-
ing provided with a strong visual representation of the mix
(stage metaphor) and just having to listen to what was go-
ing on (channel strip metaphor). There were several com-
ments about how the iPad app made the user more aware
of the ”spaciousness” of the mix and in connection to this,
the stage metaphor was suggested as a teaching tool.
Some stated that the Launchpad forced them to listen
more and many closed their eyes while adjusting the slider
and knob. However, the few who also closed their eyes while
using the iPad app said that it was easier to connect the
changes they listened to with the one-ﬁnger movement as-
sociated with moving the virtual widget about on the stage
of the iPad. As one participant stated”on the i Pad I onl y
have to move in one direction to get to where I want... with
the mixer[Launchpad]Ih a v et om o v et w ot h i n g sa to n c e ”.
Another stated:”wi th the m i xer I had to thi nk ’ l oud’ and
’to the right’, but with the iPad I just go directly... ”.I n
other words the integrality [9] of the stage metaphor might
be more natural for adjusting volume and panning than the
separable controls of the channel strip metaphor.
The measured performance similarity between the two
interface types may also have been due to the simplicity
of the task. One participant directly stated that he did not
experience a diﬀerence in performance between the two, but
if he would have been asked to manipulate multiple channels
he would probably choose the iPad for better performance.
We ﬁnd this very likely, since every time a user is asked to
manipulate a new channel, the amount of control points are
doubled when using the channel strip metaphor (as opposed
to using the stage metaphor). Note that this ease might
decay at some point as channels increase leading to clutter
and lack of overview. A future experiment is planned to
explore this hypothesis.
6. CONCLUSION
We have presented an evaluation comparing the channel
strip metaphor and the stage metaphor in terms of perfor-
mance speed and accuracy. The task was to replicate a
pre-rendered mix, but only focusing on positioning one of
three channels in the mix. The channel strip metaphor was
represented by a traditional mixing interface with knobs for
panning and sliders for setting volume. The stage metaphor
was represented by a custom built iPad app.
The study showed that there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence
in terms of performance between the two interfaces. The
simplicity of the task might have lead to this result and a
future study will explore this. Qualitative feedback suggests
that the stage metaphor is preferred for its intuitiveness,
enjoyability and its ability to reveal the ”spaciousness” of
the mix. However, there is a risk that the visual feedback
can take away focus from listening. Future studies will look
into this.
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank all the test participants.
8. REFERENCES
[1] J. P. Carrascal and S. Jord` a. Multitouch interface for
audio mixing. InProceedings of NIME,p a g e s
100–103, 2011.
[2] M. Collicutt, C. Casciato, and M. M. Wanderley.
From real to virtual: A comparison of input devices
for percussion tasks. InProceedings of NIME,p a g e s
4–6, 2009.
[3] V. Diamante. Awol: Control surfaces and
visualization for surround creation. Technical report,
University of Southern California, Interactive Media
Division, 2007.
[4] S. Gelineck, J. Andersen, and M. B¨uchert. Music
mixing surface. InProceedings of the 2013 ACM
international conference on Interactive tabletops and
surfaces,p a g e s4 3 3 – 4 3 6 .A C M ,2 0 1 3 .
[5] S. Gelineck, M. B¨uchert, and J. Andersen. Towards a
more ﬂexible and creative music mixing interface. In
CHI’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in
Computing Systems,p a g e s7 3 3 – 7 3 8 .A C M ,2 0 1 3 .
[6] S. Gelineck and D. Korsgaard. Stage metaphor
mixing on a multi-touch tablet device. InAudio
Engineering Society Convention 137.A u d i o
Engineering Society, 2014.
[7] P. Gibson.The Art Of Mixing: A Visual Guide To
Recording, Engineering, And Production.A r t i s t P r o
Press, 1997.
[8] A. Holladay and B. Holladay. Audio dementia: A
next generation audio mixing software application. In
Audio Engineering Society Convention 118.A u d i o
Engineering Society, 2005.
[9] R. J. K. Jacob, L. E. Sibert, D. C. McFarlane, and
M. P. Mullen, Jr. Integrality and separability of input
devices.ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact.,
1(1):3–26, 1994.
[10] C. Kiefer, N. Collins, and G. Fitzpatrick. Hci
methodology for evaluating musical controllers: A
case study. InProceedings of NIME,v o l u m e8 ,2 0 0 8 .
[11] D. Malham. Tutorial article: Approaches to
spatialisation.Organised sound,3 ( 2 ) : 1 6 7 – 1 7 7 ,1 9 9 8 .
[12] M. T. Marshall, M. Hartshorn, M. M. Wanderley, and
D. J. Levitin. Sensor choice for parameter
modulations in digital musical instruments: Empirical
evidence from pitch modulation.Journal of New
Music Research,3 8 ( 3 ) : 2 4 1 – 2 5 3 ,2 0 0 9 .
[13] S. O’Modhrain. A framework for the evaluation of
digital musical instruments.Computer Music Journal,
35(1):28–42, 2011.
[14] J. Ratcliﬀe. Hand motion-controlled audio mixing
interface. InProceedings of NIME,2 0 1 4 .
[15] M. M. Wanderley and N. Orio. Evaluation of input
devices for musical expression: Borrowing tools from
hci. Computer Music Journal,2 6 ( 3 ) : 6 2 – 7 6 ,2 0 0 2 .
346
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 