Proceedings of the 2002 Conference on New Instruments for Musical Expression (NIME-02), Dublin, Ireland, May 24-26, 2002  
 NIME02-01 
Cutaneous Grooves:  
Composing for the Sense of Touch
Eric Gunther 
MIT Media Lab, 
E15-368, 20 Ames Street,  
Cambridge, MA 02139 
 cephalopod@mit.edu 
 
 
Glorianna Davenport 
Interactive Cinema Group, 
MIT Media Lab, 
E15-368, 20 Ames Street,  
Cambridge, MA 02139 
            gid@media.mit.edu 
 
Sile O’Modhrain 
Palpable Machines Group, 
Media Lab Europe 
Sugar House Lane,  
Dublin, Ireland  
sile@media.mit.edu 
Abstract 
This paper presents a novel coupling of haptics technol-
ogy and music, introducing the notion of tactile compo-
sition or aesthetic composition for the sense of touch.  A 
system that facilitates the composition and perception of 
intricate, musically structured spatio-temporal patterns of 
vibration on the surface of the body is described.  An 
initial test of the system in a performance context is dis-
cussed.  The fundamental building blocks of a composi-
tional language for touch are considered. 
 
Keywords 
tactile composition, vibrotactile, music, multi-modal 
 
Introduction 
Certain kinds of music are often considered ‘visceral’, 
meaning that they exhibit some element relating to the 
body.  Sometimes we even refer to music as being ‘tac-
tile,’ usually in reference to its sonic texture or timbre.  
Why not take these metaphors a step further to actually  
materialize these visceral or tactile elements of music?  
There have been investigations along various musico-
haptic lines, several of which have enlisted haptic de-
vices as enabling technology for the creation of music.  
The approach taken in this paper views haptic technolo-
gies – in particular the vibrotactile stimulator – as inde-
pendent output devices to be used in conjunction with 
the composition and perception of music.  Vibrotactile 
stimuli are viewed not as signals carrying information 
per say, but as aesthetic artifacts themselves.  This 
purely aesthetic approach to artificial tactile stimulation 
is a departure from much previous work in the field of 
haptics.  A system that facilitates the composition and 
perception of intricate, musically structured spatio-
temporal patterns of vibration on the surface of the body 
was designed and subsequently tested in a performance 
setting.  Because sound is essentially vibration, the well-
established field of music provides an abundance of 
analogies, technical guidelines, and inspiration for the 
newborn field of tactile composition as presented herein. 
 
Background and Motivation 
A search for ways to push the envelope of music lead the 
author to consider the coupling of music with other sen-
sory modalities.  A survey of multi-modal work involv-
ing music revealed a lack of efforts in the area of hap-
tics, most of the work falling in the broad category of 
visual music.  A review of the psychophysical literature 
on touch confirmed the feasibility of a tactile accompa-
niment to music or, as it is referred to herein, tactile 
composition.  The skin is more remarkable and versatile 
than most of us know, capable of fine spatial and tempo-
ral analysis.  This section is intended to briefly familiar-
ize the reader with the skin’s basic psychophysical pa-
rameters1, with a focus on the vibrotactile response.  It is 
vital for the tactile composer to have a good feel for 
these parameters, especially when working so close to 
the fundamental levels of a new medium.   
The range of the skin’s vibrotactile frequency response 
is roughly 20- 1000 Hz, with maximal sensitivity occur-
ring around 250 Hz.  The skin is relatively poor at fre-
quency discrimination, lacking the exquisite analysis 
mechanisms found in the ear.  Reports on the frequency 
discrimination abilities of the skin are dependent on ex-
perimental paradigm and thus tend to vary.  Sherrick 
proposes that the results suggest that between 3 and 5 
values of vibration rate can be distinguished between 2 
and 300 pps [6].  Rovan and Hayward report that ranges 
broadly divided into 8 to 10 discrete steps are percepti-
ble over a range of 70 to 800 Hz [5].  The intensity range 
of the skin reaches about 55 dB above threshold of de-
tection, beyond which vibrations may become unpleasant 
or painful [7].  A range of values for the just noticeable 
difference (JND) of intensity have been reported in the 
literature, the smallest (0.4 dB) reported by Knudson in 
1928 and the highest (2.3 dB) by Sherrick in 1950 [7]. 
Prolonged tactile stimulation can result in adaptation, a 
decrease in the sensory magnitude of a stimulus.  Sensa-
tion magnitude declines during the exposure to the 
adapting stimulus and then gradually recovers after the 
stimulus is removed; recovery time ranges from a few 
seconds to several minutes depending on the duration 
and intensity of exposure [7]. 
Of particular significance to tactile composition is the set 
of illusions collectively referred to as apparent motion 
on the skin .  When tactile stimuli are sequentially pre-
                                                                 
1 For an excellent synopsis of the psychophysics of touch, refer 
to Chapter One of the book Tactile Hearing Aids. [7 ]    
 
 NIME02-02 
sented to two distal points on the skin with the right tim-
ing, the stimulus is perceived to move rapidly from one 
point of stimulation to the next.  A particularly salient 
illusion, in which a properly timed and distributed train 
of taps creates the illusion of a phantom tap ‘hopping’ 
between two or more points on the skin, is known as the 
cutaneous rabbit effect or sensory saltation [2].          
 
Previous Work and Related Research 
The work presented in this paper draws upon a number 
of fields.  The growing study of visual music  provides 
invaluable creative and technical guidance for tactile 
composition.  From the early days of the color organ to 
the more recent phenomena of video mixing and digital 
music visualization software, the coupling of music and 
visual media has been explored in considerable depth.  
This field has seen significant leaps with improvements 
in display technology, a trend that will surely manifest 
itself in tactile composition. 
One particularly relevant area of research within the hap-
tics community is sensory substitution.  This field exam-
ines the provision of environmental information through 
a human sensory channel different from that normally 
used and is largely concerned with the information proc-
essing capabilities of the skin.  Studies on the tactile 
communication of speech and the design of tactile hear-
ing aids provide unique insights into the interrelationship 
of audition and touch.  
The entertainment industry has seen various attempts at 
integrating the sense of touch with visual and audio me-
dia.  One example is the puffs of compressed air against 
the ankles or necks of unsuspecting audience members 
found in theme park movie rides.  It is increasingly 
common to encounter vibrotactile feedback in video-
game controllers.  There have also been isolated efforts 
aimed at presenting music to the body, one such effort 
utilizing a waveguide to directly couple musical vibra-
tions to the skin [8].  One performer uses powerful sonic 
vibrations to deliberately resonate specific body parts of 
the audience.   
Sound and touch have a relationship that dates back to 
the origins of music.  There have been a number of stud-
ies on haptic feedback for the musician, several of which 
view haptic and tactile devices as enabling technologies 
for the creation of music [4],[5].  Such investigations 
provide useful lessons on the application of haptics tech-
nology in a musical context.   
 
System Design 
A system that facilitates the composition and perception 
of intricate, musically structured spatio-temporal patterns 
of vibration on the surface of the body was designed.  At 
the heart of the system is a full-body vibrotactile stimula-
tor comprised of thirteen transducers worn against the 
body.  In this section, several key factors in the design 
process are discussed. 
Why vibrotactile? 
A number of tactile stimulation devices are available, 
each of which stimulates a specific tactile response.  
These include pressure, thermal, slip, electrocutaneous, 
and vibrational displays.  The vibrotactile modality was 
chosen for two reasons.  First, vibration devices are gen-
erally easiest to work with and in particular, to control.  
Second, the bandwidth of the skin’s vibrotactile response 
coincides most closely with that of music. 
Transducers 
Because they are inexpensive, compact, and easy to con-
trol, pager motors were initially considered as transduc-
ers.  However, they tend to operate in and on/off manner, 
usually vibrating at a set frequency.  A primary specifi-
cation for the transducers was versatility with regard to 
output waveform.  The transducer chosen for the first 
version of the system was the V1220, manufactured by 
Audiological Engineering for use in their line of tactile 
hearing aids.  The V1220s are compact as shown in Fig-
ure 1(a).  They have a coil-based design and can thus be 
driven with any waveform in the tactile frequency range.  
They produce very clean, localized vibrations, have a 
relatively high power output, and exhibit a frequency 
response that peaks at 250 Hz.  The requirement that 
they be worn close to the skin, however, makes them 
somewhat impractical, since clothing frequently presents 
too much impedance for the transducers to be effective.   
 
 
Figure 1. Transducers used in system.  
(a) V1220; (b) modified flat speaker; (c) Interactor   
The second version of the system used a predecessor to 
the V1220 as illustrated in Figure 1(b).  This transducer 
is also coil-based, but has a simpler design.  Specifically, 
the transducer is made by attaching a weight to the cen-
ter of a 40mm flat speaker and enclosing it in a small 
plastic case; this modification serves to lower the reso-
nant frequency of the speaker into the tactile range 
[Franklin, personal communication].  Although they 
have a larger surface area contacting the skin and conse-
quently do not produce as localized a sensation as the 
V1220s, they are more powerful (partly due to spatial 
summation in the skin) and can penetrate clothing more 
effectively.  Manufacturing a set of these transducers 
with a consistent frequency response has proved to be a 
difficult problem; center frequencies fall in the 
neighborhood of 350 Hz.  Future versions of the device 
will likely employ the V1220s and require the user to 
wear the transducers directly against the skin.                      
 
 NIME02-03 
The perceptual and compositional importance of low-
frequency vibrations was realized midway through the 
design process.  Accordingly, a low-frequency trans-
ducer was added to the system.  The Aura Interactor, a 
backpack-like wearable intended for use with video 
games, was chosen.  The device is shown in Figure 1(c) 
and consists of a woofer mounted inside of a hard plastic 
case.   
 
Transducer Placement 
There are thirteen transducers in the device: twelve high- 
frequency and one low-frequency.  The number of trans-
ducers was limited by the control hardware used; future 
versions of the suit will likely contain more than thirteen 
channels.  It should be noted though, that the composi-
tional and perceptual value added by increasing the 
number of channels eventually levels off due to the dif-
fuse receptive fields of some mechanoreceptors in the 
skin.  For the following discussion, please refer to Figure 
2, which illustrates the transducer distribution on the 
body.    
Three main principles guided the situation of the high-
frequency transducers.  First, it was decided early on to 
distribute the transducers across the entire surface of the 
body.  This decision was motivated by the analogy of a 
dancer, whose compositional tool is essentially the entire 
body.  Three transducers are distributed roughly evenly 
along the length of each limb.  The middle transducers 
on the arms and legs were placed, respectively, just be-
low the elbow and knee creases for comfort and ease of 
movement.  Second, each transducer was positioned as 
close to glabrous (non-hairy) skin as possible.  Glabrous 
skin contains more receptors than hairy skin, making it 
more sensitive to stimulation.  The thigh transducers are 
the exception; they were placed on top rather than below 
the thigh for increased comfortability while the user is 
seated.  Third, due to skeletal leakage of vibrations into 
the ear – resulting in undesirable sonic artifacts – no 
transducers were placed on or near the head.  A trans-
ducer located on the nape of the neck was considered, 
but rejected for this reason.   
The low frequency transducer is situated against the 
lower back.  It seemed intuitive to present low frequency 
vibrations to the torso, as this is generally the region of 
the body in which one experiences powerful low fre-
quency vibrations at a club or concert, for instance.     
   
 
 
Figure 2.  The small black circles represent the high-
frequency transducers.  The large circle on the lower 
back represents the Interactor.   
 
Wearable design 
When working with vibrotactile devices, it is essential to 
maintain a tight interface between the tactor and the skin.  
Elastic straps with Velcro were used toward this end; in 
addition to providing the necessary pressure, they are 
inherently adjustable.  The first version of the suit re-
quired the user to strap on each transducer individually.  
The shoulder transducers were held on via a harness-like 
contraption and the Interactor was strapped to the back 
of a Herman Miller chair (which was chosen for its low-
impedance mesh backing).  In version two of the system, 
all of the transducers and wires were embedded in a ny-
lon suit as shown in Figure 3.  A one-size-fits-all design 
was required, so the suit was designed to be loose fitting, 
with external elastic straps at each transducer point.  An 
elastic shoulder harness, which could be adjusted by 
pulling down the straps located just above the breasts, 
was sewn into the suit to secure the shoulder transducers.  
The Interactor is held against the lower back by two ad-
justable belt straps that wrap around the torso.  The outer 
cover of the device was removed to reduce the weight 
load.  The transducer wiring was routed through chan-
nels running along the lengths of the arms and legs and 
down the back, and exits in the form of a tail.  A tail was 
chosen over an umbilical chord because it hangs from 
the suit more naturally. 
 
Figure 3.  Second version of the vibrotactile suit.   
 
 NIME02-04 
During initial experimentation with the system, the per-
ceptual quality of the vibrations was found to be depend-
ent on the pressure of the transducer against the body.  
Specifically, when the strap is relatively loose and the 
transducer rests comfortably against the skin, the vibra-
tions are perceived superficially on the skin.  Tightening 
the strap couples the vibrations to the bone structure, 
resulting in a deeper, more diffuse sensation.  The latter 
is undesirable because the vibrations are less isolated 
(due to skeletal conduction) and excessive tightening of 
the straps often impedes circulation. 
 
Control 
The transducers are controlled via a Protools 
Digi001interface.  The Digi001 is a multi-channel digital 
audio hardware interface that performs the D/A conver-
sions necessary to drive the transducers.  Each Digi001 
output is independently amplified and sent to one trans-
ducer.  While the signal quality is admittedly overkill for 
this application, the Digi001 package was chosen as a 
quick solution as well as for its versatility, extensibility, 
and strong support base.           
 
Composition Environment 
Protools, a standard MIDI and digital audio sequencing 
environment for the Macintosh, is used to compose for 
the suit.  The software is configured so that each audio 
track is routed to a specific transducer.  Because the Pro-
tools interface was not designed for this type of applica-
tion, composing with it is painstaking.  The author has 
developed some useful techniques using MIDI to speed 
up the process, but it remains awkward.  The benefit of 
working in ProTools though,  is the ability to compose 
the music and tactile components in parallel within the 
same environment.  Before the full potential of the tactile 
medium can be realized, better compositional tools must 
be designed. 
 
Real-time Control 
A MAX/MSP application was designed that allows a 
user to control the suit in real time for use in a perform-
ance context.  Essentially a “tactile sampler”, this appli-
cation allows a user to send preloaded samples to the suit 
using the Macintosh keyboard as a controller.  The ap-
plication includes a saltation module that allows a user to 
configure and trigger saltation patterns in real time as 
well as a pattern generator, which can play back pre-
composed patterns onto the suit.            
 
Audio Presentation 
Presentation of audio through headphones was deter-
mined to be optimal for two reasons.  Practically, the 
headphones help to isolate the music from transducer 
noise.  In addition, the phenomenon of internalization, 
the perception of sound to originate from within the 
head, increases the ‘overall intimacy’ of the experience; 
both the audio and tactile components of the composi-
tion appear to originate on or from within the body.  The 
overall experience – in particular the observer’s sense of 
space and the interaction between the tactile and audio 
elements – is markedly different when the music is 
played through loudspeakers.     
 
A Compositional Language for the Sense of Touch 
It is indeed premature to hammer out the details of a 
language for tactile composition.  It seems more produc-
tive at this point in time to identify the underpinnings of 
such a language, specifically those dimensions of tactile 
stimuli that can be manipulated to form the basic vo-
cabulary elements of a compositional language.  Because 
tactile stimuli are viewed as aesthetic artifacts, the inter-
pretation of psychophysical parameters made herein dif-
fers from those found in other haptic disciplines such as 
sensory substitution.   
 
Frequency 
Geldard points out that the correspondence between vi-
bratory frequency and perceived “pitch” is a tenuous and 
uncertain one.  Vibratory pitch proves to be a joint func-
tion of both frequency and amplitude [1].  Due to the 
poor frequency analysis abilities of the skin, frequency 
will not assume a first order dimension of composition, 
as it does in music.  Subjects in psychophysical experi-
ments have reported a sensation of periodicity or buzz-
ing at low frequencies (below 100 Hz) while at higher 
frequencies a more diffuse, smooth sensation is per-
ceived [7].  Taking this into account, frequency will rep-
resent a more qualitative dimension for tactile composi-
tion.    
 
Intensity 
Tactile composition calls for a continuum of intensities 
ranging from threshold of detection up to the limits of 
discomfort.  Dynamic articulations – from the accent to 
the crescendo – are an important aspect of tactile com-
position.  A dynamic balance or, as referred to in the 
recording studio as a mix, will come into play as multi-
ple compositional strands are layered in space and time 
on the skin.            
Of particular utility is the amplitude envelope of tactile 
stimuli.  The attack and decay of a tactile event can be 
varied to create a wide range of perceptual effects.  For 
instance, an abrupt attack will be perceived as a sudden 
tap against the skin whereas a more gradual attack seems 
to rise up out of the skin.  By applying subtle variations 
to the attack and decay of stimuli, it is possible to gener-
ate a continuum of sensations between these two ex-
tremes.  Based on the author’s experience with tactile 
composition, envelope manipulations will assume a sali-
 
 NIME02-05 
ent role in tactile composition.  This hypothesis is sup-
ported by a study by Gescheider et al. in which the best 
intensity discriminations were made when an intensity 
increment was imposed upon a continuous background 
‘pedestal’ of vibrations [7].   
 
Duration 
Vibrotactile stimuli of duration less than 0.1 seconds are 
perceived as taps or jabs against the skin, providing the 
tactile equivalent of musical staccato.  Longer duration 
stimuli with gradual attacks and decays, on the other 
hand, may be used to construct more smoothly flowing 
tactile phrases.  Differences in duration provide an im-
portant means of grouping tactile events when layering 
multiple voices on the same area of skin.  In addition, 
stimulating an area of skin for an extended period of 
time can result in adaptation, which may be harnessed 
compositionally to ease a part into the background.     
 
Waveform or Spectral Content 
Due to the skin’s poor frequency analysis abilities, subtle 
variations in spectral content cannot be perceived in the 
way timbre is by the auditory system.  The haptic system 
is, however, able to recognize the qualitative differences 
between say, a sine wave and a square wave presented to 
the skin, perceiving them respectively as smooth and 
rough.  The vibrotactile gamut from pure sine tone to 
frequency-rich spectrum to noise is characterized as a 
continuous transition from smoothness to roughness [5].  
For tactile composition, waveform can be correlated to 
the “texture” of tactile stimuli, as in music.       
 
 Space 
As far as our spatial senses go, touch comes in second 
after vision.  The location and relative positioning of 
tactile stimuli on the body surface will assume a first 
order dimension for tactile composition, representing the 
closest analogue to musical pitch.  Of particular compo-
sitional value with regard to space is the class of phe-
nomena known as apparent motion on the skin.  When 
applied over relatively large areas on the body surface, 
apparent motion can result in some extremely vivid sen-
sations ranging from a miniature rabbit (of the cutaneous 
species) darting up the arm to smooth waves of vibration 
washing over the body from shoulder to toe.  Different 
patterns of apparent motion may be sequenced and lay-
ered, resulting in a synergistic sum of movement on the 
skin.     
In addition to being grouped – by composer and ob-
server alike – on the bases of rhythm, dynamics, dura-
tion, and envelope, tactile phrases will be grouped spa-
tially, with the body acting as a stage of sorts on which a 
vibrotactile dance unfolds.   
 
The Massager Misnomer  
The most salient analogy in people’s minds when they 
encounter a device that produces vibrations against the 
body is none other than the personal massager.  What are 
massagers designed to do?  Relax you.  There is in fact 
an entire field of medicine called vibrational therapy  
that applies vibrotactile stimulation in a therapeutic con-
text.   
On the other hand, the compositional approach to vibro-
tactile stimulation taken in this paper encompasses a 
wide spectrum of emotive content.  Part of the emotional 
potency of the tactile composition comes from its ability 
to enhance, intensify, and expand the preexistent emo-
tive elements of music.  In addition to modulating the a 
priori affective response to music, the tactile composi-
tion can stand on its own as an emotionally potent com-
positional medium.  Because sound is essentially vibra-
tion, tactile composition shares many of the fundamental 
elements which give rise to the emotional potency of 
music.  According to Pratt, if an emotion is to be real, 
the organs of the body, and in particular the viscera, 
must be made to vibrate (1952).  In the case of tactile 
composition, we actually go a step further than music by 
putting the composition on the body.  A detailed analysis 
of the affective response to tactile composition is prema-
ture and beyond the scope of this paper.   
 
Cutaneous Grooves: A Concert for the Skin 
During September 2001, a series of concerts was held to 
introduce tactile composition to the greater MIT com-
munity as well as to test the technology and hypotheses 
presented in this paper.  The concert was as much an 
experiment as it was an artistic event.  A space was set 
up at the MIT Media Lab in which ten audience mem-
bers at a time, each equipped with their own full-body 
vibrotactile stimulator, experienced a one hour concert 
of music and tactile compositions.  The pieces compris-
ing the concert are briefly described in order to give the 
reader some insight into the compositional process.     
Two of the pieces in the concert were soundscapes com-
posed by the author.  To build suspense, the first piece 
opened with a minute of just audio, including a vocoded 
passage on the anatomy of touch.  It then imitated the 
sound and feel of a heartbeat and the flow of blood down 
the limbs.  The other soundscape began with a purely 
tactile introduction (no music), with white noise played 
to mask the transducer noise, and transitioned into a 
three minute simulated thunderstorm.  Audience mem-
bers reacted strongly to the thunderstorm; it was a nice 
demonstration of the synergistic sum of a simple vibro-
tactile pattern and a more complex piece of audio. 
One musical selection 2 consisted of simple repeating 
percussive patterns layered over one another.  The tactile 
                                                                 
2 “Purus River” from the Philip Glass album Uakti 
 
 NIME02-06 
accompaniment was an attempt at translating this com-
positional idea to the body.  In particular, it demon-
strated the notion of selective attention on the skin; that 
when simultaneously phrases are grouped spatially or by 
other means, the observer can selectively attend to each 
phrase as one can tune in to different voices while listen-
ing to a piece of music.  By highlighting different parts 
of the music with the tactile accompaniment – bringing 
some into the foreground and others into the background 
– the audience’s attention could be focused on different 
aspects of the music.  
For two of the pieces, the music and tactile components 
were written simultaneously.  By engaging in this kind of 
parallel or multi-modal composition, the author was able 
to explore the interplay between the two composition 
processes.  It was indeed a two-way street, with the mu-
sic composition often influenced by a certain tactile idea 
and vice-versa.  These pieces also explored the interrela-
tionship between the musical and tactile components.  
They need not always mirror each other; they are inde-
pendent compositional strands and can coexist in a num-
ber of ways ranging from rhythmic unison to cross-
modal counterpoint.         
Much technical knowledge was gleaned from holding the 
concerts.  More interesting, though, is the feedback re-
ceived from the audience about the experience, which 
confirmed many of the author’s initial hypotheses sur-
rounding tactile composition.                      
An equivalent of the psychological notion of expectation 
found in music was experienced by audience members 
on the skin.  Specifically, when a pattern was repeated 
for some period of time, audience members expressed 
surprise at any variation or straying of the pattern.  Sev-
eral audience members noted that at certain instances it 
actually felt as if the tactile stimulations were making 
them move.  One audience member who was a drummer 
claimed that it gave him a sensation similar to that of 
playing the drums; where different body parts are rhyth-
mically moving  in an orthogonal fashion.  
There were consistently strong reactions to larger pat-
terns in the composition that spanned the entire body, 
such as saltatory vectors that rapidly swept from head to 
toe.  Audience members often reported that at first it was 
difficult to make sense of what was happening on their 
skin, but that even during the brief duration of the show, 
their ability to comprehend and appreciate the composi-
tions improved.     
As a testament to affective interactions between the two 
mediums, one audience member reported that if the mu-
sic was calm and soothing, then the tactile patterns felt 
even more so, whereas if the music was dissonant or 
jarring, the tactile patterns made him feel on edge, al-
most uncomfortable.     
Future Directions and Potential Implications 
Tactile composition can stand on its own as a viable 
compositional form.  Thus it is hoped that this new me-
dium will provide artistic opportunities for hearing-
impaired individuals.  Experiments aimed at the tactile 
augmentation of movies are underway, bringing us one 
step closer to the Feelies of Huxley’s Brave New World.  
Other plans include the automation of the music-to-touch 
translation, allowing one to use digital audio as input and 
to experience a real-time tactile interpretation of music – 
analogous to the colorful visualization plugins packaged 
with software MP3 players.  As the medium becomes 
more established and widespread, it will also be interest-
ing to see how – if at all – musical thinking will be af-
fected.  Of course it is speculative, but perhaps as people 
begin to think in tactile terms, their approach to both 
music composition and listening will be altered, ulti-
mately pushing the field of music in new directions.   
The system presented herein may be construed as a new 
tool for the tactual visualization of music; it is certainly 
that, but goes much deeper.  The Cutaneous Grooves 
project is just the beginning.  With the first tools in 
place, we can begin to explore the compositional uni-
verse of the tactile medium.   
  
Acknowledgements 
Thanks to David Franklin at Audiological Engineering 
without whose generous donations, this project would 
not have been possible; Diane Gunther for her prowess 
on the sewing machine; MIT Council for the Arts Grant 
Program for making the Cutaneous Grooves concerts 
possible; Kay for her encouragement and support.          
 
References  
[1] Geldard, F.A. Some Neglected Possibilities of 
Communication. Science 131, 1960. 
[2] Geldard, F.A. and Sherrick, C.E. The Cutaneous 
Rabbit: A Perceptual Illusion. Science 178, 1972. 
[3] O'Modhrain, M. Sile. Playing by Feel: Incorporat-
ing Haptic Feedback into Computer-Based Musical 
Instruments. Ph.D. Dissertation. CCRMA, Stanford 
University, 2000. 
[4] Rovan, Joseph and Hayward, Vincent.  Trends in 
Gestural Control of Music: Typology of tactile 
sounds and their synthesis in gesture-driven com-
puter music performance, Editions IRCAM, Paris, 
2000. 
[5] Sherrick, Carl E., A Scale for Rate of Tactual Vibra-
tion.  Journal of the Acoustic Society of America. 
78(1), 1985. 
[6] Verrillo, R.T. and Gescheider, G.A., Tactile Aids 
for the Hearing Impaired, Chapter One: Perception 
via the Sense of Touch. Ed. Summers, Whurr Pub-
lishers Ltd., London, 1992.  
[7] Wachpress, How. Audiotactile stimulation and 
communication system.  United States Patent No. 
3,875,932, 1975.  
 
 NIME02-07 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 