Pencil Fields: An Expressive Low-Tech
Performance Interface for Analog Synthesis
Palle Dahlstedt
University of Gothenburg
Dept. of Applied IT & Academy of Music and Drama
Gothenburg, Sweden
palle@chalmers.se
ABSTRACT
I present a novel low-tech multidimensional gestural con-
troller, based on the resistive properties of a 2D ﬁeld of
pencil markings on paper. A set of movable electrodes (+,
-, ground) made from soldered stacks of coins create a dy-
namic voltage potential ﬁeld in the carbon layer, and an-
other set of movable electrodes tap voltages from this ﬁeld.
These voltages are used to control complex sound engines
in an analogue modular synthesizer. Both the voltage ﬁeld
and the tap electrodes can be moved freely. The design
was inspired by previous research in complex mappings for
advanced digital instruments, and provides a similarly dy-
namic playing environment for analogue synthesis. The in-
terface is cheap to build, and provides ﬂexible control over
a large set of parameters. It is musically satisfying to play,
and allows for a wide range of playing techniques, from wild
exploration to subtle expressions. I also present an inven-
tory of the available playing techniques, motivated by the
interface design, musically, conceptually and theatrically.
The performance aspects of the interface are also discussed.
The interface has been used in a number of performances
in Sweden and Japan in 2011, and is also used by other
musicians.
Keywords
gestural interface, 2d, analog synthesis, performance, im-
provisation
1. INTRODUCTION
Electronic musicians have been struggling with gestural con-
trol over electronic sounds since the beginning of electronic
music. The high-dimensional parameter spaces of modern
synthesis and processing techniques are not so easily ex-
plored with keyboards and other conventional playing in-
terfaces, and a large part of the eﬀort has been spent at de-
sign time, adjusting parameters and preparing the sound,
with limited exploration and expression available at play
time. As both an acoustic and electronic improvising musi-
cian, I strongly feel something is missing when performing
with mouse and laptop, or with only knobs and faders. The
sound-making is not connected to physical eﬀort, which is
so important for acoustic musicians, and which also have
a strong impact on the musical output regarding phras-
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’12,May 21 – 23, 2012, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
ing and form. The importance of this kind of eﬀort has
been strongly advocated by, e.g., Joel Ryan [Ryan 1992].
Equally important are the visual performance aspects. A
physical interface involving visible gestures not only helps
the musician, it also helps the listener/spectator to follow
the structure of the performance, and gives additional in-
formation about what is going on. Also, it helps her to
some extent perceive a musician’s intentions just moments
before they happen, since physical gestures of the musician
require physiological preparation. All this requires that the
control-to-synthesis mapping preserves at least some dis-
cernible connection between gesture and music.
In this paper, I present a novel analog low-tech controller,
which satisfy most of these requirements. Its development
was motivated by a personal artistic need for gestural ex-
pression in analog sound synthesis, where no existing con-
trollers could provide what I was looking for. It was inspired
and informed by extensive research into novel mapping tech-
niques for advanced digital instruments [Dahlstedt 2009]. It
has since its premiere in May, 2011, been used in a num-
ber of performances in Sweden and Japan, both solo and
with other musicians. The interface is also used by other
musicians.
1.1 Background and previous art
The idea of a direct physical interface for analog sound is
not new. Instruments such as Michel Waisvisz’ Crackle Box,
and Peter Blasser’s creations (e.g., the Fourses and Fyrall),
and other body contact circuits emerged from a need for
direct control of analog sound. David Wessel [Wessel et al.
2002] have addressed the need for intimate control and close
correlation between gesture and sound, and applied it to
digital instruments. There is also long fascination in art
with the percieved correlation between visuals and sound,
either neurophsyiological (synaesthesia) or as a metaphor.
One interesting example is ﬂuxus artist Gerhard R ¨uhm’s
Bleitstiftmusik [R¨uhm 1981] where the acoustic sounds of
making a pencil drawing is presented together with the
drawing, as a combined artwork.
The conductive and resistive properties of pencil have
been explored before. Swedish musician Daniel Skoglund
has developed a performance technique where pencil mark-
ings on a circular paper function as a rhythmic sequencer,
read by a rotating copper brush 1. The Drawdio circuit by
Jay Silver uses linear resistance in pencil markings to alter
pitch in an oscillator 2, and Joyce Hinterding has created
large graphite antennas, the properties of which can be ex-
plored by visitors in interactive installations 3. But I have
found no implementation that use a 2D drawing in the way
1see http://youtu.be/PRYFn_JMkOA for an example
2http://web.media.mit.edu/~silver/drawdio/
3See, e.g., http://www.breenspace.com/artists/9/exhibitions
/103/joyce-hinterding-at-volta-ny-2011/
it is done in this project.
The Pencil Field is in essence a 2-dimensional surface con-
troller. Other examples of surface controllers include the
Korg Kaosspad series (a single point, ﬁnger control), vari-
ous implementations using Wacom tablets (movable objects,
pens, mice, which provide more degrees of freedom, tilt,
etc.) and numerous iPad synth apps, which have started
to explore the potentials of multitouch. Special interfaces
such as the Haken Continuum Fingerboard [Haken et al.
1998] have been developed, with a focus on smoothness and
precision.
What is diﬀerent in the Pencil Field interface is that you
do not only exploit location on the surface, but you de-
ﬁne and change the ﬁeld, which allows for detailed and
coupled control of several parameters, on both micro and
macro level. Continuous and discontinuous gestures can be
produced, and a vast range of auxiliary playing techniques
allow for a variety of musical expressions and variation in
performance. The particular aspect of drawing on paper,
and the shuﬄing around of electrodes in a board game-like
scenario, also brings interesting performance qualities.
1.2 History, and recorded performances
A primitive ﬁrst prototype was tested in concert in Kyoto,
Japan, in December 2010, in an improvisation together with
a Noh ﬂute player and a butoh dancer. In the spring of 2011
the current version was developed, and it has not changed
since. It has been used with a variety of sound engines, all
implemented in the Bugbrand analog modular, but the con-
struction of the interface has remained constant. This is a
conscious decision, and part of our evaluation method. An
instrument needs to be evaluated over a long time span, in
many diﬀerent musical contexts, in live performances and
studio sessions, with acoustic and electronic co-improvisers.
Only then are we able to tell if it works as an instrument in
real life, and to say something about the controllability, ex-
pressivity, dynamics and learning curve of the instrument.
It takes time to develop a repertoire of playing techniques,
and to ﬁnd out what kind of sound engines that work well
with a particular interface and the developed playing tech-
niques.
In August, 2011, a clone of the interface was constructed
and sent to electronic musician Richard Quirk, Isle of Man.
He has since provided valuable feedback from his process
of learning and using it in a musical context very diﬀerent
from mine.
There are two videos online that show typical solo perfor-
mances using the Pencil Field, and how it can be played. A
quick look at these will facilitate understanding of the de-
scriptions of the construction and of the playing techniques
used. Video A ( http://youtu.be/CyXByRR6I-w) shows one
of the very ﬁrst performances, a headphone concert at the
Gothenburg Art Sounds Festival, May 6th, 2011. It is a live
recording of the whole performance (ca. 12 minutes), but
the audience is not visible in the video. There are about 35
people with headphones, sitting and standing around me
in a close circle. Video B ( http://vimeo.com/31173998)
shows the beginning of a performance at the opening of the
Varia Improvisation Festival in Gothenburg, Sweden, Oct
26th, 2011. In addition to these performances, the inter-
face has been used in performances in Tokyo, Kyoto and
Gotheburg, both solo and together with other musicians.
2. CONSTRUCTION AND THEORY
The main idea behind this interface is to use the resistive
properties of a 2-dimensional conductive surface of pencil
markings on a paper to produce various levels of analog con-
trol voltages (CVs). The main diﬀerence from other surface-
Figure 1: An overview of the connections within the
Pencil Field system.
Figure 2: Pencil markings in the shape of a line
equals a 1-dimensional voltage divider. Interme-
diate voltages are distributed linearly between the
supply electrodes.
based interfaces is that there is no ﬁxed coordinate system
– the voltage ﬁeld is created by the same kind of electrodes
that are used to tap speciﬁc potentials from it. Hence it is
ﬂexible, and playing with the ﬁeld itself while keeping the
tap electrodes still is one of the key techniques, allowing
simultaneous partially coupled control of a large number of
control parameters. Also, the analog nature of the inter-
face allows for a number of additional playing techniques,
’abusing’ the design of the electrodes and the resistive prop-
erties of the human skin and body. Also, the 2-dimensional
resistive surface is drawn by hand before or during the per-
formance, and can take any shape, and can be of variable
density. Many diﬀerent topologies are imaginable, from a
simple dense rectangle with uniform resistance, to complex
patterns and ﬁgurative shapes, which combined with phys-
ical movement of the electrodes can be used to create con-
tinuous or jumping parameter sequences and rhythms.
A couple of early prototypes were tested in performance
and studio sessions to prove the concept, but were clumsy
and diﬃcult to control. Since then, I have settled on a more
thought-out hardware design that works very well. This is
the version described here.
The system consists of four parts parts (see Fig. 1). A
custom voltage regulator provides +9V, -9V and ground
(0V), from the +-15V power supply of the analog synth.
These lower voltages are connected to three supply elec-
trodes, and the placement of these electrodes on the pencil
marks on the paper determines the current potential ﬁeld
on the paper. A 1D resistor functions like a simple voltage
divider (Fig. 2), but for a resisistive surface, the pattern is
more complex. In case of an ideal surface with perfectly
uniform resistance, the ﬁeld looks like in Fig. 3. Here only
the positive and negative supply electrodes are used. Ad-
ditionally, the ground electrode can be placed anywhere on
the pencil markings to distort this ﬁeld. For example, if the
ground electrode is placed near the negative supply elec-
trode, this will push the equidistant lines closer between
the negative and the ground electrodes. Typically, only the
Figure 3: If the resistive A 2D dipole electric ﬁeld.
q1 and q2 are two equal charges of opposite polar-
ity. The gray lines show equipotential, i.e., constant
voltage. The straight line in the middle shows 0V.
positive and negative electrodes are used, with the ground
electrode used sporadically to distort the ﬁeld.
The custom regulator is a simple design utilizing a couple
of standard semiconductor DC-to-DC converters and some
stabilizing capacitors. It shares a ground connection with
the synthesizer. The + and - supply electrodes each have
a current-limiting resistor, to allow for accidental or inten-
tional short-circuits without overloading the supply. They
also help preventing too large currents going through the
skin of the performer.
The design and construction of the electrodes is crucial,
because they are the primary movable parts of the instru-
ment. They need to be heavy so they stay in place when
not touched. The weight also ensures good contact with the
pencil markings underneath. In the current system they are
made from soldered stacks of six copper coins, of 20mm di-
ameter. A soft cable extends from the side. The electrodes
can be oriented either way, and the ﬂat surfaces have been
cleaned and brushed for good contact. The heat-shrink tub-
ing on the cable connection is red, black and blue on the
supply electrodes, and white on the tap electrodes. In the
current setup, 7-8 tap electrodes have been used.
In addition, sometimes paperclips soldered to cables have
been used for ﬁxed connections to a speciﬁc point on the
paper (see for example the upper left corner of the paper in
Fig. 4).
The cables going from the electrodes to the voltage regu-
lator and to the synth need to be very soft, not to interfere
with the playing. Also, you want to avoid tangling them.
The tap electrodes are directly connected to various mod-
ulation inputs on the modular synthesizer. There is no elec-
trical buﬀering between the pencil ﬁeld and CV inputs. The
electrical coupling and co-dependence that can appear is
musically interesting, and makes the interface more organic
and interesting to play. Since the synthesizer CV inputs on
the system currently used have high impedance (100kΩ),
these eﬀect are small, but noticeable. Buﬀer stages between
the taps and the synth may be included in future versions,
to make the system more robust and compatible with diﬀer-
ent makes of analog modulars and other voltage-controlled
devices.
So far, the Pencil Field interface has only been used to-
gether with various conﬁgurations of the Bugbrand modu-
lar synthesizer, designed and built by Tom Bugs in Bristol,
UK4. The sound engines have varied between performances,
4See http://bugbrand.co.uk for more information on the
as they are improvised just before each performance. How-
ever, based on extensive experience designing sound en-
gines for explorational sound design using interactive evo-
lution [Dahlstedt 2007], I apply the same ideas to these
sound engines. They are designed as potential parameter
spaces, made for exploration. They are often chaotic, using
feedback and cross-modulation to allow for complexity to
emerge from simple conﬁgurations. Also, such circuits often
exhibit interesting phase transitions, providing an interest-
ing parameter space for an improvising musician. I have
sometimes used generative gestural conﬁgurations, where
periodic or chaotic rhythms and patterns are controlled by
the interface, in parallel to timberal control. Two or three
sound engines are often run simultaneously, and the control
parameters are then mapped to various parameters of all of
these, at the same time. So any movement of an electrode
will aﬀect parameters in all sound engines.
3. PLAYING TECHNIQUES
An instrument designer may have certain ways of playing
in mind during the design process, but speciﬁc details of
the design and implementation often lead to unforeseen
ways to play it, e.g., the extended techniques of contem-
porary instrumental music, or circuit bending of existing
instruments. In this section I describe the primary playing
techniques, and a number of auxiliary techniques that have
emerged from extensive practice and performance. What
each playing technique actually does depends on the cur-
rent sound engine and how the tapped voltages are applied
to modulate it, i.e., the current mapping. Since this can
be very diﬀerent, even within one performance, as several
sound engines often are played at once or alternated, I try
to describe the playing techniques in terms of abstract pa-
rameter changes, and not in terms of sonic changes. Also,
since this is an instrument primarily for improvisation, it
is good to have an understanding of what diﬀerent tech-
niques do on an abstract level. They can then be applied
at will, depending on musical context and conﬁgurations on
the playing surface.
The primary design idea of the Pencil Field interface is
to be able to produce a number of voltages, aﬀected both
by the positions of the supply electrodes, which deﬁne the
electric ﬁeld, and the positions of the tap electrodes, which
“read” the voltage at a certain position. This sounds simple,
but can be done in many diﬀerent ways, producing various
kinds of gestures, involving just one voltage, or a few, or all
of them.
Tapping from the ﬁeld. The simplest case is to place
the - and + electrodes on each side of a uniform pencil
ﬁeld, and move the taps with the ﬁngers (a clear example
in video B, at 1’00”). If a tap is closer to +, it will give
a higher voltage, and naturally, proximity to - will give a
lower voltage. The resolution is not uniform in a 2D ﬁeld,
as shown in Fig. 3. The voltage change increase close to the
supply electrodes. Musically, this is convenient, since small
expressive changes can be performed with great precision
in the middle, while sudden wild gestures can be played by
quickly moving the tap closer to one of the electrodes. A
number of taps can be moved easily with one hand, since
they are designed to ﬁt nicely under the tip of the ﬁngers.
Scaling and shifting the ﬁeld. A group of parameters
can be scaled by moving the + and - closer or further apart.
In the same way, they can be shifted by moving both + and
- in the same direction. These two actions can be combined
– and simpliﬁed – by moving just one supply electrode away
from or towards the taps. Then they will be simultaneously
Bugbrand modular.
shifted and scaled. An extreme example of this is when one
supply electrode is moved very far away on a thin stretch
of pencil, a tail, as the one to the left in Fig. 4. The narrow
shape makes it work more like a linear voltage divider, and
moving the - electrode out to the end of this tail pushes all
the other voltages up towards their maximum value (video
A, 2’50”, video B, 3’25”).
Rotating the ﬁeld. By moving + and - around the taps
in a circular motion, the whole ﬁeld can be rotated, causing
out-of-phase wave-like changes in all taps. A simpler version
is to just move for example + around a group of taps, with
- in a distance. This causes a sequential series of peaks in
the taps, usable for swirly musical gestures.
Warping the ﬁeld. The ﬁeld can also be warped, in
various ways. By warping I mean changing the distribution
of voltage potential away from the standard dipole ﬁeld,
as shown in Fig. 2. This can be done by placing the 0V
electrode somewhere on the playing ﬁeld. Then this point
is forced to ground (0V), and the ﬁeld around it adjusts to
this. Taps near to the 0 electrode will be scaled towards
0V, and by moving it around on the ﬁeld, diﬀerent taps can
be aﬀected. Electrodes placed close to - or + are aﬀected
the least.
Jumping the ﬁeld. So far we have dealt with contin-
uous changes. But since the ﬁeld relies on steady contact
with the supply electrodes, it can be abruptly changed in a
number of ways. Easiest is to lift either + or - from the pa-
per (video B, 3’55”), or slide them quickly out of the pencil
ﬁeld, to an empty part of the paper. Lifting gives a very
sudden change in the ﬁeld, and all voltages are suddenly
shifted towards the remaining pole. Sliding oﬀ gives a fast
but smooth transition. Single taps can also be lifted to
create a jump in the speciﬁc parameters controlled by it.
Ladders. Rhythmic and periodic gestures can be created
by drawing a ladder pattern on the side of the ﬁeld, basically
a series of tails, as can be seen to the right in Fig. 4. If a
group of taps are placed just to the left of the ladder and
the + is moved back and forth over the ladder, rhythmic
changes are created (video A, 7’00”, video B, 7’10”). A
single tap can also be moved over the ladder, to induce a
rhythm in only one tap.
Shorting. Another way to jump values is to create short-
circuit connections between diﬀerent electrodes, by making
them touch each other. This can be done by lifting one of
them and placing it on top of the other, or by sliding them
towards each other on the surface. A particular tap can
instantly be brought to its maximum or minimum value by
shorting it with one of the supply electrodes. This has often
been used to create sudden timberal changes and “events”
in the music (video B, 1’30”, 7’35”), or to mute sounds.
The ground electrode can in a similar way be used to bring
any tap to 0V. Any of these actions will also change the
ﬁeld, since the tap electrode being shorted is connected to
the ﬁeld. Hence, nearby electrodes will also be shifted by
the shorting. A number of electrodes can also be bunched
together on the playing surface, shorting them to each other.
When several electrodes are shorted to each other, the metal
electrodes bypass the underlying pencil resistor, so that the
ﬁeld is collapsed underneath, aﬀecting nearby taps. This is
also an example of warping. It is also possible to collapse
the ﬁeld partially, by shorting + to 0, or - to 0. Then all
taps will shifted to one half of the range. Finally, the whole
ﬁeld can be totally collapsed by shorting + and -.
Body contact and pressure. As is well known from
many circuit bending instruments, the human body con-
ducts electricity, but the skin resistance is quite high. It
is greatly reduced by moistening of the skin. In the Pen-
cil Field interface, this eﬀect is often noticeable, and can
be used to the advantage of the musician. For example, I
can touch the + electrode with one hand, and lightly touch
other electrodes in a rhythmic pattern. Their voltage will
increase a little when I touch them, and this often is clearly
audible. Also, the contact between the electrodes and the
pencil markings can be improved by applying pressure to
the electrodes. In this way, electrodes can be played as
keys, while keeping them stationary on the ﬁeld. This ef-
fect is subtle, just like the skin touch, but both can be used
musically (video B, 5’33”).
Electrical disturbance of the ﬁeld . It is possible to
induce ﬂuctuations in the voltage ﬁeld by, e.g., adding a
supply electrode directly from a gestural generator such as
an LFO (low frequency oscillator). This has been used,
e.g., to add ﬂutter and graininess on top of steady drones.
Diﬀerent eﬀects are achieved if the active disturbance is
induced directly to diﬀerent electrodes, or to an empty spot
on the pencil ﬁeld.
Theatrical/conceptual playing techniques. A few
more performance-oriented techniques have emerged while
preparing for performances, and sometimes during the per-
formances, as part of the improvisation. This kind of play-
ing techniques could be dismissed as mere gimmicks, but
they work very well in a live situation, especially an in-
timate one with the audience near the performer. I have
often left all the electrodes on the surface and tilted, hit or
shaken the pad, to randomize the positions of all electrodes.
Repeatedly doing this on a continuous sound structure be-
comes like a series of mutations, each time changing the
sound a little bit. I also often shuﬄe around all electrodes
with my hands, and see where they end up, to inject radical
indeterminacy into the improvisation (video B, 2’55”).
Picking up and dropping electrodes is visually and soni-
cally rewarding. It is a very clear gesture, and causes large
sudden jumps in parameter values. They might even bounce
on the paper, with a corresponding bouncing eﬀect in the
sound. An example can be seen in video A (11’35”).
The springiness of the electrode cables sometimes prevent
them from staying in place where I want them. This creates
an audible and visible “self-playing” gesture as the electrode
slides on the pencil ﬁeld. This is diﬃcult to prepare, but
can be picked up and used to great eﬀect when it happens
spontaneously (video A, 6’05”).
Finally, I try to build little towers with the electrodes.
This might seem far-fetched, but is physically encouraged
by the cylindrical shape of the electrodes. When doing this,
the electrodes short each other as I pile them, creating lots
of clear jumps in the voltages, with audible result and an
interesting connection to what is seen. But the tower always
falls because of the heavy cables, and I immediately try to
build it up again. This struggle can go on for a while, and
works very well with the audience, is rewarding to perform,
and is sonically interesting (video A, 4’50”, video B, 4’55”).
3.1 Visualization of output gestures
An example of the actual voltage contours that are produced
from the system is shown in Fig. 5. The graph shows a very
brief performance (15 seconds) with only 5 tap electrodes,
but still shows the diﬀerent kinds of gestures that can be
produced. A video of the playing that produced the graph
is available online.
4. DISCUSSION
The pencil ﬁeld is essentially a 2D interface, but because
of its design, it diﬀers a lot from other 2D interfaces. For
example, most multitouch surfaces cannot distinguish be-
tween the ﬁngers that touch them. Hence, it is diﬃcult to
Figure 4: A typical setup of the Pencil Field playing surface in a concert situation. The + and - electrodes
create a potential ﬁeld in the pencil carbon surface, and electrodes 1-5 tap voltages from this ﬁeld. E.g.,
electrode 5 would give a positive voltage because it is closer to the + electrode. Electrode 6 and 7 are placed
on a separate pencil patch directly connected to +9V trough a paper clip. This is a technique sometimes
used to control volume parameters, separate from timberal parameters. Electrodes 1-5 can be freely moving
around, while keeping the volume of two sounding structures steady in this corner (see video A, 5’40” and
onwards for an example).
create a digital model of the pencil ﬁeld. You can grab and
move around graphical symbols, but the tactile feel of mov-
ing around real objects is hard to beat. The mapping of
the ﬁeld is dynamic, i.e., dependent on the current place-
ment of the supply electrodes. Also, the physical design of
the interface allows for a number of auxiliary playing tech-
niques, as outlined in the previous section. This makes it
very rewarding to play.
The directness and complete lack of lag is rewarding, and
makes it feel like interacting with a physical object. This
resonates with the need for intimacy between gestural con-
troller and sound generation, as emphasized by Wessel et al
[Wessel et al. 2002]. Also, everything you do with the elec-
trodes and on the pencil ﬁeld has consequences, just like
when playing an acoustic instrument. There are no neutral
gestures, and there is strong inter-dependence between the
elements of the interface, which makes it feel like a whole.
Like in acoustic instruments, it is not a one-to-one mapping
[Hunt and Wanderley 2002], but many-to-many. Any com-
bination of parameter values can in theory be achieved, but
it is not a matter of adjusting them one by one. You do not
control a number of independent parameters. You play an
instrument, using your ﬁngers and your ears. These physi-
cal inter-dependencies between the parameters force you to
ﬁnd simple and elegant solutions, and to respond directly
to what you play. You have to play with big ears, and be
ready for the unexpected. It is a challenge, also for the
experienced improviser.
The whole construction is dirty (literally) and involves
very basic materials, such as carbon, copper and paper,
which is also a welcome change to the sometimes sterile
world of electronic music.
The interface has some weaknesses. The control signals
from the tap electrodes are sometimes noisy, and sometimes
there is bad contact to the pencil markings. Also, the pen-
cil markings wear out pretty quickly, since I’m using very
soft pencils, for better conductivity (lower resistance). The
playing surface has to be redrawn for each performance or
rehearsal. But these weaknesses can also be regarded as
strengths, and are essential to the kind of performance that
has developed around this interface. Noise and minute vari-
ations make the sounds animated and less predictable. Bad
contact force you to be careful and make the sound engine
robust. In a solo improvisation, sudden unexpected changes
can be regarded as creative input from the instrument, just
like the input from a fellow player injects new material into
a duo improvisation. The redrawing of the pencil ﬁeld has
become part of the performance, and is visually and the-
atrically rewarding. Features, such as ladders and tails, are
added as the improvisation calls for them, and even the
sharpening of the pencil becomes a performance act, with
contact miked and ampliﬁed sharpener providing interest-
ing sounds to the mix.
Further performance elements include contact microphones
under the paper, used to amplify the sounds of drawing.
Also, if the electrodes are left on the pencil ﬁeld while draw-
ing, the slight movements of the paper are transferred into
the synthesized sound.
Obviously, the audience should see all this clearly. For
some concerts in intimate spaces, people have been so close
so that they clearly see what is happening, even if they do
not understand the inner mechanics of it (just like most peo-
ple do not know the inner workings of, e.g., a trumpet). In
other cases, a camera and projector have been used, showing
the performance area on a big screen behind the performer.
4.1 Future development
There are a number of things with this interface that can
be improved, and a number of possible applications of these
ideas that have not yet been tested. For example, it is tech-
Figure 5: The voltage outputs of a short session on the pencil ﬁelds interface. In this example, the + and -
electrodes were used together with 5 tap electrodes. The graph shows 15 seconds and is captured from the
session shown in this short video: http://vimeo.com/36385389. The ﬁrst row shows some simple movement of
the taps between the + and - electrodes. In the end of the ﬁrst row, the + and - are rotated back and forth
around the group of taps, visible as alternating simultaneous up and down gestures. In the middle row, a
ladder and a tail is used to create fast rhythmic patterns. The third row shows some short-circuit playing.
nically possible to use the pencil ﬁeld to scale and treat
sound signals instead of DC currents. The resistive proper-
ties of the graphite can be used as part of a summing mixer,
where distance would regulate relative volume.
And maybe most interesting, the full potential of the
drawing medium has not yet been explored. Figurative
drawing combined with the pencil ﬁeld interface could allow
for a new mix of story-telling and musical performance.
5. CONCLUSIONS
While I have concentrated on live improvisations using the
Pencil Field, musician Richard Quirk at Isle of Man, was
given access to the same interface, and he has developed his
own way of using it, only aided by a brief introduction by
me. I want to conclude with a quote from him:
“The pencil-ﬁeld provides a linked source of voltages that
encourage ﬂuidity. The process of drawing the roadmap
for the coins is in itself a stretching exercise that helps the
mindspace to be ready to create. I was not expecting this
focus point, as one of the problems I have frequently had
with modulars is where to start with something that can be
as open-ended as your imagination allows it to be. My
mind was free to seek pathways within the modular as the
graphite pencil etched out a framework. .. The coins can
be stacked with increasing random results as the pos/neg
coins are added, touched together momentarily for staccato
voltage spikes or rubbed slowly for vibrato when controlling
oscillators. Collected in separate clusters like constellations
till ﬁngers collide. Moving the coins in a looped pattern,
the equivalent of a blues riﬀ. “
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was carried out within the Creative Perfor-
mance project, funded by the Swedish Research Council.
Also, thanks to Tom Bugs for electronic advice, and to
Richard Quirk for valuable testing and feedback.
7. REFERENCES
[Dahlstedt 2007] Dahlstedt, P.2007. Evolution in
creative sound design. In E. R. Miranda and J. A. Biles
(Eds.): Evolutionary Computer Music . London:
Springer-Verlag, 79–99.
[Dahlstedt 2009] Dahlstedt, P.2009. Dynamic mapping
strategies for expressive synthesis performance and
improvisation. In S. Ystad, R. Kronland-Martinet, and
K. Jensen (Eds.): CMMR 2008, Computer Music
Modeling and Retrieval. Genesis of Meaning in Sound
and Music, LNCS, 5493 . 227–242.
[Haken et al. 1998] Haken, L., Tellman, E., and
Wolfe, P.1998. An indiscrete music keyboard.
Computer Music Journal 22:1 , 31–48.
[Hunt and Wanderley 2002] Hunt, A. and Wanderley,
M. M.2002. Mapping performer parameters to
synthesis engines. Organised Sound 7(2) , 97–108.
[R¨uhm 1981] R¨uhm, G.1981. Bleistiftmusik. Box 74
(cassette, images), Edition Hundertmark. Reissued as
Pencil Music, CD, ? Records, 2002.
[Ryan 1992] Ryan, J.1992. Eﬀort and expression. In
Proceedings of the 1992 International Computer Music
Conference, San Jose, California, USA . 414–416.
[Wessel et al. 2002] Wessel, D., Wright, M., and
Schott, J.2002. Intimate musical control of computers
with a variety of controllers and gesture mapping
metaphors. In Proceedings of the 2002 Conference on
New Instruments for Musical Expression (NIME-02),
Dublin, Ireland, May 24-26, 2002 .