Enacting Musical Worlds: Common Approaches to using
NIMEs within Performance and Person-Centred Arts
Practices
Lauren Hayes
Arts, Media + Engineering
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85287
laurensarahhayes@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
Live music making can be understood as an enactive pro-
cess, whereby musical experiences are created through hu-
man action. This suggests that musical worlds coevolve
with their agents through repeated sensorimotor interac-
tions with the environment (where the music is being cre-
ated), and at the same time cannot be separated from their
sociocultural contexts. This paper investigates this claim by
exploring ways in which technology, physiology, and con-
text are bound up within two di↵erent musical scenarios:
live electronic musical performance; and person-centred arts
applications of NIMEs.
In this paper I outline an ethnographic and phenomeno-
logical enquiry into my experiences as both a performer of
live electronic and electro-instrumental music, as well as my
extensive background in working with new technologies in
various therapeutic and person-centred artistic situations.
This is in order to explore the sociocultural and techno-
logical contexts in which these activities take place. I pro-
pose that by understanding creative musical participation
as a highly contextualised practice, we may discover that
the greatest impact of rapidly developing technological re-
sources is their ability to a↵ord richly diverse, personalised,
and embodied forms of music making. I argue that this is
applicable over a wide range of musical communities.
Author Keywords
Enaction, person-centred arts practice, performance prac-
tice, sociocultural contexts.
ACM Classiﬁcation
H.5.5 [Information Interfaces and Presentation] Sound and
Music Computing—Methodologies and techniques, J.5 [Arts
and Humanities] Music
1. INTRODUCTION
Christopher Small’s concept of musicking ﬁrmly places par-
ticipation at the centre of what it isto music. To take part
in a musical activity—which includes sweeping the stage
before a concert, selling tickets, in addition to accepted
musical practices such as composing or performing—entails
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’15,May 31-June 3, 2015, Louisiana State Univ., Baton Rouge, LA.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
the forging of various relationships. Small argues that it is
through these relationships, which may exist between peo-
ple, sounds, and spaces, that meaning is constructed.
In what follows I provide two contrasting accounts of
NIME development. Through these, I explore how the rela-
tionships that Small outlines are forged over time through
the lens of practice-led and ethnographic research. I o↵er
examples which lie within two often unrelated areas: the
Western experimental and electronic music communities;
and the world of person-centred arts practices for people
with complex disabilities. This is in order to illustrate how
such an understanding of NIME development within one
context may inform work in another. This may also illumi-
nate parallels between what could be perceived as unrelated
musical practices.
By viewing musical engagement as an evolving and em-
bodied process, which supports Small’s deﬁnition of mu-
sic as human action, it can be demonstrated that the rel-
evance of technological developments in the ﬁeld of live
electronic and digital musical practice lies not necessarily
within the material aspects per se. But rather, an important
consequence is the potential for individualised practices to
emerge, where each performer enacts a unique musical envi-
ronment in coordination with their physiological, cultural,
social, and musical histories. I will suggest that by viewing
NIME-related practices in this way, we are a↵orded the op-
portunity to view musical activityin generalas a “medium
of social relation” [3] in various contexts.
1.1 Perceptually Guided Action
The idea of performance as perceptually guided action [8]
suggests the importance of a multimodal approach to devel-
oping digital musical instruments (DMIs) or NIMEs. More-
over, this can inform our understanding of musical partic-
ipation in general. Not only as listeners, but also as per-
formers we are continuously making use of multiple streams
of sensory feedback as we make our way through a perfor-
mance: auditory, haptic, kinaesthetic, and visual.
This draws on Francisco Varela, Evan Thompson and
Eleanor Rosch’s theory of enaction [11] as a way of under-
standing the importance of the role of the body within—
speciﬁcally—live electronic musical performance. An enac-
tive understanding focuses on the idea of structural coupling
between agent and environment through repeated sensori-
motor interactions [11]. Both the perceptive capacities of
various organisms as well as the environment itself emerge
through reciprocal coordination and coevolution. In biolog-
ical terms, for example, this phenomenon is “responsible for
both the ultraviolet vision of bees and the ultraviolet re-
ﬂectance patterns of ﬂowers” [11]. Through phenomenolog-
ical enquiry we start to see how musical worlds may evolve
299
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
in a similar manner.
The concept of enaction extends Maurice Merleau-Ponty’s
work on phenomenology, which posits the body as both the
perceiving object, and at the same time, the subject of per-
ception [9]. Merleau-Ponty illustrates the body’s capacity
for this duplicity of sensation through an example of the
hands, which oscillate between touching and being touched.
The enactive approach emphasises the mutuality between
agent and environment. Similarly, musical works can emerge
out of the relationships that develop over time between
a speciﬁc combination of people, instruments, and space.
This does not apply only to the immediacy of musical per-
formance. This framework can also be used to understand
the durational development of NIMEs, where an instrument
may be iterated through a series of incremental adjustments
informed by the experience of their use within di↵erent sce-
narios.
Small suggests that when we rehearse and perform, we
are exploring not only the sonic relationships that articu-
late how we ideally believe sounds should be organised, but
also the relationships between sound and instruments; the
relationship between the performers and the audience; the
relationship between those taking part and the physical set-
ting; and so on [1].
1.2 Ethnography and Creative Practice
There has been a growing number of calls from the NIME
community to acknowledge the importance of both ethno-
graphic (see [2]) and practice-led (see [5]) research. These
methodologies allow for a discussion of the complex rela-
tionships between the sociocultural contexts in which tech-
nical developments in various NIME-related ﬁelds are being
made. Both creative practice and ethnographic approaches
provide space for exploring how NIME-related research un-
folds over time in the real world. The two case studies that
I describe each o↵er accounts of highly personalised NIME
development. In exploring these situations, it will become
apparent that any attempt to optimise the instruments dis-
cussed for the wider community would be largely redundant
as they are evolved through the physiologies and aesthetic
choices of the speciﬁc musicians involved. Evaluation of
these practices through objective testing would be fruitless.
The methodologies employed allow the experiences of the
users to be shared through reﬂective observation and dis-
cussion. Nevertheless, by o↵ering this insight, we can start
to ﬁnd implications for engagement with DMIs in general.
2. TWO CASE STUDIES
In this section I discuss two case studies where I have de-
veloped NIMEs in what initially appears to be unrelated
contexts: my own live electronic performance practice; and
person-centred collaborative arts practice. In each case I
examine the role of the physiology of the musician, their
musical aesthetics and histories, the contexts in which the
musical engagement takes place, and how this is bound up
with the various technologies employed.
2.1 Personal Performance Practice
2.1.1 Background
Over the last eight years, I have explored an approach to
personal DMI design that focuses around the relationships
between sound and touch. This explores the double aspects
of Merleau-Ponty’s notion of embodiment through, on one
hand, themes of resistance and haptic technology [7], but
also the perception of sound as vibration, through vibrotac-
tile technology [6]. While the beneﬁts of using haptic tech-
nology for improving certain aspects of instrumental skill
acquisition are well documented [10], research in this area
tends to be focused around technical development. My own
research has attempted to provide an in-depth, practice-
based perspective in this ﬁeld.
2.1.2 The Physiology of the Performer
It is perhaps not surprising that my training as a classical
pianist, which began formally at the age of four, has led to
an exploration of musical HCI that is largely focused around
the expressive capacities of the ﬁngers. While I may have
been drawn to the piano simply due to its ubiquity as a
traditional Western instrument, through repeated engage-
ment with the instrument from this young age, by way of
lessons, exercises, and the sort of experimentation that I
much later learned was called improvisation, I enacted my
musical environment based around a very speciﬁc type of
tactility.
I learned to make use of both the vibrotactile feedback
of the resonating body of the piano, as well as the particu-
lar resistances that it o↵ered me as a physical instrument.
When much later I started to perform with computers, the
disconnect between sound and touch left me unfulﬁlled as
a musician. Performance gestures contained none of the ef-
fort, struggle, or physicality that I was accustomed to mak-
ing use of.
This led me to question what it was that I was missing
in my experience as a performer now engaging with digital
technology, in order to adequately communicate a musical
idea. How could I translate an intention into an expressive
and articulated sonic result? It has been through my own
personal history of musical performance that I have been
prompted to examine the relationship between sound and
touch. Experiencing what Simon Emmerson describes as
“increasingly alienated from purely physical sound produc-
tion” [4], urged me to explore more deeply the links between
action and perception, speciﬁcally for the performer.
This research has been extensively documented elsewhere,
and has included incorporating haptic technologies [7, 8],
and vibrotactile feedback [6] into my instrument design.
Rather than reiterate the technicalities of this work, it is
important to note that my evolved means of musical ex-
pression has been closely tied to my physiology over a long
period of time. As I approached NIME development, this
relationship between body and instrument was key to in-
forming my design choices in that they were deeply rooted
within an exploration of physicality and touch.
2.1.3 Sociocultural Context
My performance practice using NIMEs has been largely sit-
uated under the umbrella of Western art music. Being based
within universities has provided me with access to exper-
tise in both software and hardware development, situated
me within a community of potential mentors and collabo-
rators, and o↵ered me many opportunities to present and
discuss my work.
Working in and between genres such as contemporary
classical, free improvisation, experimental beat-based mu-
sic, and noise, has allowed my various performance envi-
ronments to be explored within a broad range of scenarios.
For example, at an academic conference, NIMEs used for
performance must be extremely reliable and stable, with
the ability to be set up quickly as there is often little time
for this between performances. Within improvisation sce-
narios, the NIME must be ﬂexible and adaptable. It must
be able to give space to co-performers, yet possess a voice
of its own. At a noise gig, my digital/laptop-based instru-
ments must be able to hold their own in terms of sonic depth
against analogue counterparts from myself or collaborators.
300
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
2.1.4 Objectives for NIME Development
While a large part of my practice has been based around
the hybrid piano, formed around haptically and digitally
augmented acoustic pianos [8], I have also performed ex-
tensively using a variety of hybrid (analogue and digital)
electronic systems. These are assemblages of various com-
ponents, including analogue synthesisers, hardware drum
machines, various MIDI and game controllers, foot pedals,
and bespoke software built using Max/MSP.
Figure 1: Networked interactions.
In working with hardware that does not o↵er the same
rich physicality of the hybrid piano, I had to develop ways
of introducing this tactile engagement to my performance
environments. By interacting with all elements of a partic-
ular set up through a single game controller, I was able
to simultaneously touch and engage with di↵erent parts
of the instrument, bringing a sense of immediacy into my
hands. For example, in one conﬁguration, the game con-
troller would trigger very short segments of sounds, which
were in turn analysed by the software. This would send
both MIDI information out via the sound card to trigger
drum machine synthesis, as well as sending multiple con-
trol voltages out to an analogue synthesizer. At the same
time, the audio output from these two external devices was
sent back into the laptop. This would then be sampled and
processed in Max/MSP, where several parameters were af-
fected by my own interaction with the game controller. In
this way I was able to access several parts of my perfor-
mance system at once, bypassing some of the given—and
to me, undesirable—control interfaces, such as the knobs of
my Korg MS20 analogue synthesizer, or the buttons of the
Elektron MachineDrum.
While this approach involves initial one-to-many mapping
choices, the overall result is a network of interdependent
processes, which feed into each other. The resistances in
my performance environments often lie within the extreme
potential for activity through interconnections within the
audio signal path, which must be negotiated by the per-
former, often through holding a static position for extended
periods of time. The game controller, for example, is so easy
to manipulate, that the musicality comes from resisting this
by holding both thumbs ﬁxed on the joysticks, which re-
quires a great deal of pressure from the hands, and creates
a tension in the body: a movement of even one millimetre
can drastically alter the sound.
2.2 Person-Centered Arts Practice
2.2.1 Background
Since 2006 I have worked in various music therapy-related
and person-centred arts practice roles in the UK. These have
included performing classical piano concerts in day care cen-
tres for adults with learning di culties, as well as running
several series of workshops for people with complex disabil-
ities. In these workshops I employ a variety of traditional
instruments along with numerous NIMEs, and I focus on
the tangible experience of playing and perceiving sound.
In 2012 I was asked to be involved with the Artlink1 Ideas
Team, established by the Edinburgh-based arts charity in
2010. This team, consisting of various local and interna-
tional artists and members of Artlink sta↵, works with an
individual together with psychologists, care workers and
family members. The goal is to establish new ways of think-
ing about and making artworks by exploring creative re-
sponses to the daily experiences of people with profound
learning disabilities. I was asked to work alongside artist
Steve Hollingsworth to develop an instrument for a young
autistic man (M), who was intensely drawn to piano perfor-
mance2.
2.2.2 The Physiology of the Performer
“The nature from which man has selected his musical styles
is not only external to him; it includes his own nature—
his psychophysical capacities and the ways in which these
have been structured by his experiences of interaction with
people and things, which are part of the adaptive process
of maturation in culture” [1].
Before any part of the design or build commenced, it was
crucial to spend time with M at the piano to observe his en-
gagement with the instrument. I visited him weekly to hear
him play acoustic pianos as well as my digitally-augmented
instrument, the hybrid piano [8]. Several important obser-
vations were made over the weeks that I visited him. Aside
from a piano-based instrument being selected due to M’s
enthusiasm for it, his often overpowering strength meant
that keyboards or MIDI instruments were ruled out as they
were neither sturdy nor durable enough.
There was a marked di↵erence in M’s playing when sitting
at the piano alone, compared to when we played together.
When playing alone, M would hammer the keys for several
minutes at a time with much force. When playing together,
he would pause to make eye contact, to listen, and to re-
spond. He would mimic patterns that my ﬁngers made on
the keys, often loosely, and sometimes with accuracy. This
posed the ﬁrst question as to how I could achieve this sense
of engagement in M’s new instrument without me, or an-
other musician, being physically present.
Another important factor was the fact that M could get so
enthralled in playing the piano that he would often become
over-excited, and begin to sweat and hyperventilate. The
posed a further problem as to how we could create some-
thing that could be enjoyable, without being over-stimulating.
2.2.3 Sociocultural Context
M’s fondness for the piano did not stem from a particular
interest in classical or romantic music, or from a childhood
that involved taking piano lessons. The piano for M was a
direct means of expression: tangible and immediate. This
unique connection between player and instrument allowed
an approach to developing the NIME that could view M’s
aesthetic choices as based around sounds that were enjoyed
by him in his everyday life. Sound libraries were created
1http://www.artlinkedinburgh.co.uk/2http://issuu.com/artlinkedinburgh/docs/
artlink201112
301
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 
which contained samples of his mother’s voice, the sound of
his dog barking, as well as car sounds, and sounds from car
racing television shows which he enjoyed. Additionally, I
was able to observe during our time together in workshops
which types of sounds from the hybrid piano seemed to en-
gage M, and which he seemed to dislike. As M had been
improvising with me over several months, I sampled some
of my own piano playing as source material.
2.2.4 Objectives for NIME Development
There were several practical design choices that we had to
consider from the outset. As mentioned above, the instru-
ment had to be stable. Furthermore, M was attracted to
wires, and would grab at any that were visible, so every-
thing had to be hidden and enclosed. A button interface
was proposed, where buttons would be secured onto the
front of the piano. These were combined with LED lights
and vibration motors which o↵ered direct sensory feedback
to M to conﬁrm that he had pressed the buttons. The but-
tons would change the sample sets, and stop and start the
sounds.
Figure 2: Detail of M’s Piano.
One of the ﬁrst goals that was discussed in a meeting by
M’s mother was the idea for M to put a “square peg in a
square hole”3. That is to say that the instrument should be
able to demonstrate some degree of agency and intention-
ality from M. Furthermore, we envisaged that this would
develop over time as M grew familiar with the instrument.
As such, I had to ensure that the software could be updated
when necessary to ensure that it would remain challenging
yet engaging for M. The buttons began as simple start/stop
switches, but could be modiﬁed to react di↵erently if M
started to exhibit choice in his actions. The project is on-
going and the Ideas Team continues to learn from M.
3. CONCLUSION
I have described two examples of NIME development in dif-
fering contexts. Each situation uses musical performance as
a means of enabling creativity, expression, communication,
and also personal development. The commonalities between
the two situations are clear. In each case, the development
of NIMEs has evolved through close attention to the users’
physiologies and sensorimotor capacities; their musical his-
tories; and the sociocultural contexts in which the musical
engagement takes place.
3Personal email correspondence with Alison Stirling
It is evident that the type of physical, tactile engagement
that I seek within live electronic musical performance has
arisen out of my perceptive capacities and experience with
the touch-based expressivity of the acoustic piano. How-
ever, there is now a generation of musicians who may not
experience this loss of touch since their initial engagement
with music may come through digital devices such as iPads,
rather than acoustic instruments. The model of structural
coupling between musician and instrument that I describe
suggests a need for individualised systems that arise out of
the speciﬁc interactions of each person in the world over
time. For those with complex disabilities, an acknowledge-
ment of the uniqueness of their experiences and responses
is required before progress can be made.
If we view music as an enactive process, where new tech-
nologies lead to more engaging, embodied relationships be-
tween people and instruments, both the social as well as the
sonic relationships that we wish to explore, a rm and cel-
ebrate [1] can be realised. The two examples in this paper
serve to highlight the need for more in-depth collaborative
research that will combine creative practice and ethnogra-
phy with DMI design in order to provide a better under-
standing of the experiences and beneﬁts of using new tech-
nologies within musical contexts.
4. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to Alison Stirling and Kara Christine, along with
Steve Hollingsworth, for giving me the opportunity to work
with them on the Artlink Ideas Team.
5. REFERENCES
[1] J. Blacking.How Musical Is Man?University of
Washington Press, Seattle and London, 1973.
[2] G. Booth and M. Gurevich. Collaborative
composition and socially constructed instruments:
Ensemble laptop performance through the lens of
ethnography. InProceedings of the 2012 conference on
New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME),
Michigan, Ann Arbor, 2012.
[3] T. DeNora.Music in Everyday Life. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 2003.
[4] S. Emmerson. ‘Losing Touch?’: The Human
Performer and Electronics. In S. Emmerson, editor,
Music, Electronic Media and Culture, pages 194–216.
Ashgate, Aldershot, 2000.
[5] O. Green. Nime, musicality and practice-led methods.
In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on New
Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME), London,
2014.
[6] L. Hayes. Vibrotactile feedback-assisted performance.
In Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on New
Interfaces for Musical Expression, Oslo, 2011. NIME.
[7] L. Hayes. Performing articulation and expression
through a haptic interface. In ICMA, editor,
Proceedings of the 2012 International Computer
Music Conference., Ljubljana, 2012.
[8] L. Hayes. Haptic augmentation of the hybrid piano.
In Contemporary Music Review, volume 32:5. Taylor
and Francis, 2013.
[9] M. Merleau-Ponty.Phenomenology of Perception (C.
Smith, Trans.). Routledge and Kegen Paul, 1962.
[10] S. O’Modhrain.Playing by Feel: Incorporating Haptic
Feedback into Computer-Based Musical Instruments.
PhD thesis, Stanford University, CA, 2001.
[11] F. J. Varela, E. Thompson, and E. Rosch.The
Embodied Mind. MIT, Cambridge, 1991.
302
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 31-June 3, 2015 