Multiple Pianolas in Antheil’s Ballet mécanique
   Paul D. Lehrman 
            Tufts University Department of Music 
            20 Talbot Avenue 
            Medford, MA 02155 USA 
             paul.lehrman@tufts.edu 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
George Antheil’s notorious Ballet mécanique (1924-1925) 
was originally scored for percussion ensemble, sound effects, 
and 16 pianolas. He was never able to perform the piece with 
those forces, however, due to his inability to synchronize 
multiple pianolas. Thus all performances of the piece in his 
lifetime, and for decades after, were done with a single pianola 
or player piano.* 
The author traces the origin of the concept of 
synchronizing multiple pianolas, and explains the attendant 
technological issues. He examines attempts to synchronize 
mechanical pianos and other time-based devices at the time of 
Ballet mécanique’s composition, and suggests that Antheil’s 
vision for his piece was not as farfetched as has long been 
thought. 
Keywords 
Antheil, Stravinsky, player piano, pianola, mechanical 
instruments, synchronization 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Ballet mécanique , by the New Jersey-born composer 
George Antheil (1900-1959), is one of the most famous, and 
infamous, compositions in 20th-century music. It was the first 
piece written for multiple automated instruments, and presaged 
the use of what are now called sequencers by over half a 
century. 
The composer attempted to break new musical ground 
structurally, sonically, and technologically. At its premiere in 
Paris, where Antheil was living at the time, it was a huge 
success, despite the fact that it was performed by an ensemble 
considerably reduced from what Antheil originally proposed.  
Antheil’s score called for a percussion orchestra of 
xylophones, bass drums, tamtam, pianos, electric bells, siren, 
and airplane propellers, along with 16 synchronized pianolas 
performing four different parts. Although no one had ever 
before attempted to synchronize even two pianolas, Antheil 
insisted right up until the piece’s premiere that it was possible. 
Eventually, however, he realized the impracticality of his 
idea, and modified the piece so that a single pianola covered all 
four parts. It wasn’t until the very end of the 20th century, 
using computer-controlled player pianos and MIDI sequencers, 
that Ballet mécanique  could be realized in its original 
instrumentation.1 
 Antheil’s vision of a huge ensemble of mechanical pianos 
was radical, but it was not entirely original, nor was it as 
farfetched as might be assumed. Recent research by the author 
shows that a system such as Antheil envisioned was in fact 
feasible using technology available at the time. It is possible, 
furthermore, that observations of instruments he saw in his 
youth inspired his vision. But his understanding of the 
technology was faulty, and this may have been the biggest 
contributor to his failure to realize his vision for the piece. 
2. STRAVINSKY’S PRECEDENT  
Before Ballet mécanique, only one composer is known to 
have even considered the idea of combining multiple pianolas: 
Igor Stravinsky (1882-1971) had extensive experience with 
pianolas, transcribing several of his works onto rolls for both 
the Aeolian Company in England and Pleyel in Paris.  
2.1 Les Noces 
Beginning in 1914, Stravinsky started Les Noces four 
times, abandoning the first three efforts. In a later interview he 
recalled that while working on the third version, which he 
began in 1918, “…I decided to have the Finale accompanied 
mainly by four pianos. It seems to me that my thinking on that 
point will be clearer to you if I tell you that for a while I was 
minded to put four pianolas in their place.”2 
But the “great difficulty of synchronizing the parts 
executed by the instrumentalists and singers with those 
rendered by the mechanical players” 3 dissuaded him from 
including the idea in the fourth and final version of the piece, 
which he wrote between 1921 and 1922. The final version 
includes four conventional pianos. 
2.2 Stravinsky and Antheil 
Antheil idolized Stravinsky, and made no secret of the fact 
in his articles and letters. The two met for the first time in 1922 
in Berlin, where Stravinsky was waiting for his mother to 
emigrate from the Soviet Union. Stravinsky was impressed with 
Antheil’s music, especially a piece that Antheil had written 
which was highly imitative of Stravinsky’s Symphonies of 
Winds. They spent significant time together over a two-week 
period, at the end of which Stravinsky returned to Paris. The 
Russian invited the American to join him there, which Antheil 
finally did a year later, the day of the premiere of Les Noces.4 
Antheil made no mention in any later writings of 
discussing the use of multiple pianolas with Stravinsky, but it 
requires very little stretch of the imagination to suggest that 
they did so. Soon after Antheil arrived in Paris, he and 
Stravinsky had a serious falling-out, due in part, according to 
some reports, to Antheil accusing Stravinsky of stealing the 
idea of using four pianos Les Noces from him.5 
3. SYNCHRONIZATION ISSUES 
Synchronizing two or more mechanical pianos is not 
trivial. Most mechanical pianos have tempo controls, but they 
are not calibrated or referenced to any standard. Thus if two 
identical mechanical piano rolls are started at the same time, at 
the same nominal tempo, they will quickly drift away from 
each other. For pieces as heavily percussive and rhythmic as 
Les Noces or Ballet mécanique, this would be disastrous. 
In filmmaking, multiple editing surfaces are synchronized 
using sprocket wheels on the film transports and chains to 
connect them. But piano rolls do not normally have sprockets. 
Thus even if the mechanisms were locked together, the players 
would still go out of sync—although perhaps not as quickly—
due to differences in the thickness of the paper and to slippage 
of the rolls. 
Using a single roll mechanism to drive the hammers and 
pedals in multiple instruments is not feasible, due to the 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work 
for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that 
copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial 
advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the 
first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to 
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
NIME’12,  May 21-23, 2012 , University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
 
limitations of the pneumatic systems used in most of the 
mechanical instruments of the era. Should the tubing between 
the roll mechanism and the hammers exceed ten feet, the 
response of the system would be d elayed due to the 
propogation speed of the change in air pressure, or it would not 
respond at all, due to the loss of pressure. 6 While 
“orchestrions”—player pianos that incorporate other 
instruments like percussion, violins, and  organ pipes in a single 
cabinet, driven by a piano roll—could be squeezed into a case 
in such a way that none of the tubing would exceed ten feet, 
this was not practical when linking multiple instruments. 
4. SYNCHRONIZATION SYSTEMS 
Even while Stravinsky was still entertaining the idea  of 
multiple mechanical pi anos, there were a number of inventors 
working on methods of synchronizing pianos with other time -
based mechanisms . Recognizing the limitations of all -
pneumatic systems, the developers of synchronization systems 
proposed during the player-piano era all used a combination of 
electrical and pneumatic technology. Although none of them 
were specifically designed to synchronize multiple player 
pianos, in theory, they could have been adapted for such use.  
Some of them built operational prototypes. 
4.1 Player Pianos + Phonographs 
Between 1913 and 1916 three companies produced 
systems that combined a player piano with a phonograph. They 
were designed to allow a recording of a vocalist or instrumental 
soloist to be accompanied by a piano. Since phonograph 
recordings at the time tended to sound worse the more 
instruments one tried to record on them, these systems would 
separate the musical elements: the singer/soloist would be on 
record, while the accompaniment would be “live.” 
4.1.1 Gulbransen and Melville Clark 
Systems built by Gulbransen and Melville Clark required 
the user to manually adjust the speed of the piano roll so as to 
remain in sync with the recording. Although a number of 
models were built, and Gulbransen’s marketing literature 
claimed that it was “quite simple” to get them to “synchronize 
perfectly,”7 in fact the process of keeping the voice and the 
music together proved to be far too cumbersome for the 
intended market, and the idea was soon abandoned.8 
4.1.2 Welte 
Heinrich Bockisch, an engineer with the Welte company , 
designed a system to do this task automatically. A combination 
of electrical contacts on the phonograph turntable and a 
dedicated duct on the piano roll regulated the piano 
mechanism’s speed through a series of vacuum chambers, 
valves, pressure sensors, and switches. An extermely complex 
system, it contained several hundred moving parts and was 
protected by seven United States patents, which together 
covered over 80 pages of text and 27 pages of detailed 
diagrams.9 The company reportedly was able to build two 
prototypes (one for Edison discs and the other for Victor discs), 
and some rolls for the system are in the hands of present -day 
collectors, but the devices were never put into production, and 
none exist today. 
4.2 Player Pianos + Film 
The patent documents for the Welte system include 
mentions of its possible use to link player pianos with film 
projectors, but this was apparently never attempted. In the early 
1920s two systems were proposed —both in France—that were 
more specfically de signed for this purpose, although neither 
one of them was able to achieve their goal.  
4.2.1 Delacommune 
A “Device For Synchronizing Various Apparatus With 
Motion Picture Projection,” was patented in 1922 by Charles 
Delacommune, an inventor and entrepeneur who was close to 
Fernand Léger, the artist whose Ballet mécanique  film was 
originally designed to synchronize with Antheil’s score. In this 
system, a mechanical linkage connects the projector motor to a 
roller which drives a perforated paper tape, similar to a player-
piano roll, but with only 12 “tracks” (as opposed to a player -
piano’s 50 to 88). The tape is sprocketed to prevent slippage.10 
As the tape travels, a series of sprung levers poke through 
the perforations and make contact with a metal plate below,  
activating solenoids, valves, lights, or other electro -mechanical 
devices. At the same time a second roller mounted on a wooden 
desk draws a paper roll on which is printed a script, a list of 
sound effects, or a musical score. to be interpreted by an actor, 
a technician, or a conductor, respectively. 
The system, which the inventor called the “Ciné-pupitre,” 
was publicly demonstrated only once, in 1922, when it was 
used to cue the conductor of a score by Arthur Honegger 
accompanying a short film by Abel Gance.11 
Although Delacommune’s patent claims that his system 
could operate “a mechanical piano whose keys are controlled 
by circuits each corresponding to a l ever of the distributing 
device,” in reality the system would have had to have been 
much larger and mor e complex in order to cover even a 
reasonable fraction of the notes of a piano. It seems unlikely 
that the device would have lent itself to such scaling.  
4.2.2 Pleyel 
In November, 1922 Pleyel, the Paris piano manufacturer 
above whose factory Stravinsky maintain ed a studio, and who 
was later to create the piano rolls for Antheil’s Ballet 
mécanique, filed a French patent (a British filing followed a 
year later) for a synchronizing system for “automatic musical 
instruments, kinematographs,  [and] phonographs….” Sim ilar 
to the Welte system described earlier, it claimed to use a series 
of vacuum chambers, bellows, and pneumatic speed controls  to 
synchronize “the several apparatus being naturally in any 
number.”12 
In contrast to the Welte system, however, the Pleyel patent 
was slim and vague, consisting of a mere four pages of text and 
a single page of simple graphics. A protoype was never built. 
5. ANTHEIL’S CONCEPT 
While some of these schemes were more feasible than 
others, George Antheil’s description of how he would pe rform 
Ballet mécanique bears little resemblance to any of them. 
Antheil was convinced that some form of electrical 
switchboard would allow him to operate the multiple pianolas 
from a central con trol position. While the piece was in 
preparation he wrote a n umber of correspondents about the 
system he envisioned. In early 1924, as he was starting on the 
piece, he wrote to his friend and patron Natalie Clifford 
Barney, “We are going to give the first ALL MECHANICAL 
music in the world, and instead of a director or conductor, I will 
be at a switch-board. Pleyels [sic] are cutting all of the Ballet 
Mecanique upon one huge roll (the cutting is already in 
progress and will soon be finished) which will be the master 
roll for the electrical operation of 16 grand pianofortes…” 13 
In the same letter he indicates that other parts were to be 
played mechanically as well: “…The xilophones [sic], electric 
motors, etc. will be electrically controlled from another roll 
specially cut, and operated from a little switchboard before me, 
which can cheaply be arranged by an ordinary mechanician.” 
He continued to believe for some time that his idea was 
possible. In May 1925 he wrote an article describing an opera 
he was planning, based on a chapter in James Joyce's Ulysses, 
that would use a similar ensemble. (He never got pa st the third 
measure.)14 And in December 1925 he inscribed a copy of the 
Ballet mécanique rolls that he sent to his friend Mary Louise 
Curtis Bok, “These are the master rolls which run the 16 pianos 
electrically from a  common control (switching on 16 or 1 as 
might be necessary to the sonority)....” 
He even managed to convince a reporter from the New 
York Herald that at the public premiere of the piece on June 19, 
1926, “…there were sixteen pianolas connected with and 
synchronized with the instrument at which Mr. Antheil worked 
with such zeal at his feet. A loud -speaker was set at each side 
of the stage, however, to carry the conglomerate of sound from 
these hidden instruments to the listeners.” 15 This was a 
complete falsehood—there were no hidden pianos.  
6. ELECTRICAL CONTROL OF 
MECHANICAL PIANOS 
The system that Antheil told his friends was going to 
perform Ballet mécanique  was, of course, never built. The 
systems for synchronizing player pianos with other mechanisms 
that di d exist—either in reality or on paper —had nothing in 
common with the system that Antheil envisioned. 
But in fact some years prior to Antheil’s starting work on 
Ballet mécanique , at least two automated instrument system s 
had been built using technology that  bore a much closer 
resemblance to Antheil’s description, and could conceivably 
have been improved and modified to accomplish Antheil’s goal 
in the way he hoped. 
6.1 Wurlitzer/Inhof & Mukle 
From 1914 to 1918 the Wurlitzer company made an 
orchestrion called the Unit Orchestra for use in movie theaters. 
It was designed both for live keyboard performance and to play 
perforated rolls. The piano keys and roll mechanism, instead of 
opening pneumatic valves, closed electrical switches, which 
sent control signals thro ugh a series of relays to the pneumatic 
mechanisms, which could therefore be located some distance 
away. This gave far more freedom to theater designers and 
organ installers when it came to placement of the keyboard. 
According to mechanical instrument expe rt Arthur Reblitz, 
“The console in a Unit Orchestra could be located where the 
musician could see the screen, and the pipes could be located in 
chambers beside the screen, closer to the audience.”16 
Whether Antheil was aware of this system —or a similar 
one reportedly made in Germany by Inhof & Mukle —is 
unknown, but with some modification, and a “little 
switchboard,” it might have been used to perform Ballet 
mécanique. But there is no evidence that such a device was 
ever conceived or built. 
6.2 Tel-Electric 
Even closer to Antheil’s idea were player pianos and 
retrofittable player systems made by the Tel -Electric Company 
of Pittsfield, Massachusetts, from 1907 to 1917.17 
The Tel-Electric system was unique in that it did not use 
pneumatics at all. The mechanism that drove the keys consisted 
of a set of simple 12 -volt DC motors —rotary solenoids —one 
for each key, which turned 90° when current was applied to 
them. Mounted in a box directly under the keys, each solenoid 
was connected to a stiff wire which went up throug h a hole in 
the underside of the piano and attached to a key. As the motor 
turned, it pulled the key down, and when the current was 
removed, gravity and the piano’s action pulled the key back up.  
The control mechanism was located in a separate box, 
connected to the drive mechanism by a multi-conductor cable. 
Power was supplied from house current or (for powerless 
homes) a car battery. The voltage going through the control 
cables could be varied with an “expression” knob on the control 
unit, so that the force of the motors, and thus the velocity of the 
keystrokes, could be controlled over a wide range. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Solenoids from a Tel-Electric system installed 
under the keys of an Ivers & Pond upright piano 
The control unit used a motorized cylinder to read the 
piano rolls, but instead of paper, the rolls were made of .003-
inch-thick brass. The roll passed between a comb -like rack of 
sensing fingers and the tracker bar, with each finger acting as a 
switch upon encountering a perforation in the roll. The bra ss 
was touted as being impervious to shrinkage, stretching, or 
other types of deformation or damage caused by variations in 
temperature and humidity.  
 
Figure 2. Tel-Electric Control unit 
The Tel-Electric company did not have a long life. While 
the brass rolls were more durable than competitors’ paper rolls, 
they were far more expensive, not to mention completely 
incompatible with any other system. These were issues for 
player piano owners who wanted to collect a large repertoire of 
rolls from multiple manufacturers. 
In 1917 the United States entered World War I, and the 
company was designated by the government as “having 
resources important to the war effort.” It shut down its musical 
instrument operation and converted to producing war materiel. 
It went out of business completely in 1921. 
Despite its brief history, the company was able to sell 
approximately 10,000 instruments and systems over a 12 -year 
period. Its main sales office and recording facilities were in 
New York City, and most of its sales were in the Northeast. 
In retrospect, modifying a Tel -Electric system to control 
multiple player pianos or other instruments in perfect 
synchronization would have been a simple task for a clever 
electrical engineer: it would essentially have involved creating 
cables that could run from a single control unit to multiple 

solenoid banks, and perhaps building a larger power supply to 
accommodate the extra current. It would also have been simple 
to build an auxilliary “switchboard,” as Antheil described, to 
route the various switch closures to different instruments. 
Tel-Electric’s unqiue technology was far ahead of its time. 
It is the direct ancestor of the technology used in modern 
computer-controlled solenoid -operated player pianos from 
manufacturers such as Yamaha, QRS, PianoDisc, and 
Bösendorfer. Had development of the system been able to 
continue, it could have led to even more intriguing possibilities 
than controlling multiple instruments, such as instruments that 
could transpose or, if every key were to have its own variable 
resistor, instruments with much greater and more subtle 
dynamics control. 
7. WAS THIS IN ANTHEIL'S MIND? 
There is no record of George Antheil ever having seen a 
Tel-Electric piano before embarking on Ballet mécanique. But 
given the instruments’ po pularity in the Northeast U.S., it is 
quite possible that the young Antheil might have encountered 
one. As he was fascinated with machines, he surely would have 
given it more than a cursory look. He may have been 
particularly impressed with the external ro ll reader, and the 
relatively simple electrical connection between the reader and 
the player mechanism.  
Thus it is not unreasonable to speculate that the Tel -
Electric design may have been in the back of his mind a few 
years later when Antheil began to dev elop his ideas for Ballet 
mécanique. Indeed, it is difficult to consider any other 
technology that might have influenced the young composer. 
8. WHY IT DIDN’T HAPPEN 
Why Antheil was not able to use a modified Tel -Electric 
system or something similar to perform Ballet mécanique can 
be explained by three primary factors. 
First, although Antheil was fascinated by machines, he had 
no training in engineering, and he may not have realized that 
Pleyel’s (and every other manufacturer’s)  approach to player 
piano design was completely different from  Tel -Electric’s. A 
potentially simple modification of a Tel-Electric system  to 
control multiple pianos was  in no way applicable to Pleyel’s 
pneumatically-driven instruments. 
Second, Tel-Electric’s products were unknown in Europ e. 
According to player-piano historian Bob Billings, there is today 
only one Tel -Electric system known to be in existence outside 
of the United States, and it is in  England. In German player -
piano expert Jürgen Hocker’s recent exhaustive  history of the 
instrument, Faszination Player Piano , the Tel -Electric system  
does not even get a mention.18 
Finally, by the time Antheil arrived in Paris, the Tel -
Electric Company, and its technology, were long gone.  
9. CONCLUSIONS 
George Antheil’s ideas for using multiple sy nchronized 
automated player pianos to perform Ballet mécanique  were 
very far out of the mainstream in 1920s Paris. But the 
technology for doing so did in fact exist, although not in a form 
that he could have used. 
Several companies had synchronization tech nology that 
might have been customized to play Antheil’s piece, but Pleyel 
was unable or unwilling to work with those companies. 
Antheil’s conception for the piece may have grown out of 
observation of a unique American player piano system, which 
could have been modified to achieve his goal. However, time, 
geopolitics, and market forces all conspired against this 
possibility. It would not be until 75 years later, using MIDI-
controlled solenoid-driven player pianos, that Ballet mécanique 
would be performed according to Antheil’s wishes. 
Had Antheil been able to achieve his goal, it is possible 
that 20th-century music would have developed very differently. 
The use of automation as a composition and performance tool 
might have had a significant role in the music of the first half of 
the century, instead of lying dormant until the 1980s. 
10. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Thanks to Mauro Piccinini, Rex Lawson, the Automatic 
Musical Instrument Collectors’ Association, and Joe Lavacchia 
for access to his Tel-Electric-equipped player piano. 
11. NOTE & REFERENCES 
* “Pianola” was originally the trademark for a piano -playing 
device made by the Aeolian Company  which attached to a 
conventional piano. It used a perforated paper roll and a series 
of pneumatic valves to operate mechanical fingers  to play the 
keys on the piano. A “player piano” uses the same principles, 
and can use the same paper rolls, but the player mechanism is 
inside the instrument, and operates the keys directly. The word 
“pianola” became a generic term for all such instruments.  For 
purposes of this paper the two terms , as well as “mechanical 
piano,” can be considered synonymous. 
 
[1] Pfeiffer, E., Hearing the Din of History, Boston Globe, 20 
Nov 1999 
[2] Lourie, A. Oedipus Rex. Opern-Oratorium nach Sophokles 
von Igor Strawinsky, Blätter der Staatsoper, VIII/19 
(1928), 9-13 
[3] Stravinsky, I, An Autobiography, New York: Simon & 
Schuster, 1932, 104-5 
[4] Antheil, G. Bad Boy of Music, Garden City, NY: 
Doubleday, Doran & Company, 1945, 119-120 
[5] Anderson, M. My Thirty Years’ War, New York, Covici, 
Friede, 1943, 257 
[6] Reblitz, A.A. The Golden Age of Automatic Musical 
Instruments, Woodinville, NH: Mechanical Music Press, 
2001, 273 
[7] quoted in Lobel, L. Player Rolls Accompany the 
Phonograph, Mechanical Music Digest, 26 Feb 1997  
[8] Wood, J.R. Player Piano Rolls Accompany the 
Phonograph, Mechanical Music Digest, 20 Feb 2008  
[9] Welte. C.M., Driving and Controlling Mechanism for 
Music-Rolls, United States Patent #1,211,799 (1913), et al 
[10] Device for Synchronizing Various Apparatus with Motion 
Picture Projection, Canadian Patent #247024 (1922) 
[11] Delacommune, C. Le Synchronisme de la parole, de la 
musique et des bruits au Cinéma, article accompanying the 
published script of Maurice Noverre, Septumia: Legend-
Mime, Paris: Livre Octave Douin, 1923, XV-XXIII 
[12]  “Improvements in Synchronizing System,” United 
Kingdom patent 207,798 (1924) 
[13] letter from Antheil to Natalie Clifford Barney, in the 
collection of the Jacques Doucet Library, Paris 
[14] Martin, P. ‘Mr. Bloom and the Cyclops:’ Joyce and 
Antheil’s Unfinished ‘Opéra Mécanique, in Bronze By 
Gold: The Music of Joyce, Sebastian D. G. Knowles, ed., 
New York: Garland Publishing, 1999, 95-105 
[15] Modern Composer Expects Riot Call When His 
Performance Opens To-day, New York Herald, 19 June 
1926 
[16] Reblitz, op cit 
[17] Billings, G. and Billings, B. The Tel-Electric Company 
from 1907 to 1917 (The Billlings Rollography, volume 6, 
Early Player Piano Music), Reno, NV: Rock Soup, 2001 
[18] Hocker, J. Faszination Player Piano. Bergkirchen, 
Germany: Edition Bochinsky, 2009 
 