The Siren Organ
Regina Collecchia
Center for Computer
Research in Music and
Acoustics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
colleccr@ccrma.stanford.edu
Dan Somen
Stanford Design Program
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
dansomen@stanford.edu
Kevin McElroy
Stanford Design Program
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
kmcelroy@stanford.edu
ABSTRACT
Sirens evoke images of alarm, public service, war, and forth-
coming air raid. Outside of the music of Edgard Var´ ese
([8], [9]), sirens have rarely been framed as musical in-
struments. By connecting air hoses to spinning disks with
evenly-spaced perforations, the siren timbre is translated
musically. Polyphony gives our instrument an organ-like
personality: keys are mapped to diﬀerent frequencies and
the pressure applied to them determines volume. The siren
organ can produce a large range of sounds both timbrally
and dynamically. In addition to a siren timbre, the instru-
ment produces similar sounds to a harmonica. Portability,
robustness, and electronic stability are all areas for improve-
ment.
Keywords
siren, organ, controllerism, modular, air compression, laser
cutting, lathe
1. INTRODUCTION
The siren organ is an electro-acoustic wind instrument with
the sound of a siren but playability of an organ. We built
it to experiment with how acoustic sirens could be more
musically oriented. Range of expression, minimal cost and
construction overhead, and transparency in playability were
our most important design requirements.
1.1 Motivation
The wide-sweeping glissando sound characteristic to a siren
is one that only a few acoustic instruments can mimic, but
over a shorter range. We desired a large range of control
over the pitch change amount and speed.
Another of the main goals that we had was transparency:
an instrument that gives performers the desire to play it
because they are conﬁdent that they can, and that they
know what it might sound like. For example, with timbre,
even a physical understanding of complex harmonic mo-
tion and the vibrations of strings and columns of air does
not inform the relative strength of those harmonics upon
physical inspection. We sought out ways to more clearly
demonstrate complex harmony via the patterns we cut into
the siren disks.
Finally, we had ﬁve weeks to complete this instrument
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’14,30 June–3 July 2014, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
and worked with a small budget, making any custom ma-
terials with laser-cutters, lathe, and a mill, all designed in
SolidWorks and Adobe Illustrator. Modern machine shops
have opened up many possibilities for aﬀordable instrument-
making and this makes their documentation highly valuable.
1.2 Background
Pneumatic sirens are mechanical instruments producing very
loud (>100 dB) sound. Their construction is typically con-
sidered in two parts: a stator and a rotor (also called a
chopper or siren disk ). The stator and the rotor have iden-
tical, equally-spaced openings and closings that look like fan
blades. The rotor spins and its openings alternate between
aligned with the stator (allowing airﬂow) and unaligned (no
airﬂow). Voltage control varies the rotation speed of the
rotor and creates the familiar wail of a siren.
The basic physics of our “siren organ” are trivial: an
air stream is applied to a rotating disk with evenly-spaced
holes. As the air ﬂows over the holes, a repeating series of
compressions and rarefactions create a periodic vibration
that we hear as pitch. The shape of this oscillation is
something close to a rectangular wave or pulse train, with
the pulse width determined by the ratio of the diameter of
the holes to the between-hole interval. The resultant pitch
fp is a function of the number of holes N and the speed
of the rotating motor fr (in rotations per second), by the
simple relation fp = Nfr. So, a disk with 10 holes spinning
at 50 rotations per second would have a frequency of 500Hz,
close to a B4.
Bart Hopkin’s documentation of the siren organ [4, 5]
demonstrated iteration in musical siren design but more
importantly showed that sirens can be built inexpensively.
Following Hopkin’s advice [5], we ﬁxed the end of the blow
tubes in holes in our siren disk stand and fabricated a wood
nozzle for the opening of each tube to decrease the output
diameter and focus the ﬂow, greatly improving the signal-
to-noise ratio (SNR) of the pitch. We found that there was
a maximum limit to the size of the tube opening: 2 smaller
openings had no aural eﬀect on the SNR nor timbre from
the larger.
Searching for toy sirens online (to no avail), we discov-
ered a small number of 3D-printed models of plastic sirens.
However, in each case they were constructed from gears that
produced substantial noise. In general, the sirens available
for purchase are meant for non-musical purposes and ex-
tremely loud ( >120 dB). Many of these are leftover relics
from the ﬁrst World Wars and quite expensive collectible
items.
1.3 Previous work
There are a small handful of “siren organs” in existence, the
names of which are coincidental. John R. Pierce gives a
nice example of a simple, homemade siren (no stator) in [7].
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
391
In 2004, Jean-Fran¸ cois Laporte constructed a siren organ
from “air compressors, pneumatic tubes, and boat horns”
[6], culminating in his compositionVertiges [3].
Rene Bakker has done creative research in the siren do-
main, designing electromechanical “servosirens” and rein-
terpreting two old inventions: a 1915 patent ﬁled by Dutch
theologist Abraham Loman [2], which Bakker calls “an in-
terpretation of the Loman siren organ,” and the Helmholtz
Doppelsiren [1]. Bakker’s Loman siren organ is a very ﬁn-
ished product. He rests a one-octave piano with knobs to
control individual motor speeds atop a complex array of
motorized sirens. The motorized buzz of the air compres-
sor appears to be constant and substantial; however, the
interface of the organ is remarkable. The documentation of
his instrument is unfortunately lacking, so it is diﬃcult to
understand its full range of expression.
Finally, as mentioned above, Hopkin’s handheld musical
siren [5] sounded by air blown through a plastic straw in-
spired many ideas about the patterns for our siren disks.
2. CONSTRUCTION
The siren organ can be constructed using only materials
from a hardware store, plus a small amount of electronics
to apply voltage to a potentiometer. The instrument can be
divided into three main components: (1) the air compressor,
(2) the interface / controller, and (3) the siren disk.
Figure 1: The three main components of the siren
organ.
In prototyping, we started with a small (4”) motor-driven
disk with 4 concentric rings of holes, ﬁxed to the stand
by simply laser-cutting a small hole in the center of the
disk and sticking it onto the shaft, to give us compact
access to 4 voices per siren. Our “air compressor” was our
mouth, delivering air to the spinning disk through a straw,
and our controller only a 9V battery. In this phase, we
achieved a surprisingly good SNR, once we realized that the
motor could be pinched together to greatly reduce its hum.
A second prototype multiplied the instrument into three
separate disk-motor pairs, adding also three potentiometers
and Arduinos. Here, we experimented with the disk design:
minor chords, major chords, and diﬀerent shapes of holes
such as stars, triangles, and squares as well as their radii.
We could not distinguish an eﬀect these shapes had on
the timbre, but the diﬀerent radii had a clear impact on
the overtone series, generating audibly stronger harmon-
ics.1 We laser cut a single stand for the three disks with
screw mounts for the potentiometers (Fig. 2), but found this
model too compact. Finally, we added the air compressor,
and in order to stand up to it we shifted our focus to
robustness.
1Interestingly, the minor chord and major chord design
was also surprisingly similar, as if the integer ratio
approximation (6:5) of a minor third was not close enough
to reality (2 3/12 = 1.189) to diﬀerentiate from that of a
major third (5:4). Perhaps the lower frequencies have strong
fourth harmonics, or there is some coupling that has an
impact on larger ratios.
With the intent of performing together, we made three
slightly diﬀerent controller-disk-motor combinations. We
refer to these as Controller 1, 2, and 3, ﬁnal design pictured
in Fig. 3, and likewise Disk 1, 2, and 3.
Figure 2: A later prototype of the siren organ.
Figure 3: The ﬁnal design of the siren organ.
2.1 Materials
We spent about $600 between the three of us constructing
the siren organ, not including the air compressor or the
access to such machines as a laser cutter and mill. The cost
of the ﬁnal design was about $450 of this expense. Research
is always the most expensive phase of product design, so
we found these costs reasonable. Close estimates of the
quantities of materials are broken down in Table 1.
Table 1: Construction Materials
Item Quantity
Plastic tubing (1/4” IID) 120’
Rubber tubing (3/8” IID) 15’
90 ◦ plastic barbs, threaded (1/4”) 8
Plastic barbs, threaded (1/4”) 8
Brass barbs, threaded (1/4”) 4
Brass barbs, threaded (3/8”) 3
Plastic barb-to-barb (1/4”) 8
Birch for faceplates 2
Basswood for siren boxes 1
Blowguns 2
Ball valves 9
Acrylic for disks 3
Plumber’s tape 1
3-way splitter 1
Power jacks 3
Arduino Nanos 3
Power supply 1
Switches 3
MOSFETs 6
Resistors 3
Motors (MD5-2445, 2.1A) 3
Potentiometers (faders) 3
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
392
2.2 Air compressor
The air compressor is a Porter Cable 150psi 6 gallon model.
We regulated it down to about 30psi to work with the valves
and tubing. In early prototypes, the disks were press-ﬁt
onto the motor shafts, but the disks would move up the shaft
of the motor after continuous exposure to the pressurized
air. Thus, we threaded both the shaft and the disk for a
more secure ﬁt.
We used a three-way brass splitter to supply air to our
three organs with just one compressor. The stream is con-
trolled by a “master” ball valve on the left side of each con-
troller. Therefore, the air pressure can be limited diﬀerently
for each controller. We had fun reaching over and turning
each other up and (more often) down during performance.
2.3 Controller
Controller 1 (Fig. 4) was fashioned out of wood, plastic tub-
ing, barbs, and 5 ball valves, plus the electronics. Controller
2 (Fig. 5) is similar to Controller 1, substituting 2 blowgun
valves for 2 ball valves. The third controller (Fig. 6) is
a custom set of lathe-turned buttons and a manifold of
airways machined on a mill, all designed in SolidWorks.
Each controller has a birch faceplate featuring holes and
etchings made by a laser cutter.
Figure 4: Controller 1 with faceplate.
Figure 5: The exposed interior of Controller 2,
housing two blow guns and two ball valves.
The inside of Controllers 1 & 2 supports the heavy blow
guns and ball valves, and leaves space for the network of
(unforgiving) plastic tubing. Barbs were fully inserted into
the tubing to stand up to the strong air pressure.
Four holes and a power jack adorn the front of each
controller, providing the output air ﬂow and connection
to the power supply. The power switch is in the top left
corner of the faceplate. On the left, an Arduino Nano is
glued to the interior of the controller. This connects the
potentiometer to the voltage supplied to the rotating motor.
Figure 6: SolidWorks diagram of Controller 3.
2.4 Siren disk and motor
The controllers are each connected by more plastic tubing
to a dedicated, acrylic siren disk (Fig. 7). The siren disk
is mounted to a triangular stand that houses the rotating
motor and also serves to route the plastic tubing. The back
of the stand has holders for the four air streams, directed
to four rings of holes in a column conﬁguration. The disks
are 6” in diameter.
Figure 7: The siren disk is comprised of four
concentric rings. Each ring has a series of evenly-
spaced holes that create a fundamental frequency.
The inside of the siren disk stand (Fig. 8) routes four
plastic tubes to each of the four rings. A threaded hole in
the middle of the disk secures it to the shaft of the motor,
also inside the stand.
Figure 8: The inside and back of the siren disk
stand.
The integer ratios between the number of holes in each
ring create natural harmonic relationships: rings with twice
as many holes as other rings have an octave relationship, a
3:2 ratio creates a perfect ﬁfth, and so on.2 By varying the
2The exact ratios used were 10:12:15:18 (Disk 1, a minor 7th
chord), 6:9:14:16 (Disk 2, a P5, m3, and P4), and 8:10:12:16
(Disk 3, a major chord). Disk 2 had holes of modulating
radii (e.g., small-med-large-med-small and so on).
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
393
size of the evenly-spaced holes, we can create harmonics [4]:
the inner ring, for example, has 6 holes, three with a smaller
radius than the others. By alternating between these two
holes, we can create an octave below the fundamental.
Our motors are rated to spin at up to 19850rpm (≃331Hz).
The weight of the disk lowers this to about 200Hz (see
seconds 10-17 in Fig. 9). The rotating motor produced
signiﬁcant sound, but we found that the cylinder could be
pinched on either side to greatly reduce the sound. Its 2.1A
maximum current rating informed our choice of a 12VDC
12.5A switching power supply. To control its speed, we used
an Arduino to output a pulse-width modulated (PWM)
signal ampliﬁed by a MOSFET. In early prototyping phases,
we blew at least one motor due to heat. Therefore, we added
a heat sink to these MOSFETs. We also upgraded to higher
quality wiring from our power supply, as occasionally the
thinner wires would melt after extended use. Doing this let
us play the siren organ for 2 hours continuously without any
of the electronics getting too hot.
The ability to change the motor speed provided not only
“sirenness” but also transposition to other keys. Hence, we
did not worry about the intonation of our siren disks.
3. PERFORMANCE & EV ALUATION
In our limited time performing with the siren organ, we dis-
covered many diﬀerent modes of producing sound. Begin-
ners of the instrument will tend to play with sharp attack,
but a bit of practice enables quite legato tones. When the
motors are spinning at full speed, it is harder to play softly.
Opening more than one valve redirects some of the air ﬂow
into other open valves, probably due to their proximity
and the strength of the air ﬂow. Thus, the siren organ is
clearest in pitch when only one voice is sounding. Because
the airﬂow is shared by three performers, the pressure di-
vides during polyphony; however, the amount of airﬂow one
controller gets is limited by its master valve.
We placed the air compressor outside of the performance
space because it is very noisy during reﬁll. We began the
performance with the tank full, and it did not need reﬁlling
for our 5-minute performance.
We experimented with the sounds of the components in
isolation—i.e., just the sound of the spinning motor-siren
disk pairs with no applied air ﬂow, or the sound of pressur-
ized air against a static disk. The humming motors and hiss-
ing valves provided contrasting sections in our performance
that showed the siren organ could perform unaccompanied.
Figure 9: Spectrogram of three distinct sections
of our performance: the air against the stationary
disks (0-10s), the motors starting up (10-17s), and
the crescendo with both the air blowing into the
spinning disks (17s onwards). The recorder was
about 30 feet from the instrument.
The dynamic range of the siren organ has not been care-
fully measured, but from a recording with an audience of
about 50 people, the diﬀerence between lightly and fully
pressing the valves is about 30dB (compare seconds 4-5 to
seconds 40-41 in Fig. 9). In an empty room, the volume can
reach a level of discomfort, especially when standing in the
direction of airﬂow. The range of both air raid sirens and
ambulance sirens are much smaller (∼3dB), because they
are not meant to be played at low sound pressure levels.
The motor spins the disk up to about 200rpm, and the
weight of the disk, tightness of ﬁt to the motor, and power
rating of the motor all dictate how quickly the motor re-
sponds to the fader. We saw a latency of about 10 seconds
when moving the fader large distances, and the frequency of
the fundamental changes linearly, having a logarithmic af-
fect on pitch. The fundamental frequencies of our disks with
the motor at maximum speed ranged from 1200-3600Hz,
and the glissando can sweep over more than 8 octaves. The
second, third, ﬁfth, and sixth partials all overpower the fun-
damental when high pressure is applied, “overblowing” the
siren organ (see seconds 20-30 in Figure 9). The harmonic
characteristics of overblowing are also present in classical
sirens.
4. FUTURE WORK & CONCLUSION
We have many ideas for how the siren organ could be im-
proved. The tubes could be able to be quickly plugged
in and out; as is, only the “master valve” can be easily
detached, by unscrewing it. More mobile tubes could enable
many siren disks at once and give the siren organ a “patch
cord” kind of character, like a modular synthesizer.
An enclosure for the disks would change the acoustics of
the instrument and potentially would require a stator. We
vetoed making an enclosure because we were worried that
it would make our organ even louder. On that note, a siren
organ that does not require a noisy air compressor (at least
during performance) is another area of improvement.
In conclusion, we believe that our reinterpretation is jus-
tiﬁed for manifesting the siren as a musical instrument.
Our siren organ is more automated, has more control over
dynamic range, and oﬀers diﬀerent modes of sound produc-
tion.
5. REFERENCES
[1] R. Bakker. Helmholtz double-siren.
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xaBoC7tbAE0, July
2008.
[2] R. Bakker. Loman siiren organ.
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gSn4EUNXz4M, July
2008.
[3] M. Corbell-Perron. Vertiges (excerpt).
https://vimeo.com/61600835, March 2013.
[4] B. Hopkin. Sirens, part one. Experimental Musical
Instruments, 12(4):13–18, June 1997.
[5] B. Hopkin. Sirens part two. Experimental Musical
Instruments, 13(1):19–22, September 1997.
[6] B. Meyer. Jean-Fran¸ cois Laporte.
http://www.chicagoreader.com/chicago/
jean-francois-laporte/Content?oid=915538, May
2004.
[7] J. R. Pierce. The science of musical sound . W. H.
Freeman and Company, 1992.
[8] E. Var´ ese.Ionisation (1924) for percussion ensemble of
13 players. 1989.
[9] E. Var´ ese.Am´ eriques (1922)for orchestra. Ed. Chou
Wen-Chung. 2001.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
394