Effective and expressive movements in a
French-Canadian ﬁddler’s performance
Erwin Schoonderwaldt
Inst. of Music Physiology and Musicians’
Medicine
Univ. of Music, Drama and Media Hanover
Emmichplatz 1
D-30175 Hannover, Germany
erwin.schoonderwaldt@hmtm-hannover.de
Alexander Refsum Jensenius
fourMs, Dept. of Musicology
University of Oslo
P .O. Box 1017 Blindern
NO-0315 Oslo, Norway
a.r.jensenius@imv.uio.no
ABSTRACT
We report on a performance study of a French-Canadian ﬁd-
dler. The ﬁddling tradition forms an interesting contrast to
classical violin performance in several ways. Distinguishing
features include special elements in the bowing technique
and the presence of an accompanying foot clogging pattern.
These two characteristics are described, visualized and an-
alyzed using video and motion capture recordings as source
material.
Keywords
ﬁddler, violin, French-Canadian, bowing, feet, clogging, mo-
tion capture, video, motiongram, kinematics, soniﬁcation
1. INTRODUCTION
Recent developments of motion capture technologies have
spurred the interest in movement analysis of music perfor-
mances. Measurement of instrumentalists’ movements have
been used for the study of eﬀective movements related to
the production of sound [2, 3, 5], as well as the study of
ancillary movements related to expression [2, 12]. Motion
capture measurements have proven particularly useful for
the study of bowed-string instrument performance, as the
sound in these instruments is entirely produced by means
of overt movements [1, 4, 7, 10, 14].
The violin is known as a highly versatile instrument be-
ing played in a wide range of musical styles and traditions.
Yet, there is a strong bias of performance research focusing
on classically trained, expert performers. Despite the large
variety of individual strategies among classical performers,
this might constrain our scope on the wide range of possibil-
ities oﬀered by the instrument in terms of playing technique
and expressivity.
In this paper we present a case study of a ﬁddler’s perfor-
mance, stemming from the French-Canadian tradition. The
ﬁddling tradition largely contrasts the classical: a) Perfor-
mances mostly take place in informal settings, for example
a jam session in a pub. b) The playing technique is typically
less “polished,” as the sound should be audible under varied
acoustic conditions, including noisy environments, outside,
etc. c) The repertoire mainly consists of traditional tunes
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’11,30 May–1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
learned by ear. d) The performances have an improvised
character and are often combined with dance. e) Fiddlers
often accompany their playing with clogging patterns pro-
duced with their feet, in the French-Canadian tradition typ-
ically a heel-heel-toe-toe pattern in sixteenth notes.
The aim of this paper is twofold. First, we want to il-
lustrate the violin’s versatility as a musical instrument by
focusing on a non-classical violin performance. Second, we
want to provide a showcase for alternative analysis meth-
ods and representations of movement data. We will present
motion-based analyses of a variety of aspects of the per-
formance, illuminating particular bowing techniques and
clogging patterns. Motiongrams extracted from the video
will be used to illustrate global features of the performance,
while analysis of motion capture data will provide insights
at a higher level of detail.
2. RECORDINGS
Performances of an expert ﬁddler of the French-Canadian
tradition were recorded.1 The ﬁddler is an experienced per-
former, playing and recording on a regular basis, and he is
also active as a teacher. For the analyses in this paper a
complete performance was selected of the reel Le bedeau de
l’enfer (transl. The deacon from hell). The reel consists of
two parts (A and B), and was performed with the following
repetition scheme in the recording: A-A-B-B-A-A-B-B. The
average tempo of the performance was∼103 BPM.
Motion capture recordings were made at IDMIL/McGill
using a Vicon 460 system with six cameras placed around
the performer. Video and audio were recorded in synchrony
with the motion capture data. Full body measurements
were made using the Plugin-gait marker placement (39 mark-
ers). The position and orientation of the violin and the bow
were tracked by ﬁve markers on each object. Additional
sensors were placed on the bow for measuring bow force
and acceleration [4]. This setup allowed for an accurate cal-
culation of all relevant bowing parameters, including bow
velocity, bow-bridge distance and bow force, as well as the
angles of the bow relative to the violin [11].
3. GLOBAL FEATURES
As a ﬁrst step in the analysis, global features were studied
using the video recording as source material.
3.1 Video analysis
Motiongrams created from the video recordings of the ﬁddle
performance are shown in Fig. 1. The motiongram tech-
nique is based on calculating the normalized mean value of
1See recordings of Fiddler performances at
http://www.youtube.com/schoondw
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
256
each column or row in amotion image(frame-diﬀerence im-
age) [6]. As opposed to traditional keyframe displays, where
individual video frames are plotted next to each other, mo-
tiongrams can show the temporal and spatial unfolding of
movement over time.
The horizontal motiongram in Fig. 1, which shows in-
formation about movement in the vertical plane, provides
the clearest information of the rhythmical body movements
during the performance. The upper part mainly shows the
movement of the bowing arm, whereas the lower part rep-
resents the clogging pattern produced by the legs. Inter-
estingly, a clear transition in the clogging pattern can be
distinguished halfway through the performance, which co-
incides with the reprise of part A of the reel. The transition
marks an increased intensity of the performance.
Motion average image Horizontal motiongram
Vertical motiongram Audio similarity matrix01:15s
01:15s
Time
Time
Figure 1: Motion average image, horizontal and
vertical motiongrams of the video recording, and
a similarity matrix of the spectrogram of the audio
recording.
The motion average imagein Fig. 1 is based on calculat-
ing the mean matrix of all motion image frames. The result
is a “blurred” image displaying the spatial distribution of
motion for the whole recording. Here we can see the move-
ment of the bowing arm and the pronounced movement of
the legs corresponding to the clogging. Furthermore, it can
be seen that the range of motion in the right leg was larger
than that in the left leg.
As a reference to sound, we have also included a similarity
matrix of the sound recording in Fig. 1. Since time runs in
two dimensions in a similarity matrix, it can be used to com-
pare sonic features to motion features in both motiongram
directions. Notice how the repetition structure of the per-
formance (A-A-B-B-A-A-B-B) can be clearly distinguished
in the similarity matrix.
3.2 Soniﬁcation of motiongrams
Since motiongrams share many visual properties with spec-
trograms, they can be used as the basis for an ‘inverse spec-
trogram’ approach, as suggested in [13]. This way we can
create a direct mapping from motiongram to spectrogram.
An implementation of such an inverse spectrogram tech-
nique for soniﬁcation of motiongrams is based on reading
each row in the motiongram matrix and mapping them di-
rectly to an interpolated oscillator bank, which does the
additive synthesis. The ﬁnal result is a direct soniﬁcation
of the motion, where low frequencies are controlled by move-
ments in the lower part of the image and higher frequencies
by movements in the upper part.
An example of a soniﬁcation based on the video record-
ing of the ﬁddler shows how present both the bowing and
clogging patterns are in the soniﬁcation.2
4. MOTION CAPTURE ANALYSIS
A selection of particular features of the performance were
analyzed in more detail using the 3D motion capture data.
4.1 Bowing
The extracted bowing parameters allowed for some general
observations regarding the use of the bow. The piece mainly
consists of 16th notes, which were played d´ etach´ e or in short
two- or three-note slurs. The range of bowing parameters
was mainly in a “comfortable zone;” the middle of the bow
was used, the bow velocity was∼1 m/s, and the bow-bridge
distance was ∼4 cm. A rather large range of bow force was
used, with pronounced peaks revealing a strong accentua-
tion pattern.
A peculiar feature of the bowing was that the performer
used a pronounced backward tilt (i.e. rotation around the
length axis) of the bow. Interestingly, a backward tilt of the
bow is uncommon and even discouraged in classical playing,
as it creates a rough sound. An acoustical explanation for
this is related to partial slips, causing spikes in the bridge
force signal making up the sound [8, 9]. The consistent use
of backward tilt suggests that this roughness might be a
desirable aspect of the sound quality in ﬁddling.
Another interesting element present in the performance
was the use of the shake, a type of bowing ornament com-
monly used in French-Canadian ﬁddling as well as other ﬁd-
dling styles. The shake could be characterized as “a rapid
and indistinct bowed triplet, more of a scratch than a series
of notes.”3
−2000
0
2000
Bow vel. [mm/s]
−0.5 0 0.5 10
2
4
Time [s]
Bow force [N]
Figure 2: (a, b) Overlapping bow velocity and bow
force proﬁles of 16 occurrences of the main motif,
consisting of a shake (at t=0) followed by four 16th
notes. The solid vertical lines indicate half beat
durations (8th note level). The dashed vertical lines
show the subdivision of the shake.
Fig. 2 shows overlapping bow velocity and bow force pro-
ﬁles of 16 selected occurrences of the main motif of the piece
consisting of a shake followed by four 16th notes. The tim-
ing proﬁles extracted from the bow reversals (zero crossings
in bow velocity signal) are shown in Fig. 3. The proﬁles
2Video at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pV8JglqB94k
3Deﬁnition found on an internet discussion forum.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
257
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Note #
Rel. IOI (beat fraction)
Figure 3: Timing proﬁles of the main motif shown
in Fig. 2. The dashed lines indicate the nominal val-
ues of 8th notes, triplets, and 16th notes. Nominal
durations of the notes (according to a transcription)
are indicated by black dots.
reveal a high degree of consistency, both with regard to the
use of the bowing parameters, as well as the rhythmic per-
formance. The shake was played as two rapid notes (32nd)
followed by an 8th note. The two ﬁrst notes were played
with a high bow force (2–4 N), showing a pronounced dou-
ble peak; in combination with the small bow displacement
this resulted, indeed, in a scratchy sound with a more or
less percussive character.
Figs. 2 and 3 also give insight in the accentuation pattern
of the 16th notes. The ﬁrst and the third notes (played up
bow) were accented; the strongest accent fell on the third
note, resulting in a syncope-like eﬀect. The accentuation
was achieved by a combination of (1) bow force, showing
strong peaks at the attack of the ﬁrst and third notes; (2)
asymmetry in the bow velocity pattern, showing a shorter
attack time (steeper slope) at the beginning of the ﬁrst and
the third notes; and (3) prolongation of the ﬁrst and the
third note at the cost of notes two and four; the third note
was consistently played the longest, whereas the fourth note
was consistently played the shortest.
4.2 Clogging
The perhaps most special feature of the ﬁddling perfor-
mance presented here is the clogging with the feet, used
as a rhythmic accompaniment of the playing. As already
suggested by the horizontal motiongram in Fig. 1, there
was a transition in the clogging pattern in the middle of
the performance. The motion capture data reveals that in
the ﬁrst part the beats were divided in a long-short-short
rhythm, with tapping pattern: right heel / right toe / left
foot. In the second part the beats were subdivided in four
16th notes with tapping pattern: right heel / left heel / right
toe / left toe.
The patterns, as well as the transition between them,
are illustrated in Fig. 4 by the vertical movement of the
knees. The right leg shows the largest movement amplitude,
conﬁrming the initial observation from the motion average
image in Fig. 1. An explanation for this is that the player
stressed the strong metrical events (ﬁrst and third within
a group of 16th notes), which coincide with the tapping
of the right leg. In the ﬁrst part, the left foot taps on
every fourth within a group of 16th notes. In the second
part the movement pattern of the left leg is similar to that
of the right leg, but shifted in phase by one 16th note so
that the taps are alternating. The transition seems to occur
suddenly from one stable coordination pattern into another,
8800 9000 9200 9400 9600 9800
460
480
500
520
540
560
Time [samples]
Knee height [mm]
Figure 4: Height of right knee (grey) and left knee
(dashed) versus time. The selected intervals show
the diﬀerent clogging patterns present in the per-
formance, as well as the transition between them.
which indicates a highly eﬃcient motor control.
The kinematic proﬁle of the right leg (knee, heel, toe;
seen from the side) is shown in Fig. 5. The position of
the leg is marked in bold at instances of tapping with heel
and toe. The motion consists of a combined up-down and
forward-backward movement of the lower leg: the leg moves
forward before tapping with the heel, and backward before
tapping with the toe. An interesting detail here is that in
preparation for the heel tap the leg is pushed up by ﬂexion
of the foot after the toe tap, minimizing the eﬀort of lifting
the leg.
Heel Toe
Clogging period (0.58 s)
Figure 5: Kinematic representation of the clogging
pattern of the lower right leg. The sticks show the
connections between knee, heel and toe markers.
Movement trajectories are shown for the heel and
the toe. The tapping events of the heel and the toe
are marked by arrows. The time interval between
the shown frames is 20 ms between frames; a trans-
lation to the left with increasing time is applied for
a clear presentation of how the movement unfolds.
The moments of impact of the feet were extracted from
the vertical displacement of the heel and the toe markers of
the right and the left foot, using a peak picking algorithm
(with knowledge of the periodicity of the signals). This al-
lowed for extracting timing characteristics of the clogging
patterns, shown in Fig. 6. The clogging pattern in the ﬁrst
part shows a clear long-short-short pattern, consisting of an
8th note interval followed by two 16th note intervals. The
ﬁrst of the two short intervals was consistently prolonged at
the cost of the second one. The clogging pattern in the sec-
ond part showed rather regular 16th note intervals. The ﬁrst
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
258
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
right_heel right_toe left_foot
Rel. IOI (beat fraction)
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
right_heel left_heel right_toe left_toe
Rel. IOI (beat fraction)
Figure 6: Timing proﬁles (normalized IOI) of the
two clogging patterns. The dashed lines indicate
nominal values of 8th notes (0.5) and 16th notes
(0.25).
and the third intervals were slightly prolonged, consistent
with the timing proﬁle of the bowing in Fig. 3. However, in
the clogging the ﬁrst interval was longest, and not the third
as in the bowing.
5. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
In this study video recordings and 3D motion capture data
have been used to reveal diﬀerent aspects of a ﬁddler’s per-
formance. Motiongrams and a motion average image, in
combination with a sound similarity matrix, were used to
distinguish global patterns in the performance. They re-
vealed the spatial distribution of motion in the performance,
as well as a transition in the clogging pattern halfway through
the performance. Analysis of the motion capture data pro-
vided detailed information of special performance features,
including the shake, and kinematic features of the clogging
and timing proﬁles.
Analysis of the bowing provided some indications of dif-
ferences between ﬁddling and classical performance, which
might be traced back to a diﬀerent sound ideal. Three dis-
tinct features regarding the use of the bow we described
are: (1) the backward tilting of the bow, (2) the accen-
tuated use of bow force in d´ etach´ e bowing, and (3) the
“shake,” a special ornamentation technique. These features
contribute to a highly articulated sound containing scratchy
elements, whereas classical performers generally strive for
a more homogeneous and “polished” sound quality. Even
though the data of only one player have been shown, such
features can be commonly observed in other ﬁddlers’ per-
formances within the same and other traditions (e.g. Celtic,
Scandinavian).
Besides the sound-producing eﬀects, the performer’s move-
ments may also be interpreted at an expressive level, pro-
viding the performance its special character and style. The
bow velocity and bow force proﬁles provide insight in the
expressive shaping of the performance by means of accentu-
ation and expressive timing. The combination of clogging
and bowing also provides a nice illustration of a complex
coordinated motion involving all four limbs.
While the violin is not a new instrument for musical ex-
pression, its use in ﬁddling and in combination with other
musical elements (e.g. clogging) provides for a diﬀerent mu-
sical experience. We hope that alternative performance
studies of other (traditional) instruments may open for a
broader understanding of musical instruments and their use
in performance.
Acknowledgments
Thanks to Pascal Gemme for the ﬁddling, and Marcelo
Wanderley for making the recordings possible. The study
was partly ﬁnanced by NSERC-SRO. Currently, the ﬁrst
author receives an Alexander von Humboldt postdoctoral
fellowship, and the second author is supported by a grant
from the Norwegian Research Council.
6. REFERENCES
[1] A. P. Baader, O. Kazennikov, and M. Wiesendanger.
Coordination of bowing and ﬁngering in violin playing.
Cognitive Brain Research, 23(2-3):436–443, 2005.
[2] S. Dahl. On the beat: Human movement and timing in the
production and perception of music. PhD thesis, KTH –
School of Computer Science and Communication,
Stockholm, Sweden, 2005.
[3] S. Dahl and E. Altenm ¨uller. Motor control in drumming:
Inﬂuence of movement pattern on contact force and sound
characteristics. In Proceedings of Acoustics ’08, Paris,
France, 2008.
[4] M. Demoucron. On the control of virtual violins: Physical
modelling and control of bowed string instruments. PhD
thesis, Universit´ e Pierre et Marie Curie (UPMC), Paris &
Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Stockholm, 2008.
[5] W. Goebl and C. Palmer. Anticipatory motion in piano
performance. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 120(5):3004–3004, 2006.
[6] A. R. Jensenius. Using motiongrams in the study of
musical gestures. In Proceedings of the 2006 International
Computer Music Conference, pages 499–502, New Orleans,
LA, 2006.
[7] E. Maestre. Modeling Instrumental Gestures: An
Analysis/Synthesis Framework for Violin Bowing. PhD
thesis, University Pompeu Fabre, Barcelona, Spain, 2009.
[8] M. E. McIntyre, R. T. Schumacher, and J. Woodhouse.
Aperiodicity in bowed-string motion. Acustica, 49:13–32,
1981.
[9] M. E. McIntyre, R. T. Schumacher, and J. Woodhouse.
Aperiodicity in bowed-string motion: on the
diﬀerential-slipping mechanism.Acustica, 50:294–295,
1982.
[10] E. Schoonderwaldt. Mechanics and acoustics of violin
bowing: Freedom, constraints and control in performance.
PhD thesis, KTH – School of Computer Science and
Communication, Stockholm, Sweden, 2009.
[11] E. Schoonderwaldt and M. Demoucron. Extraction of
bowing parameters from violin performance combining
motion capture and sensors.J. Acoust. Soc. Am.,
126(5):2695–2708, 2009.
[12] M. M. Wanderley, B. W. Vines, N. Middleton, C. McKay,
and W. Hatch. The musical signiﬁcance of clarinetists’
ancillary gestures: An exploration of the ﬁeld.Journal of
New Music Research, 34(1):97–113, 2005.
[13] W. S. Yeo and J. Berger. Application of image soniﬁcation
methods to music. In Proceedings of the International
Computer Music Conference, Barcelona, 2005.
[14] D. Young. A methodology for investigation of bowed string
performance through measurement of violin bowing
technique. PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, 2007.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May - 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
259