Considering Virtual & Physical Aspects 
in Acoustic Guitar Design
Amit Zoran
MIT Media Laboratory
20 Ames Street
Cambridge, MA 02139
amitz@mit.edu
Pattie Maes
MIT Media Laboratory
20 Ames Street
Cambridge, MA 02139
pattie@media.mit.edu
ABSTRACT
This paper presents a new approach for designing acoustic guitars, 
making use of the virtual envir onment. The physical connection 
between users and their instruments is preserved, while offering 
innovative sound design. This paper will discuss two projects,
reAcoustic eGuitar, the concept of a digitally fabricated 
instrument to design acoustic sounds, and A Physical Resonator
For a Virtual Guitar, a vision in which the guitar can also 
preserve the unique tune of an instrument made from wood.
Keywords
Virtual, acoustic, uniqueness of tune, expressivity, sound 
processing, rapid prototype, 3D printing, resonator.
1. BACKGROUND
Each acoustic instrument made of  wood is unique. Each piece of 
wood is different, leading to uniqueness of tune of the acoustic 
sound that is created. Both uniqueness and expressivity are the 
most important characteristics of the acoustic instrument. Digital 
instruments lack the uniqueness but usually allow more sound 
flexibility [1], by offering digital sound processing or synthesis 
[2]. 
Digital keyboard instruments have been significantly more 
successful than bowed or plucked instruments, which suffered 
from lack of expressivity and uniqueness of tune. On the one 
hand, the digital instrument can add new interfaces, controllers 
and sound abilities to the musical experience. On the other hand, 
there is a significant cost for modeling the captured information 
into a pre-defined digital structure. Besides the processing 
problem, it usually leads to decreasing or canceling the 
uniqueness of tune and expressivity of the instrument. 
The main approach to deal with the expressivity problem lies in 
the field of sound processing, inst ead of synthesis. One option to 
this approach is to capture expressive signal and modify some 
parameters while preserving the expressive behavior [3].
We come to suggest a different approach. We believe that 
significant work can be done by combining benefits from both of 
the worlds (digital and physical) – preserving the values of 
acoustic instruments while applying digital control to their 
structures. 
1.1. Acoustic, Electric and Virtual Guitar
The design of a guitar is influenced by its cultural context. For 
thousands of years lutes and afterwards guitars evolved: starting 
with ancient instruments that were made out of natural chambers 
(turtle shells, gourds), through fine handmade wooden chambers 
[4] to electrically amplified guitars. Carfoot [ 7 ]  p r e s e n t s  a n d  
analyzes the huge changes in guitar in the 20th century; electric 
guitars, which use electricity in order to amplify instead of 
chambers, evolved at mid century and were a part of the musical 
revolution of Rock & Roll and its distortion sound.  
The guitar has been influenced by electrical technologies. It is to 
be expected that digital technol ogies will now take a significant 
part in the guitar evolution. While sound design has been 
conventionally done using digital software, expressive digital 
instruments are starting to appear as well. The Line 6 Variax  [5] 
guitar gives a variety of preset sounds, from classic acoustic and 
electric tones to sitar and banjo. It allows the player to plug into a 
computer and customize a chosen tone. Expressive playing and 
sound flexibility is enhanced with  t h e  d i g i t a l  g u i t a r .  A n o t h e r  
example is Fender’s VG Stratocaster [6], a hybrid electric and 
digital guitar.
Carfoot uses the term virtual instead of digital. If digital defines
the type of process being done, virtual refers better to an 
experience’s context. Like virtual reality,  t h e  v i r t u a l  s o u n d  
created in digital environment imitates real life experience. This 
experience feels like a natural experience to our senses, but it was 
created with a computer model of  t h a t  r e a l  l i f e  e x p e r i e n c e .  I n  
sections 2 and 3 we present our approach using the virtual sound 
experience in order to create a new physical guitar (a conceptual 
work). In section 4 we present a different vision in which the
guitar can also preserve unique tune of a material (a work in 
progress).
2. COMBINING VIRTUAL AND 
PHYSICAL IN GUITAR DESIGN
3D design, sound design and digital music software are becoming 
common and easier to use. Their combination is leading to the 
possibility of designing, simulating and printing objects according 
to pre-required acoustic behavior. 
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
67
Gershenfeld [ 8 ]  p r e s e n t s  a  f u t u r e  r e a l m  i n  w h i c h  p e r s o n a l  3 D  
printers become as common as color printers. RedEye RPM  [9] is 
a rapid prototyping company that creates guitars using digital 
manufacturing technology. Synthetic  m a t e r i a l s ,  s u c h  a s  c a r b o n -
fiber epoxy composites, could be used instead of wood in guitar 
soundboards [10]. Blackbird Guitars  created the Blackbird Rider 
Acoustic [11], a commercial guitar digitally designed and made 
from composite materials. This kind of new material enables a 
significant decrease of the chamber’s size while preserving the 
instrument loudness.
3. reACOUSTIC eGUITAR
Three perspectives are fundamental to the sound experience
created by a musical instrument: the listener, the performer and 
the instrument constructor [12].
The vision of reAcoustic eGuitar  i n v i t e s  p l a y e r s  t o  b e c o m e  
creators of their acoustic instruments and their sounds with 
endless possibilities for the sounds to be re-shaped. Players will 
customize their own sounds by assembling different small
chambers instead of using a single large one. Each string has its 
own bridge; each bridge is connected to a different chamber. 
Changing the chamber size, material or shape will change the 
guitar’s sound.
Designing sounds digitally allows the player to share the 
experience of the constructor. This might lead in a change of 
relationship between players and their instruments. Today rapid 
prototype materials have a broad range of qualities. Players can 
now take part in designing their own acoustic sounds, by
modifying the physical structure of  t h e i r  i n s t r u m e n t s ,  r e v e a l i n g  
the characteristics of new materials (see Figure 1).
We created a simple chamber in rapid prototype process. This 
chamber adds a significant amplification to a single string (see 
Figure 2) 1,e v e n  w i t h o u t  o p t i m i z i n g  a c o u s t i c a l  p a r a m e t e r s  a s  
membrane thickness and sound box size.
In the reAcoustic eGuitar vision digital technology will be used to 
design the acoustic guitar structure (see Figure 3 for a design 
suggestion). It presents a novel sound design experience between 
users, their objects and the digital environment. 
Re-designing the guitar according to the characteristics of rapid 
prototyping materials could lead to sound innovations. Open 
source and shared files environments could create a reality in 
which a player downloads or designs his own sound cells, and
plugs them to his instrument (see Figure 4). 
Starting from virtual sound, getting the desired virtual shape and 
then printing it, the reAcoustic eGuitar  o f f e r s  a n e w  u s e r  
experience for the guitar player.
The main disadvantage of the reAcoustic eGuitar  concept lies in 
the rapid prototype process itself. The process is expensive and 
doesn’t preserve uniqueness of t une as wood does.  Perhaps in a 
few years, 3D printers will become less expensive and more 
accessible so this idea can be reconsidered. 
1 3D printed chamber from 3D Systems InVision HR 3-D  i s  
presented in ambient.media.m it.edu/projects.php, January 27, 
2008.
Figure 1: Constructing principl es: Searching, downloading, 
modifying, printing and assembling the chambers.
Figure 2: The 3D printed chamb er connected to single string 
on a wood structure vs. string on a wood structure without a 
chamber.
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
68
4. A PHYSICAL RESONATOR FOR A 
VIRTUAL GUITAR 
The former project led to a new vision , A Physical Resonator For 
A Virtual Guitar. It is a concept of combining the values of the 
virtual guitar with the uniqueness of the wooden acoustic guitar’s
tune. By doing so we can achieve expressive playability in a 
unique tool that also enables the player to design the required 
sound with the computer.
The uniqueness of a musical instrument influences more than just 
its sound. By differing itself from other instruments, it assumes an 
individual economic value and stabilizes a unique relationship 
with its owner. The structure of the wood is the main reason for
the acoustic instrument’s unique behavior. The grain of the 
soundboard [13], the wood’s humidity, the exact thickness and 
more influence how it transfers different frequencies. Luthiers   
[14,15] used their experience in order to tune the instrument by 
making modification to the wood until it gave the required results.   
A Physical Resonator For A Virtual Guitar  f o c u s e s  o n  t h e  
influences of the chamber on the sound of the acoustic guitar. The 
chamber’s main parameters are the shape and material [14,15]. 
The structure and shape can be virtually designed on a computer 
and be used as a virtual chamber. The material will not be 
synthesized or modulated. In this way we will get a hybrid 
chamber – part of it is physical (the guitar’s resonator) and part of 
it is virtual (see Figure 5).
A replaceable slice of the material (the guitar resonator) will be 
connected to the guitar bridge using mechanism that enables easy 
replacement. Piezo sensors will capture the frequencies being 
developed on the guitar’s resonator. The signal will be transferred 
to a digital signal-processing unit (DSP). The DSP will modify the 
sound by simulating different chambers shapes and sizes, 
thickness and surface smoothness.   
By combining the virtual with the physical, we believe we can
preserve both worlds’ values. More than that, the new approach of 
the physical resonator can play an important role in continuing the 
traditional relationship between players and their unique 
instruments. The digital part can be replaced and updated; the
resonators can be collected and saved. A player could take one 
guitar body with many resonators , instead of a lot of guitars. 
The use of a physical resonator is not limited to wood. The 
resonator can also be created in a rapid prototype process; similar 
to the concept presented in section 3.
Figure 3: reAcoustic eGuitar, a design suggestion.
Figure 4: Examples of different chambers. 
Figure 5: Physical resonator in virtual shape. 
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
69
5. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We believe that the future of the guitar lies in the connection 
between digital sound design and acoustic experience. Digital 
processing can create new options for sound design, where the 
acoustic part of the instrument will give the expressivity and 
uniqueness of tune. The reAcoustic eGuitar  c o n c e p t  i s  b a s e d  o n  
rapid prototype techniques and 3D printers. This process is 
expensive and not accessible to the majority of guitar players. 
There is not enough knowledge and experience of using rapid 
prototype for creating acoustic instruments. However, we believe 
that this may be more feasible in the future. 
The A Physical Resonator For A Virtual Guitar is a work in 
progress. We believe that by creati ng a chamber that is part virtual 
and part physical, we will preserve expressivity and uniqueness of 
tune in digital sound design innovations. We intend to develop a 
working model for A Physical Resonator For A Virtual Guitar. 
This process will be divided into different parts - from mechanical 
solution for the replaceable resonator through development of 
piezo sensors system that will be able to capture the resonator 
vibration in different locations. We also intend to develop a DSP 
unit that will implement the digital modeling of the structure.   
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Authors want to thank MIT Medi a Laboratory, Marco Coppiardi, 
Cati Vaucelle, Nan-Wei Gong and Tamar Rucham or their help 
and support.
7. REFERENCES
[1] Magnusson T., Mendieta E. H. The Acoustic, The Digital 
and he Body: A Survey on Musical Instrument. NIME 07,
June 6-10, 2007. New York, New York, USA.
[2] Poepel C., Overholt D. Recen t Developments in Violin-
related Digital Musical Instruments: Where Are We and 
Where are We Going? NIME 06, June 4-8, 2006. Paris, 
France.
[3] Merrill D., Raffle H. The Sound of Touch .C H I  2 0 0 7, April 
28 – May 3, 2007, San Jose, California, USA.
[4] Jahnel F. (1962 ). Manual of Guitar technology: The History 
and Technology of Plucked String Instruments. English 
Version of Die Gitarre und ihr Bau  by Havrey J. C., (1981). 
The Bold Strummer Ltd , First English Edition, 1981.
[5] Line 6, Variax®.  Product website line6.com/variax. Last 
accessed: January 27, 2008.
[6] Fender, VG Stratocaster®.  Product website 
www.fender.com/vgstrat/home.ht ml. Last accessed: January 
30, 2008.
[7] Carfoot G. Acoustic, Electric and Virtual Noise: The Cultural 
Identity of the Guitar. Leonardo music journal , Vol. 16, pp. 
35-39, 2006. 
[8] Gershenfeld N. FAB: The Coming Revolution on Your 
Desktop - From Personal Computers to Personal Fabrication,
pp. 3-27. Basic Books, April 12, 2005.
[9] RedEye RPM. Guitar with digital manufacturing technology. 
Company website www.redeyerpm.com. . Last accessed: 
January 27, 2008.
[10] Jonathan H. Carbon Fiber vs. Wood as an Acoustic Guitar 
Soundboard. PHYS 207 term paper.
[11] Blackbird Guitars. Blackbird Rider Acoustic . Company 
website www.blackbirdguitar.com . Last accessed: January 
27, 2008.
[12] Kvifte T., Jensenius A. R. Towards a Coherent Terminology 
and Model of Instrument Description and Design. NIME 06,
June 4-8, 2006. Paris, France.
[13] Buksnowitz C., Teischinger A ., Muller U., Pahler A., Evans 
R., (2006).  Resonance wood [Picea abies (L.) Karst.] –
evaluation and prediction of violin makers’ quality-grading .
J. Acoustical Society of America  121, 2007.
[14] Kinkead J. Build Your Own Acoustic Guitar: Complete 
Instructions and Full-Size Plans . Published 2004 by Hal 
Leonard.
[15] Cumpiano W. R., Natelson J. D. Guitarmaking: Tradition 
and Technology: A Complete Reference for the Design & 
Construction of the Steel - String Folk Guitar & the Classical 
Guitar (Guitar Reference). Published 1998 by Chronicle 
Books.
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
70