Re-Designing Principles for Computer Music Controllers:        
                            a Case Study of SqueezeVox Maggie 
Perry R. Cook 
Princeton University Computer Science (also Music)  
35 Olden St. Princeton, NJ  USA 08540 
prc@cs.princeton.edu 
Abstract 
This paper revisits/extends “Principles for Designing 
Computer Music Controllers” (NIME 2001), subsequently 
updated in a NIME 2007 keynote address.  A redesign of 
SqueezeVox Maggie (a reoccurring NIME character) is 
used as an example of which principles have held fast over 
the years, and which have changed due to advances in 
technology. A few new principles are also added to the list. 
Keywords: HCI, Composed Instruments, Voice Synthesis, 
Wireless, Batteries, Laptop Orchestras, SenSAs. 
1. The Original Principles 
To begin, I will restate the original 13 Principles for 
Designing Computer Music Controllers [1], briefly noting 
whether they still hold true (or not) and why.  Two new 
principles will be introduced here, and more added later. 
1.1 Some Human/Artistic Principles  
1) Programmability is a curse 
Still true. The ability to constantly add features means that 
many devices are never used in performance or formally 
tested.  Ever-changing NIMEs make it hard to determine, 
especially after time, if they still work as intended. 
 
2) Smart instruments are often not smart 
Still (largely) true.  Instruments that learn from the player 
can easily confuse (everyone).  However, the last decade 
has seen major advances in machine learning and music 
information retrieval [2].  Cautious use of these techniques 
can allow crafting of systems that learn.  To be most 
useful, it is still best to let the human player/designer 
explicitly choose training vs. performance modes. 
 
3) Copying an instrument is dumb, leveraging            
               
     expert technique is smart  
Still true.  The best violin is a violin, but we’ve seen many 
great virtuosity-inspired controllers: violins, trumpets, mic 
stands, turntables, beat-boxers, ethnic instruments, etc.  
 
4) Some players have spare bandwidth, some do not  
Still true.  Trumpets still have 3 valves and trumpet players 
still have 10 fingers.  Singers and dancers have lots of 
spare digits and other manipulators, clarinet players less 
so, organists even less. 
5) Make a piece, not an instrument or controller  
This is still true, especially for beginning designers, but 
even for experienced builders starting a new project.  But 
for mature instruments, tested during many performances, 
it is possible to redesign to make a NIME more generically 
useful (see Maggie’s redesign below), but we should try to: 
 
18) NEW: Redesign with backward compatibility 
More than just an exercise, “backward compatibility” for 
original functions and compositions can help detect lost 
functionality, and map progress (more on this shortly). 
 
6) Instant music, subtlety later 
Still true. It is compelling for a musical instrument to make 
sound immediately, simply and reliably.  There are other, 
non-musical reasons that this is a good idea, such as: 
 
19) NEW: Design (and pack) for post-9/11 travel 
I have been quite ama(u)zed at my experiences with airport 
security.  More than once the person searching my carry-
on bag (after seeing odd things in the scanner) has seen a 
5-pin DIN (MIDI) jack, said “Oh, music,” and sent me on 
my way. I also try to pack a copy of a paper depicting and 
describing the instrument.  When asked to prove what the 
thing does, being able to plug it in and make music often 
eases the need for more questions. Even if it’s a rubber 
chicken with a MIDI jack, life is easier if it can make some 
sound pretty quickly.   Making security wait while we 
grumble about MAX or ChucK doesn’t help keep us safe 
from the terrorists. (More on this in Maggie’s redesign). 
1.2 Some Technological Principles 
7) MIDI = Miracle, Industry Designed, (In)adequate  
Still true.  MIDI is still here, and we still use it.  But Open 
Sound Control (OSC) has become a great option too. 
 
8) Batteries, Die (a command, not an observation)  
Not so true anymore.  Digital cameras, cell phones, MP3 
players, and other small devices have brought smaller 
batteries with higher energy densities, capable of powering 
our systems for hours.  Cyber-instrument builders can now 
reasonably consider designing with batteries as an option. 
 
9) Wires are not that bad (compared to wireless)  
This also is not so true anymore.  Indeed, I would not write 
this paper if some things had not changed in major ways in 
a decade.  We can now consider building our instruments 
to use Bluetooth, 802.11 (WiFi), Zigbee and roll-your-own 
radios.  We can also exploit sensor-rich wireless products 
like the WiiMote, iPhone, and other devices for musical 
purposes.  Wires are still nice though. 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear th is notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.  
NIME09, June 3-6, 2009, Pittsburgh, PA 
Copyright remains with the author(s) . 
NIME 2009218
1.3 Some Other Principles  
10) New algorithms suggest new controllers  
11) New controllers suggest new algorithms  
12) Existing instruments suggest new controllers  
13) Everyday objects suggest amusing controllers  
All still very much true, as proved at conferences such as 
NIME, ICMC, DAFX, SIGGRAPH, etc. , and also in the 
market place.  Controllers inspired by new algorithms, an d 
algorithms emerging from new controllers demonstrate the 
magic that can happen when acoustics, mathematics, 
physics, haptics, sensors, and many other disciplines 
inform the design of a new instrument or system.  A wide 
variety of wacky yet quite musical devices ranging from 
my CoffeeMug and Romaineraca to Eric Singer’s Sonic 
Banana and Musical Raddichio, and many other such “gag 
NIMEs” have proven to be so memorable that I feel that I 
can offer the following axiom:  
13b) Funny is often much better than ser ious.   
This possibly reflects my personality, but a post -concert 
review of “What the heck was that?  Did you see the dude 
playing the lettuce?” is preferable to “Wow. That really 
sucked.  What the heck was that?”  
2. Some (more) New Principles (NIME07) 
My first revisit of the original principles came about when 
I was asked to give a NIME07 keynote talk at NYU. That 
talk, entitled “Principles for Controlling Computer Music 
Designers”[3] presented a survey of the original principles, 
with modifications as noted above, and also reviewed my 
experiences from teaching NIME -type courses for two 
decades.  From our experience with the Princeton Laptop 
Orchestra (PLOrk)[4][5], I added three new principles:  
14) More can be better! (but hard) .   
Years of building musical c ontrollers and speaker systems, 
and playing in small ensembles of computer -mediated 
instruments led Dan Trueman and I to ask, “what might it 
be like to build a large ensemble of such instruments?”  
The answer began to unfold with the creation of PLOrk in 
2005 (Figure 1), and we’ve been looking at related 
questions ever since.  It’s been lots of work, but incredible 
things have happened and it’s been well worth the trouble. 
15) Music+Science is a great teaching/ marketing tool  
Many of us find ourselves near ly constantly raising money, 
and explaining to others why what we do is scientific, 
interesting, difficult, and important.  Our field increasingly 
bridges disciplines and tests the boundaries of computer 
science, psychology, engineering, physiology, and ot hers.  
The real -time latency constraints of sensor acquisition, 
DSP, and interactive music synthesis are tighter in our 
applications than in any almost all other engineering areas.  
The press loves a good nerd -art story (Figure 2), even 
if they don’t actua lly “get it,” and granting agencies 
increasingly like the idea of funding ground -breaking 
multimedia research.  From a pedagogical perspective, 
teaching computer science is more fun when the results 
can be heard and felt immediately.  Engineering students 
dig fun examples that demonstrate key -concepts from their 
field, while students in the arts and humanities feel 
technically empowered, often times learning things that 
they never would have voluntarily signed up for.   
 
 
   
  
     Figure 1. The first PLOrk .              Figure 2 PLOrk press.  
16) The younger the student, the more fearless  
All of us who teach a NIME/PLOrk or related course have 
experienced the odd fact that the things our students think 
should be easy to do as projects often are the truly dif ficult 
open problems in our field, while the things they think are 
impossible have been solved many years ago.  A great 
aspect of this is that we (and they) are often proven wrong.  
In the first PLOrk (a freshman seminar), none of us knew 
what to expect, or whether it was going to work at all.  
Things we thought should work never did, and many 
“impossible” problems worked fine with little effort.  This 
year a few of our fresh-persons are returning to PLOrk one 
more time as seniors.  Others have made a caree r of 
PLOrk, taking it multiple times, learning more, and 
teaching others.  We learned a lot, but often feel like we 
still know very little.  We head into each new season, 
semester, rehearsal, and concert with anticipation, but also 
white-knuckle panic at possible impending train -wrecks. 
One common theme of the three new principles 14-16 
is that our NIME field, and our instruments, might be 
maturing.  This leads to the third main topic of this paper:  
3. Principles for Controller (Re)design 
It seems like more t han eight years has passed since the 
first NIME, because so much has changed.  I’ve modified 
my stance on principles regarding batteries and wireless/ 
wires, and relaxed my position a little on smart instruments 
that learn from the player.  I also mentione d in my revisit 
of Principle 5 (Make a piece, not an instrument or 
controller), that after a NIME has been tested extensively, 
and used in a variety of demos and musical performances, 
it is reasonable to think about a redesign.  So here is one: 
3.1 SqueezeVox Maggie as a Case Study in Redesign  
Building many similar controllers and gigging quite a 
lot on them since the SqueezeVoxen were first created [6] 
[7], I formed many opinions about issues like functions 
and integration (speakers, possibly amplifiers, and possibly 
even all computation contained within the device), 
portability (accordion vs. concertina), and expressive 
control ( pitch control via AGO keyboard vs. brass -valve-
219
mapped buttons vs. Boehm -fingering-mapping of buttons 
vs. linear FSRs vs. tilt sen sors etc.).  I entered a phase 
where I wanted to craft a NIME to constantly carry with 
me; to build an “Axe” that would be my main instrument 
for a while; on which I could compose and perform many 
pieces, and play pieces by and with others (somewhat in 
opposition to Principle 5) ). Maggie seemed to be the 
obvious choice, because she looks and feels like a real 
instrument, and nestles nicely into a backpack.  
To begin the redesign, and even for initial designs:  
 
(20) NEW: Build a (new) copy, don’t trash the or iginal 
Once one undertakes a redesign, the strong temptation is to 
modify the original controller, but we should try to resist 
this. Keeping the original around allows for verification 
and before/after comparisons. Maggie’s redesign clone 
copy is named Mil house.  If we modify the original we 
also risk breaking it, and having no reference for 
improvements or functional testing .  A corollary is: 
(20b) NEW: Build two or more if you can afford it.  
For the construction of a new controller, build more than 
one, b ecause inevitably they come out differently.  Best 
case, one will come out better.  Worst case one won’t work 
at all and the functional one can be used to determine 
what’s broken in the other.  I do this for nearly everything, 
including kits.  If I need two RF modules, I order  three kits 
because one doesn’t work or somehow get s fried.   
Another corollary of principle 20) is 18): Redesign 
with backward compatibility .  Maintaining all functions 
and musical pieces the original device supported allows 
comparisons to be made and improvements to be mapped.  
Lost functions or capabilitie s can also be tracked.  It is  
possible; even likely, that each device might have 
attributes that make it better than the other for certain 
functions and pieces.  This of course migh t even suggest a 
further redesign, merging the best parts of both.  In the 
original Maggie, bellows pressure combined with the four 
right-hand buttons (brass valve pitch mapping) and thumb 
slider (overtone mapping) to send standard General MIDI 
NoteOn and AfterTouch.  I thought of ditching this arcane 
functionality, but it fits so well with the Instant Music 
Principle 6)  and Post-9/11 Principle 19)  (plug her into 
any MIDI synth for instant music) that I had to leave it in.  
3.2 So what’s new about Maggie for 2009? 
Figures 3 and 4 show Maggie’s main control surfaces.  
As in the original SqueezeVox Maggie, the left hand side 
sports an array of 32 momentary push buttons (1) sending 
32 different values of MIDI control #6 as well as NoteOn 
messages for 32 standard MIDI drums on chan nel 10, and 
the bellows vent -switch (2), which still performs the 
function of allowing air to enter or leave the bellows 
rapidly, but also sends state on MIDI control #65.  The 
toggle “bank switch” for mapping the 32 buttons into 64 
effective buttons (compatible with SqueezeVox Lisa’s 64 
buttons) was basically never used in practice, and my left 
hand had to de -strap to flip the switch anyway.  So in 
Maggie09, there are two arbitrary bank & mode toggle 
push buttons (3,4) that transmit state on MIDI controllers 
#67 & #68.  Purple and green LEDs are located on top (5, 
not visible) to indicate the state of the mode/bank switches.  
 
       
    
  
  Figure 3 Maggie’s left side.       Figure 4 Maggie’s right side. 
The four bend sensors previously l ocated on the top of 
Maggie’s left side turned out to not be so useful, and often 
broke and needed repair.  Further, Maggie lacked any 
variable analog sensors capable of being positioned to a 
static value (potentiometers), and I had gotten accustomed 
to having these for effects, tempos, etc. in the VOMID [7].  
So the bendies were replaced with four pots that report 
their values individually as MIDI controllers #40-43 (6). 
Maggie’s right side still has a slide pot with thumb -
ring (7) (MIDI controller #1), th e linear FSR strip (8) 
(MIDI controller #4), and four “valve” buttons (9) mapped 
to brass fingerings (more on that shortly).  The first button 
springs were so strong that they made my fingers hurt, so 
new buttons with longer action throws and weaker springs 
were installed.  The new switches also each report their 
states as MIDI controllers #80 -83.  The right side also has 
a push -button toggle switch (10) (MIDI control #64), 
(same as SqueezeVox Lisa’s accordion register switch).  
Status of this is displayed the top right side (1 1) via a blue 
LED.  There’s also a power switch and red power LED . 
  
    
  
Figure 5 Left inside computer guts, sensors, and connectors.  
Figure 5 shows Maggie’s left insides and connectors.  
All computer functions are located in the le ft endcap (12), 
and there is a multi -color wiring harness running through 
her bellows to connect her left and right sides, terminated 
with a DB25 connector on one end for easy disassembly.  
This leads us to a new design (and redesign) principle:  
 
(20) NEW:  Wire and document for future surgeries . 
When I take an interface apart to add functions, replace a 
switch, LED, or whatever, one or more wires often break.  
The good news is that I usually wire my interfaces using a 
different wire color for each sensor, display, or function.  I 
also write with a sharpie or pencil next to most major 
connections a letter representing the wire color that should 
be there.  This makes it easy to fix, replace, or copy things.  
220
For her 2009 internal makeover, Maggie received a 
pair of more sensitive Motorola MPX5050 air pressure 
sensors (17).  These combine in MIDI control #66 to 
indicate whether the bellows are blowing (inward pressure) 
or sucking (outward pressure), and the absolute value of 
blow/suck pressure is carried by both  MIDI control #7 and 
MIDI after-touch. Maggie’s previous left-hand bendies had 
been intended for control of vowel -space (formants, F1/F2, 
articulation, etc.) and other multi -dimensional data, but in 
the redesign I took a lesson from Lisa’s brother Bart (by  
Colby Leider)  [6] and embedded a two -axis accelerometer 
(ADXL202) inside her left top plate (13).  Maggie still has 
an RS232 jack (14) (to talk to the microprocessor), a 9V 
battery clip (15), and a MIDI (16) jack on her left side. 
3.3 What’s Radical and Awesome About Maggie09?  
Internal battery power and wireless MIDI.  There, I said it.  
After Maggie’s external battery fell off a couple of times 
during gigs, I installed eight 1.2V 1.5 Amp Hour Ni -MH 
rechargeable phone batteries inside her right end -cap 
(Figure 6). As I roam freely, Maggie -Nouveau transmits 
MIDI via an M-Audio MidAir (Figure 7) system.  
 
           
          
    
Figure 6 Internal batteries.   Figure 7 MidAir wireless MIDI.  
 
Transmitting MIDI to what? An integrated “Maggie 
wrangler” written in Chu cK, wi th GUI “Dashboard” built 
in MAUI (MiniAudicle User Interface), as shown in Figure 
8.  This motivates two final new principles:  
 
(21) NEW: Build diagnostic features and displays  
One problem with sensor -rich controllers is that it’s hard to 
tell if thi ngs are wor king, and the audience often  figure s 
out that things are broken just about when we do.  Visual 
feedback, even if just for setup and debugging, can save 
hours.  Nice meaningful feedback, like the simple LEDs 
mounted on Maggie’s top, and her elabo rate GUI 
dashboard, can help us build, repair, set up, and perform.  
 
(22) NEW: Construct controller proxies  
Creating even a minimal GUI that sends the same signals 
as the controller can be helpful in many ways.  Part of this 
new principle is a corollary of  principle 19) Design for 
travel in a post 9/11 world . The GUI of Figure 8 is fully 
functional even without Maggie present and connected, 
and can be used on an airplane or anywhere else to test and 
tweak new ideas for compositions. Shreds for handling 
MIDI a nd MAUI are independent, taking over from each 
differently depending on whether Maggie is connected or 
not. To start a new piece or construct a new set of 
mappings, all I need to do is copy the dashboard code and 
start hacking in the main (empty by default) synth shred.  I 
can do this at any time, with or without the controller.  
“Proxy-ism” and compatibility work two  ways; a ny 
decent programmable MIDI keyboard can send almost all 
of the signals that Maggie’s ChucK/MAUI GUI and 
software understand.  Furthe r, if you inspect the MIDI 
messages I’ve selected for Maggie to send, you’ll note that 
most are standard: buttons send pitches or  drum NoteOns, 
x/y til ts send  MIDI Pan/Balance, vent/bank/mode/ register 
buttons act like  MIDI Sustain, Portamento, Sostenuto, and 
Legato Pedals.  More possibility for instant music!  
 
 
Figure 8 Maggie’s massive MAUI GUI display dashboard. 
4. Conclusions and Future Work 
From the four or so gigs I’ve done so far with the 
redesigned Maggie, she works really well.  I carry her with 
me pretty much everywhere.  Will I build more interfaces?  
Yes.  Will I constantly revisit these principles, adding new 
ones, long into the future?  Likely.  Mostly for now I just 
want to play my new axe and make lots of music.  
5. Acknowledgments 
This work was supported by Princeton’s David A. Gardner 
’69 Magic Fund (Humanities Council), and the Kimberly 
and Frank H. Moss ’71 Research Innovation Fund (SEAS). 
Thanks to NIME, PLOrk, TeQWire, LAP, Colby Leider, 
Dan Trueman, Ajay Kapur, Curtis Bahn, and Ge Wang.  
References 
[1] P. Co ok “Principles for Designing Computer Music 
Controllers,” ACM SIGCHI New Interfaces for Musical 
Expression (NIME) Workshop, Seattle, 2001.  
[2] International Symposium on Music Information Retrieval, 
(ISMIR) 2000-2008,         www.ismir.net. 
[3] P. Cook, “Principles for Controlling Computer Music 
Designers,” Keynote talk, NIME 2007, NYU. 
[4] Trueman, D, P. Cook, S. Smallwood, and G. Wang,   
“PLOrk: The Princeton Laptop Orchestra, Year 1,” in Proc. 
International Computer Music Confere nce, 2006. 
[5] Smallwood, S., D. Trueman, P. Cook, and G. Wang.  
“Composing for Laptop Orchestra,” in Computer Music 
Journal 32(1), MIT Press, 2008.  
[6] Cook, P. and C. Leider, “SqueezeVox: A New Controller 
for Vocal Synthesis Models,” in Proc. of the ICMC, 2000. 
[7] Cook, P. “Real -time Performance Controllers for 
Synthesized Singing,” in Proc. of NIME, Vancouver, 2005.
221