Children of Grainger:
Leather Instruments for Free Music
ABSTRACT
Grainger’s Free Music remains a rich source of discovery for
contemporary Australian musicians. Free Music represents a
significant departure point for electronic musicians and
instrument makers searching for new musical language, form
and expression.  This paper presents research undertaken by
the Bent Leather Band exploring Grainger’s Free Music ideas
within a 21 st century music-making context embracing live
improvisation, instrument and software design. Research
outcomes presented in this paper includes a range of creative
works; meta-serpent wind controllers, the 4th generation of
the light-harp controller, new MAX-based software engines
for signal processing, control-modes and strategies for the
instruments and music including Bent Leather Band’s latest
collection of works “Children of Grainger”. This paper
discusses technical issues confronting the contemporary
electronic instrument builder and presents Bent Leather
Band’s aim to develop playable instruments.
1. FREE MUSIC
Since late 2003, Grainger’s Free Music has been revisited by
a number of Australian composers and experimental
musicians. In all cases the Grainger Museum audio collection
has revealed a surprising amount of interesting material that
has redefined our previous notions of Grainger’s Free Music
experimental depth and rigor. Warren Burt’s work covers the
history of the Free Music  experiments [1] and presents an
appendix of the audio collection. His work rebuilding
Grainger’s unfinished Electric Eye Tone Tool ; a seven part
Free Music  player machine, was supported by the ABC
listening room and presented collaborative works for the
Electric Eye  by Tristram Carey, Catherine Schieve, Wang
Zheng Ting and Warren himself. The Blisters ensemble; an
ensemble of Australian improviser/instrument builders
including; Jon Rose, Rainer Linz, Tom Fryer, Joanne Cannon
and myself, were also commissioned by the ABC listening
room to investigate Grainger’s Free Music legacy and this
created a radiophonic work “Skeleton in the Museum”, which
was selected for the 2004 International Karl Szcuka Pries.
The Bent Leather Band has continued to work on Grainger.
We were surprised to discover the diversity of Grainger’s
experiments. The breadth of the audio collection was a stark
contrast to the musical education we received in Australia;
which sorely neglected Grainger let alone his experiments.
We first discovered Grainger’s Free Music  back in the mid
1980s, in the library at LaTrobe University. From there we
found the Grainger museum; which has had a long
association with experimental electronic music. Finally we
began our collaboration with Garry Greenwood and through
the exhibition of this work at the Grainger Museum, created
the opportunity to work there with our Blisters project.
Grainger’s Free Music comprises writings, recordings and the
actual machines he created. “Music beyond the traditional
constraints of pitch and rhythm” [4], was developed through
the construction of many bizarre instrumental experiments
and prototypes including; 6th tone tuned pianos fitted with
player systems, air-pump powered reed organs capable o f
fine controlled portamenti, and large machines; such as the
kangaroo pouch ; which allowed the pitch of up to four
electronic valve oscillators to be played by score of cut
cardboard and paper rolls.
Grainger’s explains his Free Music  as “music using gliding
tones and irregular rhythms” throughout the 1951 recordings
of his experiments and instruments. The 1938 manifesto [4]
explains his desire to liberate or free  sound from the
constraints of conventional pitch and rhythm.
“Existing conventional music (whether "classical"; or
popular) is tied down by set scales, a tyrannical (whether
metrical or irregular) rhythmic pulse that holds the whole
tonal fabric in a vice-like grasp and a set of harmonic
procedures (whether key-bound or atonal) that are merely
habits, and certainly do not deserve to be called laws.”
[Grainger, 1938]
This manifesto also reveals a desire to bypass the role of a
performer or interpreter of his music. It directly follows
Grainger’s experiences composing for and rehearsing
theremin ensembles. His attempts to have his Free Music
compositions played by musicians on theremins never
achieved results to his satisfaction [5]. It is doubtful that
Grainger knew about categorical perception [17] and
perceptual limits on the human ear and how it would affect
the performance of glides using theremins. Grainger was
already using player piano technologies and the potential of
piano roll devices became the hub of his Free Music
activities.
As improvising live ensemble musicians, we had to consider
how much Grainger’s preference for paper-roll [player]
sequencing was going to influence the formation of our
music. As improvisers, we are not interested in a paper-roll or
sequencing technique. But perhaps we share with Grainger a
common desire to eliminate the “proverbial middleman” or
interpreter (Cross, 1976, in Drefuss interview [6]). We do
Stuart Favilla
Bent Leather Band
Hybrid Initiative
ICEPA
Victoria University, Melbourne
61+3 97301026
sfavilla@bigpond.com
Joanne Cannon
Bent Leather Band
Hybrid Initiative
ICEPA
Victoria University, Melbourne
61+3 97301026
joanne_cannon@bigpond.com
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work fo r
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and tha t
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Nime’06, June 4-8, 2006, Paris, France
Copyright remains with the author(s). ©copyright bent leather band
2006
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
370
know how impressed Grainger was with improvised music
generally. He brought the Ellington Band into one of his
composition classes in New York [5] and Grainger’s own top
ten system rated Rarotongan improvised polyphony 3 rd; well
above Debussy and even Bach [7]. Therefore, as improvisers,
we embrace Free Music as an opportunity to escape the rigid
harmonic constraints of traditional pitch systems and also as a
departure point for the development of new specialised
musical instruments.
Figure 1. Detail of Grainger’s Kangaroo Pouch Machine
[Courtesy Grainger Musuem]
2. NEW INSTRUMENTS
The field of new interfaces for musical expression continues
to expand. Musicians are offered increasing access to new
technologies that can develop new instruments. Network
protocols such as OSC, are beginning to purge the old MIDI
language through a range of new interfaces from Kroonde
and Gluion. Micro-electronics internet groups such as the
MIDI Box network run by Törsten Klose, have made
available cheap MIDI circuits and PIC chip-software;
allowing musicians the chance to construct their own
customizable interfaces. Novel controllers, mixers and DJ
spatial sensor interfaces for music are available straight off
the shelf in music stores.
A constant proliferation of theoretical literature regarding the
development of musical instruments has also flourished over
the past five years.  Amongst this proliferation are ideas that
challenge the relevance of traditional notions of music
performance such as whether the role of virtuoso
performance is valid? Choi[3], and Paine[13]: and the
blurring of the traditional roles of composer, performer and
listener.
Twenty years ago Jeff Pressings imagined a super-instrument
[14]. It posited a human limit of up to ten independent
degrees of freedom and provided the player with multiple
channels of quality sensory feedback. Controllers were
expected to develop high resolutions, scanning rates and
sensitivities capable of performing very fine expressive
control of music. Pressing’s work defined ten fundamental
issues relating to the design and construction of new
interfaces.
Although Pressing’s instrument has been achieved in part,
much of today’s work lies in the domain of instruments for
public interaction. In stark contrast to Pressing is the work of
Ulyate, [18]. His ten commandments of interactivity require
“no expertise”, “no thinking” and measure quality of control
from immediate reactions of players or participants.
Other approaches proposed by Mulder [9], develop new
instruments to existing human motor skills, rather than
requiring the musician years of commitment to developing
new skills.  Pedro Rebelo’s work applies the media theory of
prosthesis to instruments [15]. Physical modeling is used in
an intervention of an acoustic sound to mimic, extend or
fulfill a potential of the body [acoustic instrument]. For
Rebelo the player’s intention and the instrument [which he
defines as a point of resistance] constitutes an acoustic
threshold.
Other interesting areas of research include: The continuing
development of controllers modeled from existing acoustic
instruments such as; Cormac Cannon’s EpipE Uilleann Pipes
[2] and Diana Young’s HyperPuja  [18].  Completely new
novel instruments designed for a specific form of synthesis or
sound generation; including Sile O’Modráin and Georg Essl’s
PebbleBox and CrumbleBag  controllers for granular
synthesis [12]; and Blockjam [11], a polyrhythmic sequencer
interface that forms a series of interconnecting block
switches. The switch’s function is displayed by an LED panel
and can change throughout an interaction or piece.
Something that seems to be lacking from the field overall is a
development of new original music through new
instruments/interfaces and although there are many new
contributions made to the field in the form of new instrument
prototypes, very few of these prototypes are developed to the
next generation. The field has also responded to the rise of
sound design over music.
Our musical instrument work has been primarily concerned
with skilled ensemble performance of new sounds. Our broad
research aims have been to create new music, performance
and ensemble techniques and new instruments. So far our
work has developed in order to embrace specific musical
languages. Over the past five years, our language has
specialized in beat-less, microtonal and gliding forms of
sonic expression. In essence we have been playing a digital
form of Grainger’s Free Music.
3. EVOLUTION OF PLAYABILITY
Our idea of a playable instrument is one that essentially does
not limit or inhibit the development of skill. The key is a
balance between the instruments’ expressive potential,
responsiveness, quality of feedback, embodiment of the
sound and the instruments’ ability to provide the player with
an intuitive understanding about the music being played.  The
instruments we were going to build had to suit the music we
played and also work well together in ensemble. We defined
this as playable, meaning
 Expressive
 Responsive
 Versatile in solo and ensemble performance
 Visceral [naturalness, appropriateness, good visual
feedback]
 Palpable [allowing for skill development, an
instrument you can practice for hours]
 Inspiring [intuitive, revealing new things to the
player]
 An instrument that has a definitive sound or
character
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
371
The focus on playability was intended to unify all aspects of
controller interface design across as many possible
disciplines, e.g. cybernetics, HCI, ergonomics, gesture
research and skill-development. Specific areas we have
focused our preliminary research on have included tactile,
haptile control and expert skill development Shakel [16], the
combination of dominant [attack based] gestures with
ancillary or [modifying] gestures and the potential limitations
of bimanual control [8].
The goals of the project were as follows:
1. To build an ensemble of new playable electronic
instruments
2. Develop a new improvised music and ensemble
3. Build prototypes and develop them into mature
aesthetic instruments
4. Explore the language of Percy Grainger’s Free
Music
The overall aim of the research was to create successful
instruments, their playing techniques and ensemble music
simultaneously. Our process was reflexive, sometimes
beginning with a sound or process and then finding physical
gestures that could effectively control them. Sometimes
gestures discovered their own sounds. We investigated
playability through the development of two distinct
instrument projects; one investigating the potential of light
sensors to trace virtual strings for a musician to play [the
Light-harp]; and another project investigating the potential of
live signal processing control of double reed [the Meta-
serpents].
4. LIGHT-HARP
The Light-harp  uses spotlights and lasers to trace virtual
strings through space. The instrument is a MIDI controller
and was originally built in collaboration with David Brown [a
violin and shakuhachi maker] and Robin Whittle [a notable
computer music instrument developer and designer].
Figure 2. Light-Harp Ancillary Controllers
After earlier models were built, using wood, fiberglass and
steel as construction materials, the current Light-harp  was
made from leather by the talented Tasmanian leather artist,
Garry Greenwood. This version supports an extensive array
of controllers.  These include an active electro-magnetic
whammy-bar, a two-dimensional bamboo whammy-bar, two
large wheels, breath control and two touch-sensitive strips. It
is usually played with up to 5 independent dimensions of
freedom. It is also boosted with a control panel of 16
assignable pots for synthesis parameter control. The
instrument controls synthesizers, software-synthesisers and
signal processing.
The Light-harp's  specialized hardware allows for the
threshold attenuation of light-sensors. This reduces the
response time of light-sensors [less than 2msec] and makes
sensing beams playable of up to 200 MIDI notes a second.
This means that unlike conventional keyboards and other
controllers, the Light-harp  is capable of performing
extremely dense and interesting textures not to mention
glissandi. It is well suited to the performance of equally
tempered microtonal tuning systems such as the sixth tone
tuning system used by Grainger to approximate glides and
perform “loud unisons”, [tremelos] with his own butterfly
piano. Within the Free Music project the Light-harp  has
referenced the butterfly piano by using piano samples as a
source timbre for all sound creation.
Figure 3. Light-harp
Dimensions 164 x 64 x 29cm
The experience of building two previous instruments has
brought about changes to the instruments dimension and
shape. The neck now supports a scalloped tactile playing
surface so the player can feel the sensors sitting under the
fingertips. The curvature of the neck has been increased
making the instrument’s dimension more compact and
additionally, the ancillary controllers have been grouped in
accordance with bimanual control [8], emphasizing a strong-
handed [in this case right-handed] role for leading attack
gestures against a left handed passive modification role.
Whenever possible, a breath controller is used to control
dynamics or attacks.
The aesthetic design of the instrument merges elements from
Indian music and 1930’s valve radio equipment. Bakelite and
French polished controller knobs are set against flat polished
leather panels. The Indian elements include the dragon [yali]
headpiece, human physiology of the pelvis [instrument base],
spine & vertebrae  [neck and sensors], lotus flower [the
tailpiece], and the fluted trumpet end. With the exception of
metal control panels, a strip of supporting metal and wooden
pieces supporting the base, the instrument is constructed
entirely from leather.
5. SERPENTS
The evolution of the meta-instrument controllers began with
the sensor modification of simple double reed instruments.
Joanne Cannon, a bassoonist and Australia’s chief
protagonist for the creation of an Australian electric bassoon,
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
372
wanted to transport her reed playing into a signal-processing
environment.  The first prototype instrument used force
sensitive resistors and a passive magnetic proximity sensor to
track the spatial position of the instrument’s bell. This
instrument was interfaced via a MIDI control circuit to a
laptop running Max which in turn controlled a number of
effects units. The musical language we developed for this
instrument made heavy use of delays, which we used to
create additional parts. These techniques required fine control
of delay times and more controllers were desired to
independently control the multiple audio streams. The major
drawback of this instrument proved to be its limited tonal
production. This led to the idea of making long tubes with
open holes.
The second prototype instrument we built in collaboration
with instrument leather instrument maker Garry Greenwood.
The Serpentine-bassoon is a leather meta-bassoon, with a
2.4meter conical bore. The instrument has eight open holes;
which can be used to play pitches or closed with stoppers
allowing for sensors to be played instead. This instrument
produced a variety of timbres reminiscent of bassoons and
horns. Two contact condenser microphones were used to pick
up a large variety of sounds and the signal was processed
using MaxMSP via a Digi002. Dials were added for fine
delay time and other parameter control and three force
sensitive resistors were used to control dynamic features of
the signal processing such as acoustic or delay feedback etc.
Figure 4. Serpentine-bassoon
Controllers attached
The third instrument, dubbed Contra-monster, has a 3.6meter
conical bore and was built for maximum signal processing
control. It has two built in condenser microphones, and 15
controllers including, three dials, one fine tuning dial, one
fader, two joysticks and six small force sensitive pads; in the
place of finger holes. The sensors have been positioned
ergonomically for ease and effectiveness of use and the
interface was completed with a small built in display for the
performer. The Contra-monster  is capable of ten
simultaneous degrees of freedom.
The current instrument was built around a MIDIBox Plus PIC
controller that was redesigned to make the circuit board
smaller. A small panel of push buttons allows for the
instruments controller mode to be changed allowing for over
760 possible assignments for the MIDI controller signals.
The aesthetics of the serpents combine the same elements
adopted by the Light-harp . The Serpentine-bassoon  was
made as a direct relative to the Light-harp  using the same
color scheme and leather dyes. The Contra-monster’s visual
aesthetic combines 1930s Bakelite radio dials, French-
polished panels and an Indian theme of a lotus or orchid
design.
Figure 5. Detail of force-sensitive resistors
Contra-monster, 2005
6. FREE MUSIC MAPPINGS
Software is a necessary part of our process and a laptop is the
host computer for practical reasons.  The Laptop is
effectively the live effects studio and Max software allows all
of our sensors to be mapped to all the parameters we use to
play our music. Our mappings are fixed, not dynamic, but we
will usually switch between several mappings during a
performance. The instruments however, constitute the
interface between the musician and software with the laptop
remaining off. Sensor mappings consists of a number of
process stages including sensor adjustment [rectification],
rescaling, processing [including averaging/interpolation of
data]; and finally the mapping and tweaking of a specific
parameter of synthesis or signal processing.
Figure 6. Joystick, Contra-monster
Signal processing and synthesis techniques have developed
from experiments using delay with modulating or playable
delay-time. The technique is commonly associated with
echoes. However, if the feedback of the signal and the delay
time can be accurately controlled, tones and independent
lines can be achieved in a myriad of ways.
Other associated signal processing techniques explored so far
have included; pitch-shifting [coarse, tuned, continuous or
modulated], extensive control of delays [to create pitched
feedback tones], distortion [overdriven or boosted signals,
ring-modulation, noise, clipping and unstitched wavelets],
and granular treatments [streams, clouds, pitch-shifting,
distortion, prolongation, and accenting], this list is not
exhaustive. We developed processing techniques in MSP but
also had great success hacking groups of existing VST format
plug-ins including those found in cycling’s Pluggo suite and
other freeware plugins.
Throughout the project we were conscious of providing each
instrument with its own character. This was achieved by
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
373
limiting the source timbres. In the case of the serpents their
source is the sounds created by the double reed anyway, but
the Light-Harp, a synthesizer controller can play a huge
variety of sounds. In the theme of Grainger’s microtonal
butterfly piano experiments, we limited the Light-Harp to
using only piano samples.
Figure 6. Contra-monster
As our work developed our mapping strategies have grown
much larger encompassing sets of over 50 parameters. These
mappings are responding to the development of a reflexive
approach to playing and are designed to offer a large number
of possibilities to a performer.  The central idea to these
mappings is to create stock standard number of simultaneous
sensors whose behavior can then be governed by a set of
ancillary knobs or other more passive systems of control.
Figure 7. Visual Display Contra-monster
The Light-Harp for example has a standard playable set of
sensors including light sensors [pitch or note/sample trigger],
breath control [attack/volume], two dimensional whammy-
bar [push=feedback, side to side=delay time], a force
sensitive strip allows for another simultaneous control for
filtering, two large dials which can also be played controls
fine delay-time, modulation speed/depth and or specialized
filtering parameters. These main controls are supported by a
number of other controllers extending the mapping with up to
64 additional transformations such as; transposition [+-6ve],
re-scaling of temperament [quartertone, sixth-tone, 7-tet, 9-
tet, 23-tet, 64-tet microtonal sets], fine tuning shifts,
modulation controls, envelope controls for filtering or
amplitude envelopes, signal processing parameters for delays,
flangers, chorusing, flanging, distortion and granular effects.
Our experience has found that these larger mappings are
intuitive; revealing more each time they are explored.
Intrinsic to the success of mapping gesture is the notion of
embodiment . This remains a subjective area of research and
we define embodiment  as a convincing relationship between
physical gesture and resultant sound. Convincing in this sense
does not necessarily mean realistic . Nor do we subscribe to
the research areas of audible  gesture or universal  musical
gesture in relation to our work. We believe for example, that
the tiniest movement of a fingertip is entitled to make the
hugest possible sound. After all, that is a good example of
what a digital instrument can do that acoustic instruments
[great pipe organs the exception] do not. We also think of
embodiment  as a process. It is discovery, questioning and
searching for a response in the context of an artistic
discourse, an ongoing dialogue between the musician, the
controller interface, the software mapping and the music.
7. FUTURE WORK
Currently the instruments’ sensor implementations are
limited by the small 7-bit MIDI controller resolutions.
Although we have found ways around these limitations in
regards to the control of audio and synthesis processing
through data interpolation, averaging and smoothing, these
techniques result in data hysteresis [sluggishness] and are
really only a compromise.
The next stage of development will involve upgrading the
instruments to OSC via Gluion interfaces. The Gluion is
capable of much faster scanning rates [up to 1ms] compared
to other OSC interfaces on the market. This should offer a
sense of immediate control with a significant boost to
resolution. The signal latency of computer processing
remains a significant problem. We have also found software
synthesizers to be limited in terms of polyphony and also in
regards to tuning system implementation.
In conclusion, this project has created instruments, techniques
and music exploring Grainger’s Free Music  i.e. music using
gliding tones and irregular rhythms. We have explored and
extended Grainger’s ideas and legacy through the creation of
new playable  electroacoustic instruments. The research has
created a folio of creative work including two finished CD
albums, hours of recorded experimental work, International
concert performances, exhibitions, television, radio
performances and videos.
8. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We dearly acknowledge the contributions of three remarkable
Australians. Firstly to Garry Greenwood, who’s passing in
April this year was a tragic loss. Garry’s incredible
leatherwork will inspire Australians for years to come. An
artist of rare talent we dedicate our work to Garry. We also
would like to acknowledge Jeff Pressing and his support and
belief in our work over the years previous to his passing.
Without Jeff’s support, we would never have believed in
developing our first prototype. Lastly we acknowledge David
S. Brown, his friendship and remarkable talent for instrument
innovation, skill and artistry, have given us great inspiration
from the beginning of our work in the early 1990’s.
7. REFERENCES
[1] Burt, W. Percy Grainger’s Work with Music Technology
Melbourne Independent Media Centre, 2005
http://melbourne.indymedia.org/news/2005/02/87624.php
[2] Cannon, C., Hughes, S., & Ómodhráin, S., “EpipE:
Exploration of the Uilleean Pipes as a Potential
Controller for Computer-based Music” In the
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces
for Musical Expression (NIME03), Montreal, Canada
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
374
[3] Choi, I., “A Component Model of Gestural Primitive
Throughput” In the Proceedings of the 2003 Conference
on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME03),
Montreal, Canada
[4] Crab, S., The Free Music Machine
http://www.obsolete.com/120_years/machines/free_mus
ic_machine/
[5] Dorum, E., Percy Grainger: the man behind the music
published by IC & EE Dorum, Melbourne Australia,
1986
[6] Drefus, K., Interview with Burnett Cross, 5.3.1976
Audio collection Grainger Museum, 1976
[7] Giles, M., & Pear, D., “Grainger’s Top Ten” Review The
Centre for Studies in Australian Music No. 15 June,
2002
[8] Kessous, L., & Arfib, D., “Bimanuality in Alternate
Musical Instruments” In the Proceedings of the 2003
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
(NIME03), Montreal, Canada
[9] Mulder, A., “Towards a choice of gestural constraints
for instrumental performers” In Trends in Gestural
Control of Music Ircam- Centre Pompidou, 2000
[10] Nelson, M., & Thom, B., “A Survey of Real-Time MIDI
Performance” In the Proceedings of the 2004
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
(NIME04), Hamamatsu, Japan
[11] Newton-Dunn, H., Nakano, H., & Gibson, J., “Block
Jam: A Tangible Interface for Interactive Music” In the
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces
for Musical Expression (NIME03), Montreal, Canada
[12] O’Modhráin, S., Essl, G., “PebbleBox and Crumble
Bag: Tactile Interfaces for Granular Synthesis” In the
Proceedings of the 2004 Conference on New Interfaces
for Musical Expression (NIME04), Hamamatsu, Japan
[13] Paine, G., “Gesture and Music Interaction: Interactive
Engagement Through Dynamic Morphology” In the
Proceedings of the 2004 Conference on New Interfaces
for Musical Expression (NIME04), Hamamatsu, Japan
[14] Pressing, J., “Cybernetic Issues in Interactive
Performance Systems” Computer Music Journal, Vol.
14   No.1, 1990
[15] Rebelo, P., & Van Walstijn, “Designing Acoustic
Thresholds” Les journées du design sonore, IRCAM
2004
[16] Shackel B. [1990] “Human Factors and Usability” In:
Preece J. and L. Keller (Ed.) Human-Computer
Interaction: Selected Readings. Prentice Hall 1990
[17] Siegel, J., & Siegel, W., “Categorical Perception of tonal
intervals: Musicians can't tell sharp from flat.”
Perception & Psychophysics, 399-407, 1977
[18] Ulyate, R., & Bianciardi. D., “The Interactive Dance
Club: Avoiding Chaos in a Multi Participant
Environment.” In the Proceedings of the 2000
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression,
Seattle
[19] Young, D., Essl, G., “HyperPuja: A Tibetan Singing
Bowl Controller” In the Proceedings of the 2003
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
(NIME03), Montreal, Canada
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France
375