Tremolo-Harp: A Vibration-Motor Actuated Robotic String 
Instrument 
 
  
Steven Kemper 
Mason Gross School of the Arts 
Rutgers University 
 85 George St.   
New Brunswick, NJ 08901 
skemper@mgsa.rutgers.edu 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
The Tremolo-Harp is a twelve-stringed robotic instrument, where each 
string is actuated with a DC vibration motor to produce a mechatronic 
“tremolo” effect. It was inspired by instruments and musical styles that 
employ tremolo as a primary performance technique, including the 
hammered dulcimer, pipa, banjo, flamenco guitar, and surf rock guitar. 
Additionally, the Tremolo-Harp is designed to produce long, sustained 
textures and continuous dynamic variation. These capabilities 
represent a different approach from the majority of existing robotic 
string instruments, which tend to focus on actuation speed and 
rhythmic precision. The composition Tremolo-Harp Study 1 (2019) 
presents an initial exploration of the Tremolo-Harp’s unique timbre 
and capability for continuous dynamic variation.   
 
Author Keywords 
Musical Robotics, Mechatronics, Chordophone, Actuators, Tremolo 
 
CCS Concepts 
• Applied computing → Sound and music computing; Performing 
arts; 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The musical term “tremolo,” originating from the late Renaissance, 
describes a rapidly articulated, repeating series of notes [4]. While this 
term comes from the Western art music tradition, tremolo articulation 
is used as a performance technique for a wide variety of instruments 
from around the world. While any instrument capable of rapidly 
reiterating the same note(s) can be considered to produce tremolo, for 
some instruments and musical styles, tremolo is the primary 
performance technique. This is especially true for struck/plucked 
string instruments, where tremolo not only produces an interesting 
timbre, but also allows for continuous sustain of specific notes that 
would otherwise decay quickly. Instruments and musical styles that 
feature tremolo include the hammered dulcimer, pipa, banjo, flamenco 
guitar, and surf rock guitar. Inspired by these instruments and styles, 
the Tremolo-Harp is designed to create mechatronic “tremolo,” where 
vibration motors directly actuate a series of strings, producing unique 
timbral results. This instrument is also capable of continuous dynamic 
variation by adjusting the intensity of vibration.  
                                                             
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. PRIOR WORK 
The Tremolo-Harp was designed to produce continuous, tremolo-like 
sounds where the dynamic shape can be controlled over time. This 
instrument represents a development in the area of robotic instruments 
that draws upon two different sources: robotic
1 string instruments and 
electromagnetically-actuated string instruments.  
2.1 Robotic String Instruments 
Since the early 2000s, several robotic string instruments have  
been developed, including [2, 9, 15, and 17]. While most of these 
instruments are capable of producing tremolo articulations either 
through repeated picking or “hammer-on” playing, the speed of 
these articulations can be limited, as in the case of picking 
mechanisms mounted on rotary stepper motors [9, 20] . 
Additionally, most robotic string instruments that are actuat ed 
with a picking mechanism do not allow for dynamic contro l, 
though the Protochord instrument created at the Victoria 
University of Wellington represents a novel approach in this area 
[12].  Solenoid-based hammer-on articulations are capable of 
producing rapid tremolo and dynamic change. For example, 
Cyther’s actuators are capable of producing rapid tremolos with 
continuous dynamic changes, though faster striking requires 
shorter on-times, reducing the dynamic range as the repetition 
rate increases [2].  
 Some robotic string instruments are capable of producing 
continuous sound. For example, there are several robotic systems 
designed to bow violins, such as Koji Shibuya ’s violin-playing 
robot [16], as well as Godfried-Willem Raes’s automated bass 
hurdy gurdy <Hurdy> [14]. While these instruments can produce 
tremolo-type effects, their sizes and range of movement limit the 
rate of repetition of the bowing mechanism.  
2.2 Electromagnetically-Augmented String 
Instruments 
In the past several years, designers have also explored 
continuous actuation of string instruments through audio-signal 
driven electromagnetic transduction [10]. Notable examples o f 
this approach include the Electromagnetically-Prepared Pian o 
[3] and the Magnetic Resonator Piano [8], which both employ 
audio-signal driven electromagnets to resonate piano strings, 
allowing for continuous dynamic change over the course of a 
note. This technique has also been explored in several of Raes’ 
robotic instruments, including the previously-mentioned 
1 This paper employs the term “robotic instruments” for both 
mechatronic instruments, which possess autonomous 
performance capabilities as well as truly robotic instruments, 
which include feedback from the environment. Colloquially, 
especially in the field of music, both types of instruments are 
often classified as “robotic.” 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
301
<Hurdy>, as well as the electromagnetically-actuated Aeolia n 
harp <Aeio> [13]. A similar technique was also explored in the 
author’s earlier robotic instrument MARIE, co -created with 
Expressive Machines Musical I nstruments (EMMI) [15]. 
Though these technologies represent interesting hybrids of 
electronic/acoustic sound production where the string becomes a 
physical filter, their sonic output tends to be quite pure i n tone, 
lacking the unique timbral nuance produced by the mechanical 
articulation of a string (though this is controllable based on input 
signal).  
3. DESIGN 
3.1 Structure and Configuration 
The Tremolo-Harp consists of twelve strings tuned chromatically from 
E2-D#3 connected to a 24” x 16” t-slotted aluminum frame by 3D-
printed parts (see Figures 1-2). The dimensions of the instrument allow 
it to fit in a flight case that conforms to standard checked baggage 
sizing. Vibration motors are suspended next to each string. These 
motors are wired in parallel with LEDs that illuminate according to the 
signal being sent to the vibration motors, which serves to visualize the 
string actuation. Dampening solenoids are affixed to the opposite end 
of the instrument and are used to control sustain. A 5V power supply 
is used for the vibration motors/LEDs and a 24V supply for the 
solenoids. A Teensy 3.6 microcontroller is programmed as a USB 
MIDI device, enabling MIDI output from a computer to control the 
vibration motors and dampening solenoids [19]. String vibrations are 
transduced using five standard electric guitar pickups and output via a 
1/4” TS jack. The Tremolo-Harp’s output can be plugged directly into 
a guitar amplifier or audio interface, and the output signal level is 
controllable through a potentiometer on the side of the instrument.  
 
 
Figure 1: Tremolo-Harp top view 
 
Figure 2: Tremolo-Harp side view 
3.2 Actuation 
As previously mentioned, the Tremolo-Harp’s primary mode of 
actuation consists of vibration motors striking the strings. After testing 
a variety of different motors, the Jinlong Machinery & Electronics Co., 
Ltd’s Z4KH2B0470652 11000 RPM 3VDC motor emerged as the 
best option in terms of size and vibrating force (see Figure 3). Pulse 
width modulation (PWM) is used to control the voltage being sent to 
the motors, which allows for continuous changes in dynamics. An 
early, smaller prototype of the Tremolo-Harp used an Arduino Uno 
microcontroller; however, this produced an audible hum due to the 
fixed PWM frequency of 490Hz on most pins (pins 5 and 6 output 
980Hz) when using the analogWrite() function [1]. This frequency 
was significantly amplified by the electric guitar pickups. Attempts to 
mitigate this problem led to the use of the Teensy 3.6 microcontroller, 
which has an easily-adjustable PWM frequency. The ideal frequency 
for 8 bits of PWM resolution at a 96MHz clock speed is listed as 
187500Hz in Teensy documentation [18]. Setting the PWM frequency 
to this ultrasonic value eliminated the hum produced by the Arduino. 
Additionally, the Teensy 3.6 provided enough PWM-capable and 
standard digital pins to control twelve strings of vibration motors and 
dampening solenoids. 
 
Figure 3: Jinlong Machinery & Electronics Co., Ltd’s 
Z4KH2B0470652 11000 RPM 3VDC vibration motor  
4. SOFTWARE DESIGN AND CONTROL 
4.1 MIDI Control Modes 
In order to maximize the capabilities of the instrument, the Tremolo-
Harp is programmed with four control modes (see Table 1). 
“Standard” control consists of activating both the vibration motors and 
dampers, similarly to the action of a piano. This is achieved by sending 
MIDI note numbers 52-63, where the velocity values are mapped to 8-
bit PWM values, controlling the intensity of vibration. MIDI note 
numbers 40-51 allow for control of the vibration motors independently 
of the dampers, which produces a muted effect, and note numbers 64-
75 allow for direct control of the dampers, which can be used to extend 
the sustain of a note, or to produce percussive, hamme r-on 
articulations. One of the most important capabilities of the Tremolo-
Harp is the ability to continuously adjust the dynamics of the vibration 
motors striking the strings. To facilitate this, control change messages 
52-63 directly adjust the PWM value, and can be used to change 
dynamics following a note on message. 
Table 1: Tremolo-Harp control modes  
Control Mode MIDI Note Number* 
Vibration Motors Only 40-51 
Vibration Motors and 
Dampers 
52-63 
Dampers Only 64-75 
Vibration Motors 
(continuous) 
52-63 (*cc message) 
 
4.2 Max for Live Software Interface 
The goal of producing an instrument with continuously-varying 
dynamic control made programming the Tremolo-Harp more 
complicated than previous approaches to robotic stringed 
instruments. For example, on EMMI’s Automatic Monochord 
Instrument (AMI), note on messages are sufficient to depress a 
tangent (to control pitch) and pick the string [15] . However, 
exploring the capabilities of the Tremolo-Harp for sustain and  
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
302
continuously-varying dynamics means that a variety of different 
control techniques may be used for a single note gesture. For 
example, a standard note-on message may be sent to initiate a 
note, then control-change messages may be sent to adjust the 
dynamics, with the damper solenoids remaining on to sustain the 
note, akin to the sustain pedal on a piano. While it is possible to 
automate both the note on and control change messages, for 
example using automation curves in a digital audio workstation 
or directly through a musical programming language, a 
“Noteshaper” Max for Live device was developed to provide 
specific control for this type of note gesture. This device allows 
the user to draw in amplitude envelopes, set the duration, toggle 
note off messages (allowing the dampers to remain lifted when 
the note “ends”), and to add a time offset for note off messages, 
which allows each string to sustain for a specified period of time 
(see Figure 4). This device is controlled by MIDI note on 
messages from Live. The adjustable parameters (Env. Preset #, 
Env. Duration, Note Offs, and Note Off Delay Time) can also be 
controlled through automation in Live. 
 
 
Figure 4: Tremolo-Harp Noteshaper Max for Live device 
(control for first three strings shown). 
4.3 Sonic Output 
Figures 5 and 6 show a waveform and spectrogram of a 10-
second triangular envelope using the Noteshaper Max for Live 
device on E2 that produces a linear fade in and out of the PWM 
value. The signal was sent through a Radial J48 DI box into an  
RME Fireface UCX interface and recorded in Logic at 44.1 kHz 
sampling rate/24 bits. This produced a dynamic range between -
68.2dB (minimum RMS) and -18.6dB (maximum RMS). By 
looking at the waveform and spectrogram one can see that while 
dynamic changes are possible, the response of the instrument is 
nonlinear. On the one hand, this nonlinearity represents an 
inherent feature of the Tremolo-Harp, which produces a uniquely 
rich timbre based on its mechanical design. This approach is less 
discretely controlled than other pick-based robotic string 
instruments and produces more variable results. On the ot her 
hand, part of this nonlinear response comes from the relationship 
between PWM values and the response of the vibration motor 
itself, which is nonlinear. In the future I plan to develop a 
firmware-based lookup table that will produce a more linear 
relationship between PWM values and vibration intensity. This 
will allow the user more control over the Tremolo-Harp’s  
dynamics without affecting the instrument’s unique sound. 
 
 
Figure 5: Waveform display of 10-second triangular 
envelope on E2. Created in Sonic Visualiser. 
 
Figure 6: Spectrogram display of 10-second triangular 
envelope on E2. Created in Sonic Visualiser. 
5. MUSICAL RESULTS 
The majority of contemporary robotic string instruments (with some 
notable exceptions listed in Section 2) are built using designs that focus 
on the production of discrete attacks (e.g. through picking 
mechanisms) rather than continuous sound. As a result, musicians 
working with these instruments tend to focus on musical gestures such 
as hyper-virtuosic speed and complex rhythms [5]. This has certainly 
been true in my own compositions for robotic instruments. As a result, 
I wanted to explore the capabilities for mechatronic expression that 
could be produced by an instrument that would primarily focus on 
longer, more sustained sounds [6].  
 Tremolo-Harp Study 1 (2019) represents the first piece composed 
for the Tremolo-Harp (see link to video at the end of the paper). This 
study explores the instrument’s unique timbral properties as well as its 
capabilities to create long, sustained textures and continuous dynamic 
changes. The overall musical concept for this piece is one of slowly-
evolving chords of differing durations that move across the range of 
the instrument. While this composition does not incorporate all of the 
performance techniques that the Tremolo-Harp is capable of, for 
example hammer-ons played by the dampening solenoids, it does 
demonstrate the instrument’s unique timbre and ability to produce 
continuously-changing dynamics and sustained textures. 
 While the Tremolo-Harp can function as a solo instrument, its ability 
to play sustained, chordal textures makes it well-suited to accompany  
both human performers and existing solenoid-based robotic string and 
percussion instruments that I have developed. A second study for this 
instrument that is still under development explores human-robot 
interaction by pairing the Tremolo-Harp with a live electric guitarist. 
Anticipation of this paring is one reason the Tremolo-Harp is tuned to 
a chromatic scale beginning on E2.  
 To enable real-time interaction between a guitarist and the Tremolo-
Harp, I have developed a Max for Live device that applies pitch 
tracking and envelope following to the guitar’s signal. This device 
interfaces with the Noteshaper device described in section 4.2 and 
allows the Tremolo-Harp to respond to both the guitar’s pitch and 
dynamic shape. The initial version of this device focuses on translating 
these parameters to the Tremolo-Harp. For example, the envelope 
following module can detect a picking gesture, which has a short 
attack and longer decay. The Tremolo-Harp can then perform this 
gesture following the amplitude of the guitar’s signal at the original 
pitch, at a pitch offset, or with a chord. By adjusting attack and decay 
settings in the envelope following module, the Tremo lo-Harp’s 
gestures can be made longer or shorter than the sound of the live input. 
Early explorations have focused on three types of guitar playing: 
traditional picking (as explained above), using an EBow 
(electromagnetic bowing device), and hammer-ons. The EBow 
produces accompanying long, sustained gestures on the Tremolo-
Harp, while hammer-ons are mapped to short, staccato notes played 
by the dampening solenoids. 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
303
6. CONCLUSION 
The Tremolo-Harp represents a new approach to robotic string 
instruments that employs a unique method of string articulation to 
produce a distinctive timbre inspired by tremolo performance 
technique, as well as the capability for long sustained textures and 
continuous dynamic variation. This instrument provides  
complementary capabilities to existing robotic string instruments, 
which tend to focus on speed and precise timing. On a technical level, 
refinements to this instrument will include development of the PWM 
value lookup table described in section 4.3 and the use of PWM to 
control the dampening solenoids. This would reduce the mechanical 
sound of these actuators and could be used for other timbral effects. 
Further musical exploration of this instrument will include developing 
new studies that focus on human-robot interaction, incorporating 
novel performance gestures, such as rapid hammer-ons played by the 
dampening solenoids, and including the Tremolo-Harp in a growing 
ensemble of robotic instruments.  
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This project was completed with support from the Rutgers  
University Research Council, the Rutgers Aresty Research 
Center, and undergraduate research assistants Ryan Mulroney, 
Zetao Yu, and Brad Miller. Fabrication support was provided by 
Stacey Carton and the Rutgers University Libraries as well as the 
Rutgers Makerspace.  
8. ETHICAL STANDARDS 
Funding for the Tremolo- Harp was provided by the Rutgers 
University Research Council and personal research funds. This 
project is free from conflicts of interest. 
9. REFERENCES 
[1] Arduino analogWrite() 
https://www.arduino.cc/reference/en/language/functions/analog
-io/analogwrite/ 
[2] S. Barton et al. Cyther: a human-playable, self-tuning robotic 
zither. In Proceedings of the 2017 New Interfaces for Musical 
Expression conference, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2017, 319-324.  
[3] P. Bloland. The Electromagnetically-Prepared Piano and its 
Compositional Implications, In Proceedings of the 2007 
International Computer Music Conference. Copenhagen, 
Denmark, 2007, 125-128.  
[4] D. Fallows. Tremolo. In Grove Music Online, 2001, Retrieved 
January 16, 2020 from 
http://www.oxfordmusiconline.com/view/10.1093/gmo/978156
1592630.001.0001/omo-9781561592630-e-0000028314 
[5] S. Kemper. Composing for Musical Robots: Aesthetics of 
electromechanical music. Emille: The Journal of the Korean 
Electro-Acoustic Music Society 12 (2014), 25-31. 
[6] S. Kemper, and S. Barton. Mechatronic Expression: 
Reconsidering Expressivity in Music for Robotic Instruments. 
In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression Virginia Tech University, 
Blacksburg, VA, 2018, 84-87. 
[7] L. Maes, G-W. Raes and T. Rogers. The Man and Machine 
Robot Orchestra at Logos. Computer Music Journal 35, No. 4, 
2011, 28–48.  
[8] A. McPherson. The Magnetic Resonator Piano: Electronic 
Augmentation of an Acoustic Grand Piano. Journal of New 
Music Research 39, 3, 2010, 189–202.  
[9] J. Murphy, et al. Expressive Robotic Guitars: Developments in 
Musical Robotics for Chordophones. Computer Music Journal 
39, 1, 2015, 59–73.  
[10] D. Overholt, E. Berdahl and R. Hamilton. Advancements in 
Actuated Musical Instruments. Organised Sound 16, 2, 2011, 
154–165.   
[11] H. Park, et al. A Study about Robotic Hand and Finger for 
Violin Playing Robot. International Journal of Applied 
Engineering Research 10, 11, 2015, 27553-27557.   
[12] J. P. Y. Placencia, J. Murphy, and D. Carnegie. Exploring 
Dynamic Variations for Expressive Mechatronic 
Chordophones. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME’19), Federal 
University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 2019, 
413-418.  
[13] G-W. Raes. <Aeio> 
https://www.logosfoundation.org/instrum_gwr/aeio.html  
[14] G-W. Raes. <Hurdy> 
https://www.logosfoundation.org/instrum_gwr/hurdygurdy.htm
l  
[15] T. Rogers, S. Kemper, and S. Barton. MARIE: Monochord-
Aerophone Robotic Instrument Ensemble. In Proceedings of 
the 15th International Conference on New Interfaces for 
Musical Expression (NIME) Louisiana State University, Baton 
Rouge, LA, 2015, 408-411. 
[16] K. Shibuya. Violin Playing Robot and Kansei. In Musical 
Robots and Interactive Multimodal Systems. Springer, Berlin, 
Heidelberg, 2011, 179–193. 
[17] E. Singer, K. Larke, and D. Bianciardi. LEMUR GuitarBot: 
MIDI Robotic String Instrument. In Proceedings of the 2003 
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-
03), Montreal, Canada, 2003, 188-191. 
[18] Teensy Pulsed Output: PWM & Tone 
https://www.pjrc.com/teensy/td_pulse.html  
[19] Teensy USB MIDI https://www.pjrc.com/teensy/td_midi.html 
[20] R. Vindriis, A. Kapur, and D. Carnegie. A Comparison of 
Pick-Based Strategies for Robotic Bass Playing. In 
Proceedings of the Electronics New Zealand Conference, 
2011, 67–72.  
10. Video Example 
Tremolo-Harp study 1: 
https://youtu.be/DUXXjP3IIYs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME-20), Birmingham, 2020
304