ABSTRACT
The Ghost has been developed to create a merger between 
the standard MIDI keyboard controller, MIDI/digital guitars 
and alternative desktop controllers.  Using a custom software 
editor, The Ghost’s controls can be mapped to suit the users 
performative needs.  The interface takes its interaction and 
gestural cues from the guitar but it is not a MIDI guitar.  The 
Ghost’s hardware, firmware and software will be open 
sourced with the hopes of creating a community of  users that 
are invested in creating music with controller.
Keywords
Controller, MIDI, Live Performance, Programmable, Open-
Source
1. INTRODUCTION
The creation of  The Ghost came from  an interest in the sound 
generating/sculpting abilities of synthesizers, my background 
as a guitar player as well as from  the desire to control Digital 
Audio Workstations with a performance controller that 
allows for mobility and gestural control.  Many of  the 
innovative commercial controllers released in the past few 
years have succeeded in moving the performance out of  the 
laptop.  Unfortunately, most have not moved much further 
than the desk space next to the laptop.  Borrowing the form 
factor of the guitar, The Ghost presents itself  in a familiar yet 
new package.  Most of  the familiar gestures associated with 
the guitar translate to The Ghost.  Strumming and picking 
notes as well as scalar runs up and down the neck are adapted 
to the new interface.  With that said, The Ghost is not 
intended to be a guitar or a digital guitar.  There are many 
MIDI guitar systems and digital guitars available today but 
these are designed for guitar players using a 1 to 1 recreation 
of the guitar interface.  The intended users of  The Ghost are 
not only guitars players but also keyboard players, computer 
musicians and people that are new to playing musical 
The Ghost: 
an open-source, user programmable 
MIDI performance controller
Paul Rothman
Interactive Telecommunications Program, New York University
721 Broadway, 4th Floor 
New York, NY 10003
+1 2019608608
paul@fridgebuzzz.com
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this 
work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee 
provided that copies are not made or  distributed for  profit or 
commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the 
full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or  republish, 
to post on servers or  to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee.
NIME2010, June 15-18, 2010, Sydney, Australia
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Figure 1. The Ghost MKII
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
431
instruments. As I will explain further in the paper, The Ghost 
interface can be made as easy or complicated, as the user 
requires.
2. SYSTEM
A basic overview of  the system  in use can be summed up like 
this:  the user chooses presets or creates their own control 
mappings in the software editor and loads them (as .txt files) 
onto an SD card.  The SD card is inserted into The Ghost and 
the mappings are read and parsed by the microcontroller.  
Using the onboard rotary encoder (data knob) with “press to 
select” function and the LCD screen, the user can select a 
mapping or “patch” and begin playing.  There are a few 
modes of play that can be accessed within one patch so that 
mappings can be changed during a performance.  
 Depending on the mode of operation, The Ghost 
can act as a melodic lead or harmonic rhythm instrument, 
sequence percussion or trigger samples. The user interface 
consists of 48 LED pushbutton switches (arranged in three 
rows of 16 along the neck), eight resistive touch sensitive 
switches, four rotary potentiometers, a SoftPot linear 
potentiometer, a “whammy bar” (spring loaded control stick), 
four “mode” selection slide switches and a two axis 
accelerometer.  How The Ghost is played depends on how 
the controls are mapped and what modes are active.  The 
three main modes are Chord, Note and Drum.  
 In Chord mode, the user has mapped chords to 36 
or 48 buttons along the neck.  The system is open but as I 
play The Ghost (see Figure 2 ), the top row of  buttons are 
mapped to Major chords and ascend in fifths from C Major.  
The second row of buttons are set as the relative Minor chord 
of the Major chord in the first row.  The third row of  buttons 
act as “shift” keys not unlike on a QWERTY keyboard.  By 
pressing a Major or Minor chord button and one or multiple 
shift keys, additional chords can be played including 
Seventh, diminished, and augmented chords.  A number of 
other chords and voicings can be programmed from  the 
software editor.  Pressing multiple chord buttons at once can 
create polychords, something not easily achievable on a 
stringed guitar or conventional keyboard. While simply 
pressing a single or combination of buttons on the neck can 
produce sound, the deeper interaction comes from  the use of 
the touch plate located on the body of The Ghost.  By 
selecting the use of  the touch plate, the user can break up the 
chord into individual notes which can be laid out in a number 
of different ways.  The plate can arpeggiate the chord in a 
root, third, fifth fashion, play a scale in the key of that chord 
or even play notes reflecting those that would be played if 
The Ghost were a guitar.  The mapping of the plate function, 
like the functions of the buttons along the neck, can be edited 
in software.  The upper 12 buttons can be mapped to a 
number of things but one idea is to have them laid out to 
represent a chromatic scale so that scales and lead parts can 
be played with accidentals while in Chord mode as shown in 
Figure 2.
 The second main mode of play is the Note mode.  
This mode allows the user to have each button represent a 
MIDI note as opposed to a chord.  This mode is suited for 
melodic or lead playing as opposed the the harmonic nature 
of the Chord mode.  The user can map the 48 buttons to any 
notes they choose allowing for a completely custom 
performance interface.  The mapping can be based on music 
theory principles like scales or can be set to mimic other 
instrument layouts.  By mapping MIDI notes to functions in 
the user’s DAW, the buttons can act as drum or sample 
triggers, clip launchers in Ableton Live, control MAX/MSP 
or any other MIDI controlled function within the user’s 
software.  The aforementioned mode switches can select 
whether or not the 48 buttons access chords or notes, whether 
the chords/notes are played automatically or triggered from 
the touch plate, change the mapping of  the touch plate from 
two preselected options or turn the drum  programming mode 
on.
 In the Drum  mode, the 48 buttons along the neck 
are used to create percussive patterns that can be edited and 
manipulated in real time.  Programming the patterns is 
similar to the programming of a x0x style drum machine.  On 
The Ghost, the top row of buttons display the pattern for the 
selected MIDI note or drum hit.  The LEDs cycle through 
along the 16 steps of the middle row of buttons.  The active 
MIDI note/drum hit is selected by the third row of  buttons.  
The MIDI note numbers are selected in the software editor 
and 16 can be stored in one patch.  By selecting a MIDI note/
drum hit, the hits can be placed along the 16 beat timeline.  
Pressing a button illuminates it, signify that it is active and 
will be sending a MIDI note on that step.  Pressing the button 
again will clear that step of  the MIDI note.  The middle row 
of buttons also act like a scrub selector for the step timeline.  
Pressing any one of  the 16 buttons in the middle row will 
cause the “play head” of the drum pattern to skip to that step.  
For example, if the sequence is running and is currently at 
Figure 2. Example Chord and Note Mapping
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
432
step 10, the user can press the fourth button and the pattern 
will jump to step four.  This way, the user can dynamically 
play the sequenced pattern and change its play order on the 
fly adding another interaction to drum  sequencing.  The 
tempo of  the pattern playback is controlled via the rotary 
encoder.
 Along with these modes of  play, The Ghost is 
equipped with seven continuous controllers for the user to 
manipulate during a performance.  Four rotary 
potentiometers can be mapped to Continuos Controller 
messages in the user’s DAW and control things such as 
volume, frequency cutoff, envelope parameters etc.  The 
three other performative controls are the SoftPot linear 
potentiometer, “whammy bar” and two axis accelerometer.  
These controls can be freely mapped but here are some of the 
uses I envision.  The mod strip can as a modulation source as 
on a standard MIDI keyboard controller or can control other 
parameters such as filter cutoff or resonance and pitch 
shifting.  One interesting mapping would be to set the 
SoftPot to control the pitch of  a synthesizer as one  would do 
with a ribbon controller.  The whammy bar is spring loaded 
and can act as a pitch bend control, or more interestingly, a 
volume control.  In this usage, a user could trigger a note 
with their left hand and then smoothly swell the volume up to 
create a soft attack and decay like a violin or theremin.  The 2 
axis accelerometer is interesting because it allows for using 
gestures normally associated with the electric guitar but in a 
different manner and with different results.  By tilting The 
Ghost vertical, with the headstock pointing increasingly 
upward, the user can change the octave or register in which 
they are playing.  The more vertical the instrument becomes, 
the higher the octave it is playing in.  The other axis is also 
interesting in that when the body is pulled upward, making it 
perpendicular to the ground, a parameter will be changed.  
Perhaps for example the feedback or delay time of a digital 
delay effect.
 With all of these controls, the MIDI channel can be 
freely assigned in the software editor so that individual 
controls can control several digital instruments.  To add to 
the visual presence of the Ghost, the headstock contains eight 
white LEDs that turn on when the corresponding touch plate 
is activated.   Sweeping a hand across the touch plate creates 
a shimmer of  light which creates a visually pleasing effect for 
the audience.
3. HARDWARE
The Ghost’s hardware is comprised of  three key circuit 
systems.  They are the button boards, touch plate and master 
controller.  The design of  the hardware has been made 
intentionally modular.  The idea behind this is that electronics 
can be rehoused in the future to create new interfaces based 
on the same electronics.  Figure 3 shows the button boards 
assembled and in place next to the neck.  Each board 
contains an ATmega168 microcontroller that is programmed 
from  the Arduino1 IDE.  Arduino was chosen because of its 
large user community, ease of  use and commitment to open 
source.  Each button board runs the same program and uses 
row column scanning to read button presses and light up 
LEDs.  Its address is selected via a four position DIP switch.  
The input information is sent to the master controller via i2c 
protocol.  The LEDs can be addressed individually from  the 
master controller.  As an aside, the result of  having a 
microcontroller on each button pad is that each 3x4 unit is 
conceivably its own instrument.  By writing MIDI out 
commands to the firmware, each button pad can send MIDI 
data directly to a sound generator.  Therefore, if the button 
pads are used outside of  The Ghost controller, any number of 
new interfaces can be derived from this platform.
 The master controller, as seen in Figure 4 is run by 
an ATmega1280 and is also programmed via the Arduino 
IDE.  The master controller handles all of the control data,  
SD card input, MIDI output as well as control circuitry for 
the touch plate. As previously mentioned, the touch plate 
consists of eight switches.  Each switch is made up of  three 
copper traces that are arranged in an interleaved zipper 
configuration where one trace carries a ground signal and the 
other two are trigger inputs feeding the control circuit.  When 
a finger bridges the two signals to ground, a pulse is sent to 
the control circuit.      Firmware is currently being developed   
where the master controller compares the timing of  the two 
input triggers and can derive velocity data from it.  The touch 
control circuit is created around a 556 timer in monostable 
mode.  
 Power distribution was a considered aspect of the 
hardware design.  USB Bus-powering The Ghost was 
considered but ultimately, a custom  MIDI cable and breakout 
box were created to be able to meet any current draw from 
future hardware additions and allow for both Data and Power 
lines to be run on  single cable.  In addition, there is a DC 
power input allowing for a standard MIDI cable to be used in 
the event it is needed
Figure 3. LED button boards
Figure 4. Master Control Board
1Arduino. http://www.arduino.cc
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
433
 For the construction, The Ghost was built based on 
techniques and materials associated with electric guitars.  
Solid wood was cut to shape and the neck and body has been 
chambered to accommodate the electronics.  Both hand 
cutting and laser cutting methods were used in the design and 
fabrication of The Ghost.  The neck is a bolt-on style and the 
back plate is clear acrylic so that the electronics can be seen.
4.  SOFTWARE
The Ghost software editor is written in the open source 
Processing1 environment.  The editor is a Processing applet 
that writes text files to the computer it is running on.  These 
text files become the presets that are loaded onto an SD card 
and inserted into The Ghost.   Different user maps can be 
accessed on board The Ghost via the rotary encoder and LCD 
screen.  Figure 5 shows the GUI for the Ghost Editor.  Each 
button pad is represented by a square and can be selected and 
made active.  Once a button is active, it can have attributes 
associated to it.  There are four tabs at the top of the screen.  
They are: Chord, Note, CC, and Channel.  The Chord tab 
provides a drop down menu for the user to select a chord to 
be associated with that button.  Likewise, using the Note, CC 
and Channel tabs, MIDI notes, CC messages and MIDI 
channel can be attributed to a button or a combination of 
buttons.  The CC controls can only be assigned CC messages 
and MIDI channels.
Creating unique mappings is one of the exciting 
aspects of  The Ghost.  Each individual player can lay the 
controls out as best suits them.  Different mappings or 
“patches” can be stored in the controller to use within one 
performance.  As mentioned earlier, The Ghost can be as 
easy or challenging to play as the user wants.  For a simple 
example, the user could create a “patch” that has the chord 
progression for a particular song arranged down the neck.  
Different sections of the song i.e. verse, chorus, bridge, could 
be set along different rows of the neck.  The user would only 
have to press the appropriate button while moving  their hand 
down the neck while strumming the touch plate to play a 
song.  For this reason The Ghost could be a very accessible 
first instrument for a new musician.
On the other end of the spectrum, complex patches 
can be created that involve the use of many buttons held 
down at once to create different chord qualities.  In Figure 6 
you can see a number of  different chords that can be made 
from  a few button presses within a given mapping.  By using 
the shift keys directly below and adjacent to the chord that is 
being played, different chord qualities can be achieved. 
5. OPEN SOURCE
One of  the hopes for The Ghost is that users will share their 
patches and come up with creative new mappings as well as 
expressive new ways of  using the controls.  Inspired by the 
monome, this idea of building a community around an 
instrument is what lead to the decision of making it open 
source.  By opening the firmware, hardware and software, 
users can make what they want of  The Ghost platform and 
create use cases that I have not thought of.  This is also what 
will set The Ghost apart from other MIDI controllers on the 
market.  By using the Arduino platform, The Ghost is 
accessible to a wide audience of makers, hackers, and 
intrepid musicians.  
 As previously mentioned, The Ghost’s electronics 
have been modularly designed.  The button boards come in 
Figure 5. Ghost Editor Software
Figure 6. Button combinations create additional 
chord qualities
1Processing. http://www.processing.org
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
434
arrangements of  three buttons by four buttons.  Since each 
board has it’s own microcontroller, it can be programmed to 
be a controller in itself.  A simple change in code and the 
addition of  a MIDI DIN socket, the button board is a 12 
button controller. 
6. EXPERIENCE
In use, playing The Ghost is fairly straightforward. 
Technique can be developed for more advanced playing 
styles but ultimately, since there are no moving parts like 
strings, a user can begin playing with very little practice.  For 
me, a guitar player, it felt very natural to play and in my 
observations during user testing, other players took to the 
concept very quickly.  Even if  a user has not played a guitar 
before, the two handed playing technique is known and 
established and even commonly experienced through music 
games such as Guitar Hero and Rock Band.  
 After some time playing The Ghost, I have realized 
that the physical feedback provided by the touch plates is not 
as good as it could be.  One of the great things about playing 
the touch plate is that one can effortlessly swipe their hand 
across  all eight switches and strum  notes with ease.  Where 
this system  becomes less than ideal is when a player wants to 
play specific notes individually.  This can be accomplished 
but in my experience, the user needs to look down and 
visually see the touch plates in order to strike the correct one.  
I am still searching for a way to provide tactile feedback so 
that the user can feel which switch they are currently 
touching.  This will allow for more accurate picking and the 
freedom to disengage ones eyes from  the touch plates while 
playing.
 Although there is no foot controller in The Ghost 
system, general MIDI controllers can be used to enhance the 
playing experience.  In my own performances, I have used a 
Behringer FCB1010 to change sound patches on the fly as 
well as trigger samples and send MIDI CC messages with 
foot treadles.  With two foot treadles, I am able to adjust the 
volume and pitch of the synthesizer adding new dynamic 
control.
7. ALTERNATIVES
During the development of  The Ghost I have looked into 
many of the commercially available MIDI and digital guitars.  
Instruments such as the Roland V-Guitar System, the Yamaha 
EZ-AG, the Misa Digital guitar, and Starr Labs Ztar series 
are similar in appearance but have different functionality.  As 
mentioned earlier in the paper, I do not consider The Ghost to 
be a guitar at all but a programmable MIDI controller in the 
form  of a guitar.  The Ghost takes the form of  the guitar for 
its interaction and gestures as well as its familiarity.  Most 
users who have tested The Ghost have instinctively known 
how to begin playing it.  The Ghost could easily be a 
rectangularly shaped desktop unit or long and narrow like the 
Chapman Stick.  The reason for adopting the guitar  shape 
was to make The Ghost more intuitive and accepted among 
users unfamiliar with alternative music controllers.  In 
addition, as a guitar player myself, it felt natural to leverage 
my experience in guitar playing and building to create a new 
interface.  
 What the aforementioned instruments have that 
make them  true guitars, digital or otherwise are their control 
layouts.  Each of these instruments have a 1:1 recreation of 
the guitar interface, meaning 20+ columns or “frets” of 
buttons multiplied by six rows of  “strings”.  They also all, 
with the exception of  the Misa, have physical strings as a 
control device.  By simplifying and resizing the buttons 
along the neck of  The Ghost, the user is not forced to think as 
if they were playing a guitar.  In addition, the touch switches, 
when held, can provide infinite sustain like a keyboard 
instrument.  On top of these points, The Ghost is an open 
platform designed to be revised and refined by the user.  With 
access to software, firmware and hardware, the user is free to 
alter the functionality of the instrument however they see fit.  
The aforementioned guitar controllers operate within closed 
systems that can only be partially altered by the user and 
require previous knowledge and skill on the guitar to play 
them.
 The controller that I see as the most similar to The 
Ghost is the Eigenharp from  Eigenlabs.  Both instruments 
leverage classical instrument styles and provide open and 
customizable platforms for musical expression.  The 
Eigenharp is without a doubt a far more complex and precise 
instrument but that comes at a price not suited for everyday 
musicians.  What The Ghost lacks in depth of  control, it 
makes up for in mass appeal and accessibility.  While I do 
not have a price associated with a commercial version of The 
Ghost, it would fall significantly under $1,000 USD, making 
it within reach to a larger population of musicians.
8. FUTURE
The Ghost MK2 will be presented on May 5 as my thesis 
project for the completion of my masters degree at the 
Interactive Telecommunications Program at New York 
University.   I am  currently gauging interest in The Ghost as 
a commercial controller and will be looking into 
manufacturing possibilities in the Summer of  2010.  Further 
information including schematics and source code will be 
available at www.fridgebuzzz.com/synth/TheGhost.html.
9. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to instructors Greg Shakar and Hans-Cristoph 
Steiner, Tom Igoe, Matt Parker, Eric Rosenthal, Tymm 
Twillman and Elias Zananiri. 
10. REFERENCES
[1] Igoe, Tom. http://www.tigoe.net/pcomp/code/serial-
communication/midi
[2] Koch, Martin, Building Electric Guitars. Martin Koch.  
Gleisdorf, Austria, 2001.
[3] Mims, F. Timer, Op Amp, and Optoelectronic Circuits 
and Projects. Master Publishing, Inc. Lincolnwood, IL, 
1989.
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Sydney, Australia
435