The EMvibe: An Electromagnetically Actuated Vibraphone
N. Cameron Britt
Department of Music
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ, USA
nbritt@princeton.edu
Jeff Snyder
Department of Music
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ, USA
josnyder@princeton.edu
Andrew McPherson
Centre for Digital Music
Queen Mary University of
London
London, United Kingdom
andrewm@eecs.qmul.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
The EMvibe is an augmented vibraphone that allows for
continuous control over the amplitude and spectrum of in-
dividual notes. The system uses electromagnetic actuators
to induce vibrations in the vibraphone’s aluminum tone
bars. The tone bars and the electromagnetic actuators are
coupled via neodymium magnets aﬃxed to each bar. The
acoustic properties of the vibraphone allowed us to develop
a very simple, low-cost and powerful ampliﬁcation solution
that requires no heat sinking. The physical design is meant
to be portable and robust, and the system can be easily in-
stalled on any vibraphone without interfering with normal
performance techniques. The system supports multiple in-
terfacing solutions, aﬀording the performer and composer
the ability to interact with the EMvibe in diﬀerent ways
depending on the musical context.
Keywords
Vibraphone, augmented instrument, electromagnetic actu-
ation
1. INTRODUCTION
The vibraphone is a keyboard percussion instrument con-
sisting of aluminum bars mounted over tuned metal tubes
which act as resonators. While the decay time of the vi-
braphone is long as compared with other keyboard percus-
sion instruments, the instrument is incapable of sustaining
sounds, and only certain amplitude envelopes are possible:
Once the bar is struck the sound begins to decay. The
tremolo, or roll, is the most common technique for creating
more sustained textures on the vibraphone, but often the
individual attacks are audible. Using a bow aﬀords other
amplitude envelopes, but bow changes are quite problem-
atic, so the length of the bow limits the envelopes that
can be created. Furthermore, when using a bow a single
player is limited to playing, at most, two notes simultane-
ously (one bow in each hand) and certain passages can be
quite diﬃcult to execute because moving from the acciden-
tals to the “white keys,” for example, requires reaching all
the way across the instrument. Playing overtones on the
vibraphone is possible with mallets or a bow, but the tech-
nique requires two hands meaning that the performer can
only play one note at a time, and only the ﬁrst overtone is
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
NIME’12,May 21 – 23, 2012, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
available. While certainly a very capable instrument, the
vibraphone has its limits.
In this paper we present the EMvibe, an electronically
augmented vibraphone that extends the capabilities of the
standard vibraphone. The EMvibe is an acoustic vibra-
phone augmented with electromagnetic actuators allowing
for enhanced control of the vibraphone’s amplitude enve-
lope and harmonic content. The instrument is capable of
inﬁnite sustain of up to seven pitches simultaneously as well
as continuous control of the instrument’s overtones. All of
the sound of the EMvibe is produced by the vibraphone it-
self, without loudspeakers, so in terms of sound diﬀusion the
instrument remains acoustic. An important design consid-
eration was that the added hardware not interfere with the
vibraphone’s more traditional playing techniques, so in this
sense the EMvibe is conceived as an augmented vibraphone.
2. EXISTING INSTRUMENTS
The Electromagnetically-Prepared Piano is a system devel-
oped by Berdahl [1] and Bloland [3] consisting of twelve
electromagnetic actuators positioned over the strings of the
piano in a way that does not interfere with the normal
hammer action of the piano. Each actuator is connected
to its own ampliﬁer channel and each ampliﬁer channel
has a dedicated DAC channel feeding it audio generated
in Max/MSP. Using twelve actuators the researchers can
theoretically cover the entire range of the piano by using
overtones, although the audio signals sent to the actuators
need not be harmonic.
Andrew McPherson’s Magnetic Resonator Piano [6] uses
a similar actuation system to the above, but covers the en-
tire range of the piano as opposed to the Electromagnetically-
Prepared Piano’s twelve coils. Each actuator is driven by its
own ampliﬁer, but the system uses many fewer DAC chan-
nels than ampliﬁer channels. Each ampliﬁer is connected
to a 16-channel multiplexer allowing any ampliﬁer to be
connected to any of the sixteen DAC channels. In terms
of signal processing the Magnetic Resonator Piano employs
a feedback-based approach, using a single piezo pickup on
the piano soundboard as the source. The system is designed
to give the pianist access to the additional capabilities by
means of a standard MIDI keyboard, or an augmented piano
keyboard.
Electromagnetic actuation has also been used with the
electric guitar with the EBow [5] and feedback-based sys-
tems [2]. Shear and Wright developed the Electromagneti-
cally Sustained Rhodes Piano [8] which uses electromagnetic
actuators to drive the tines of a Fender Rhodes electric pi-
ano. Boutin and Besnainou [4] have done work in active
control of xylophone bars.
2.1 Comparison to Previous Work
Our system is similar in approach to the Magnetic Res-
onator piano in that we intend to give the vibraphone player
access to the enhanced capabilities the EMvibe aﬀords, or
to at least have that option. We therefore cover the entire
range of the vibraphone and employ a signal routing sys-
tem similar to the Magnetic Resonator Piano. The EMvibe
does not currently use a feedback-based approach to audio
signal generation, instead generating audio signals in the
computer as does the Electromagnetically-Prepared Piano.
While there are similarities to the above described systems,
there are also signiﬁcant diﬀerences in our implementation
owing to the diﬀerences between the vibraphone and the
piano.
3. VIBRAPHONE ACOUSTICS
While piano strings support a complete harmonic series,
vibraphone bars supports relatively fewer harmonics. Vi-
braphone bars have arches cut in the underside to empha-
size the fundamental frequency and tune the most promi-
nent overtone, making it more harmonic. The ﬁrst over-
tone is tuned to approximately four times the fundamental
frequency, or a double octave. The frequencies of higher
partials do not maintain a consistent relationship to the
fundamental; the relationship is frequency dependent and
non-harmonic. Overtones are much more prominent in the
lower range of the instrument than in the upper range.
The transverse vibratory modes are the most prominent
in the vibraphone. The tone bars also exhibit longitudinal
as well as torsional vibratory modes which are inharmonic.
In general these modes are very weak, though they may be
more prominent when the tone bars are bowed.
4. ACTUATION
The EMvibe consists of electromagnetic coils under each of
the vibraphone’s tone bars supported by aluminum brack-
ets that are clamped onto the outside support rails of the
vibraphone frame. Because vibraphone bars are made out
of an aluminum alloy they cannot be driven directly by the
electromagnetic actuators. In order to be able to actuate
the bars with electromagnets we aﬃx a small neodymium
magnet to the underside of each bar (Figure 1).
Each coil is driven by a dedicated audio ampliﬁer specif-
ically designed for this application. Ampliﬁer input sig-
nals are generated by a computer and sent to the ampli-
ﬁers via an 8-channel DAC. There are more coils than DAC
channels, so our maximum polyphony is determined by the
number of DAC channels. Signal routing between inputs
and outputs is done using analog hardware. Each ampliﬁer
channel is connected to an 8-channel analog multiplexer and
pairs of multiplexers are set by a single shift register. Voice
allocation is done in software and a microcontroller is used
to set the shift registers.
Ampliﬁer and signal routing hardware for seven channels
are on a single circuit board mounted on the instrument.
These individual circuit boards are daisy-chained creating a
hardware system that is both modular and extensible. The
ﬁrst board in the chain is connected to an external enclosure
containing power supplies, audio connections from the audio
interface and the microcontroller for signal routing. This
power box is connected to the ﬁrst ampliﬁer board in the
chain using DB25 connectors while the remaining boards are
chained using ribbon cables. The EMvibe can be installed
on a standard vibraphone within a matter of minutes and
is designed to be robust enough to withstand the rigors of
being moved. Figure 2 diagrams the signal ﬂow for the
system.
Figure 1: Placement of the electromagnetic actua-
tors.
Figure 2: Signal ﬂow for the EMvibe.
Audio synthesis and voice allocation is done on a com-
puter running software written in ChucK and Max/MSP.
Before the system can be used the tunings of the fundamen-
tals and overtones of the vibraphone must be established.
This is done by sending a single frequency to a coil and ﬁne
tuning the frequency by ear until the maximum bar response
amplitude is determined. The tuning data are written to a
text ﬁle which is referenced by the performance software to
set oscillator tunings. This tuning procedure only needs to
be undertaken once for any installation on a single vibra-
phone.
4.1 Ampliﬁer design
The vibraphone’s acoustic properties allowed us to create
to create a very simple, cheap ampliﬁer requiring no heat
sinking. Because the bars support so few vibratory modes
they eﬀectively ﬁlter out frequencies other than those that
are supported. In practical terms this means that we don’t
need to be concerned with the quality of the audio that we’re
sending to the coils, only the frequency and power. Our am-
pliﬁer design produces bipolar pulse waves. The fact that
the design requires no heat sinking allowed us considerable
ﬂexibility in our circuit board layouts and installation on
the instrument. We wanted to keep the per channel ampli-
ﬁer cost as low as possible because we need 37 channels of
ampliﬁcation to cover the standard 3-octave vibraphone.
4.2 Signal processing
The tradeoﬀ for our ampliﬁer design simplicity is that we
need to take special care with the input signals we feed
the ampliﬁers; we cannot send any arbitrary waveform. We
have to ensure that there is a small amount of “oﬀ-time” in
our signal to avoid damaging the ampliﬁers.
Driving a coil with a bipolar pulse wave produces a roughly
sinusoidal response from the vibraphone bar assuming the
frequency of the pulse wave corresponds to one of the bar’s
resonant frequencies. The amplitude of the response is de-
termined by the pulse width and our synthesis software lim-
its the maximum pulse width to keep our ampliﬁers safe.
To obtain more complex responses we use multiple oscil-
lators, one per partial, tuned to the desired frequencies. We
switch between the multiple oscillators at a low audio rate.
In this way we are able to generate a more complex bar re-
sponse without a complex waveform. Just as we control the
amplitude by varying the pulse width, we can control the
spectrum by varying the proportion of time each oscillator
is sounding.
By switching between multiple oscillators, as opposed to
switching the frequency of a single oscillator, we ensure that
the oscillators and vibraphone bar stay in phase (Figure 3).
Phase is signiﬁcant because, particularly for the fundamen-
tal, it takes some time for the bars to reach maximum am-
plitude. If we were to ignore phase we would potentially
limit our amplitude because there’s no way to guarantee
that the oscillator is in phase with the vibrating bar when
switching between partials.
Figure 3: Switching between oscillators to main-
tain phase: a) shows the switching waveform, b)
and c) show the two oscillators on their own. Note
the ”dead zones” between the positive-going and
negative-going portions of the waveforms.
4.3 Measurements
Figure 4 shows the spectra of a single tone bar (A3) actu-
ated by the EMvibe and sounded in more traditional ways.
The single spectral peak in Figure 4c shows the nearly sinu-
soidal response of the bar to a single frequency pulse wave.
Figure 4d shows the response for waveform that switches
between the fundamental and ﬁrst harmonic. The spectral
shape is similar to that of the bowed note in Figure 4b
for the fundamental and ﬁrst harmonic, though it lacks the
higher frequency components.
Figure 4: Spectra for vibraphone note A3 sounded
four diﬀerent ways.
5. AURAL DESCRIPTION
Like the other electromagnetically actuated instruments de-
scribed previously, the sound of the EMvibe might best be
described as ethereal. The sound is pure and the attacks are
legato even at their fastest. The electromagnetic actuation
is quite eﬀective when the damper pedal depressed, but the
response is extremely weak with the damper bar engaged.
The amplitude response is much stronger for the funda-
mental than for the overtones, although overtones respond
more rapidly than do fundamentals. The fundamental is
quite strong across the range of the vibraphone, but the
availability of overtones diminishes at the upper range of the
instrument. The diminished high frequency performance is
likely due to a combination of the acoustics of the instru-
ment and attenuation in the electromagnets. The attenua-
tion in the electromagnets is caused by coil inductance as
well as potential losses in the core at higher frequencies.
The EMvibe aﬀords playing legato passages much more
rapidly than is possible with a bow. It is also possible to
sustain chords of up to seven notes. Crossfading between
harmonics works well and diﬀerent eﬀects can be achieved
by crossfading at diﬀerent rates. An interesting forte-piano-
crescendo eﬀect can be achieved when an electromagneti-
cally actuated bar is struck with a mallet. This technique is
not completely reliable though as it depends on the phase
of the bar at the moment the mallet strikes.
We expected the sound of the EMvibe to be somewhat
similar to that of bowed vibraphone, and indeed there are
similarities. As with bowing it is possible to generate very
smooth attacks. Unlike bowed vibraphone, however, the
EMvibe lacks some of the high frequency content charac-
teristic of bowed vibraphone (see Figure 4). Surprisingly,
when passages are played on the the EMvibe the sound is
quite reminiscent of a ﬂute stop on a pipe organ.
6. INTERFACE
The control parameters of the EMvibe are spectrum, ampli-
tude, and frequency. The spectrum, or harmonic content,
refers to the relative amplitudes of the fundamental and
overtones, of which there are one or two depending on the
range that are strong enough to be musically useful. In
our implementation the number of control axes for spec-
trum equals the number of partials (i.e. three axes for the
fundamental and two overtones). While spectrum refers to
the relative amplitudes of the various partials, amplitude
controls the overall level.
The EMvibe was not designed with a single interface in
mind. Indeed the thought is that diﬀerent pieces will de-
mand diﬀerent interfacing and mapping strategies and the
exploration of various modes of interaction is motivating
continued work on the instrument. There are two broad
categories of use for the EMvibe, each placing the performer
in a diﬀerent relationship to the instrument, and thus de-
manding diﬀerent interfacing strategies.
6.1 As a New Sound Source
Taken as a new sound source where the vibraphone player
(if there is a human player on the instrument at all) does
not have direct control over the extended capabilities of the
instrument, interfacing with the EMvibe is fairly straight
forward as the EMvibe software can be conﬁgured to re-
spond to virtually any MIDI device.
We currently have a MIDI layer that uses Note On/Oﬀ
messages to start and stop notes, and Control Change mes-
sages to set amplitude and spectrum globally. Our MIDI
layer has two modes, Omni and Poly, determined by the
MIDI channel. In Omni mode ( channels 1-9) amplitude can
be set per note using Polyphonic Aftertouch, but spectrum
can only be set globally. In Poly mode (channels 10-16)
both amplitude and spectrum can be set per note, using
Polyphonic Aftertouch to set the amplitude and Channel
Aftertouch to set the spectrum. Global parameter changes
are available in both modes.
As a sound source controlled by some external physical
controller the EMvibe presents no unique challenges to the
user. As with any novel interface or synthesis technique the
user still has to come up with a mapping strategy. The ques-
tion of how to connect controller outputs to the EMvibe’s
inputs may have diﬀerent answers depending on the musical
context.
6.2 As an Augmented Instrument
As an augmented instrument, where the player gains ac-
cess to the extended capabilities of the instrument, the
EMvibe presents signiﬁcant challenges. Augmenting vibra-
phone technique to control the EMvibe is challenging be-
cause: 1) the vibraphone player actively uses three of his
four limbs (and the other is needed for balance) and 2) the
performer cannot maintain constant physical contact with
the instrument without adversely eﬀecting the instruments
ability to vibrate.
We are only in the beginning phases of this part of our
research, but we suspect that camera tracking holds a lot
of promise as a means to control the EMvibe. Odowichuk
et al have explored such a strategy using Microsoft Kinect
[7]. Sensor-based approaches where the sensors are placed
on the performer could also prove interesting for certain
musical contexts.
7. FUTURE WORK
With the hardware infrastructure in place we are now in
a position to do the most important work: making music.
We are particularly interested in exploring the performance
possibilities aﬀorded by an instrument that can, in a sense,
play itself. The performer may be interacting with some
automated process or other performer controlling the elec-
tromagnetic actuation, controlling the sounds himself, or
any combination thereof. The performer’s actions may ini-
tiate, stop, or alter sounds. Some of this work will be tied
into the interfacing options we explore, though some of it
will explore modes of interaction where the performer does
not have direct control.
Future work with the EMvibe will proceed on the tech-
nical front as well. We are interested in exploring various
interfacing possibilities, some of which were described previ-
ously and there are surely others we haven’t yet considered.
In addition, we are interested in experimenting with our sys-
tem on instruments other than the vibraphone. Our system
would work on the marimba or xylophone as it exists now
and we are interested in experimenting with mbira, lujon,
and steel drum. Finally, given one of the author’s expertise
in this area, we may eventually explore active control using
a feedback-based approach.
8. REFERENCES
[1] E. Berdahl, S. Backer, and I. S. Julius O. If i had a
hammer: Design and theory of an
electromagnetically-prepared piano, September 5-9,
2005.
[2] E. Berdahl, G. Niemeyer, and J. Smith. Active control
of a vibrating string. In Proc. Acoustics, 2008.
[3] P. Bloland. The electromagnetically-prepared piano
and its compositional implications, 2007.
[4] H. Boutin and C. Besnainou. Physical parameters of
an oscillator changd by active control: Application to a
xylophone bar, Septembler 1-4, 2008.
[5] G. Heet. String instrument vibration initiator and
sustainer. U.S. Pat. 4,075,921, 1978.
[6] A. McPherson. The magnetic resonator piano:
Electronic augmentation of an acoustic grand piano.
Journal of New Music Research, 39(3):189 – 202, 2010.
[7] G. Odowichuk, S. Trail, P. Driessen, W. Nie, and
W. Page. Sensor fusion: Towards a fully expressive 3d
music control interface. InCommunications,
Computers and Signal Processing (PacRim), 2011
IEEE Paciﬁc Rim Conference on , pages 836 –841, aug.
2011.
[8] G. Shear and M. Wright. The electromagnetically
sustained rhodes piano. In Proc. NIME, 2011.