Proceedings of the 2002 Conference on New Instruments for Musical Expression (NIME-02), Dublin, Ireland, May 24-26, 2002  
 NIME02-01
An Interface for Precise Musical Control
Robert Huott 
Huott Sound 
7836 Lake Shore Dr. 
Silver Bay, NY 12874, USA 
bhuott@earthlink.net 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper is a design report on a prototype musical con-
troller based on fiberoptic sensing pads from Tactex 
Controls [8].  It will discuss elements of form factor, 
technical design, and tuning/sound generation systems 
tested while building the device I have dubbed ‘the Ski’.  
The goal is the creation of a fine musical instrument with 
which a skilled performer can play music from standard 
repertoire as well as break sonic ground in modern 
forms. 
Keywords 
musical controller, Tactex, tactile interface, tuning sys-
tems  
INTRODUCTION 
The persistence of traditional interfaces in the control of 
mainstream electronic instruments highlights both the 
quality of these generations-old interfaces and the diffi-
culty of creating a new electronic interface with any po-
tential for universality and widespread acceptance.  
Many alternative interfaces are aimed at creating novel 
experiences or sounds and/or the control of meta-
parameters instead of focusing design on the generation 
of specific notes, melody, harmony, or other sound under 
precision control.  With the advent of generically sensi-
tive devices like the Tactex pad we are able to approach 
the arbitrary nature of electronic sound generation with a 
similarly arbitrary interface, one that imparts a minimum 
of its own character and allows for a wide range of ges-
tures to be mapped in any number of ways.  Of course, 
even a virtuoso performer cannot be expected to master 
an instrument that is constantly mutating, so it seems 
worthwhile to explore a smaller set of gesture mappings 
that can be used in a variety of styles and situations.  The 
Ski and its tuning system is an effort to develop an in-
strument that can be custom-scaled to each performer, 
creating musically useful relationships based on that 
person’s hands.  Important goals are the capacity to per-
form music from as many styles and periods as possible, 
and also to be able to collaborate in any kind of ensem-
ble: traditional, modern, or a hybrid of both.  In its origi-
nal mandate, Tactex technology was designed to emulate 
skin for robotic applications.  Its fine resolution makes it 
well suited to tracking subtle gestures.  Since nearly all 
precise musical manipulation is executed with the hands, 
the Ski takes the form of a specifically shaped surface, 
played primarily with fingers and hands (see Figure 1). 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Ski  in  standing  position 
FORM FACTOR 
The heart of the device is built on components of the 
Tactex Multi-Touch-Controller (MTC).  The MTC is a 
foam pad measuring 5.75 x 3.75in. containing a grid of 

 
 NIME02-02
72 fiberoptic sensors (taxels) connected to a supporting 
circuit board.  The Ski consists of three MTC pads  
combined on a curved aluminum frame, two in front on a 
convex curve, and one on the back, the curve set con-
cave.  The pad sandwich itself can only bend a small 
amount in one axis only.  Some curvature helps in posi-
tioning the hands according to the angle relative to the 
rest of the instrument.  This is an improvement over a 
flat surface which relies mostly on visual cues for posi-
tioning events.  The back surface accommodates the 
opposing thumb allowing it to play and grasp the instru-
ment at the same time.  We are seeing increased use of 
the thumb as a primary manipulator in handheld devices 
(cellphones, game controllers, etc.) so it seems appropri-
ate to include it fully in a new instrument design.  The 
front and back surfaces of the Ski are set at an angle, so 
that the varying thickness (top to bottom) can be used as 
a tactile position cue for the player, similar to the tapered 
neck of a stringed instrument such as a cello.  The front 
two MTC units are mounted one above the other in 
‘landscape’ orientation, and the one on the back in ‘por-
trait’ orientation (see Figure 2).  This setup was chosen 
based on the performance position of the hands as well 
as on hardware availability and mounting limitations.  
The entire frame is mounted in a long wooden body, 
placing the pads in comfortable positions whether played 
standing or sitting. Like a bass or cello, the Ski rests on 
the ground and shoulder, an arrangement also used on 
the Interval Stick [4]. The body gives the instrument 
enough mass for a substantial feel.  The tapered ‘ski’ 
shape was chosen with the idea that ultimately we will be 
able to wrap sensitive surfaces over the entire device, 
and in keeping with the concept that a tapered design 
with compound curves will aid in developing a precise 
technique and allow musicians of different hand size to 
play it in the same way.  The shape also has a novel vis-
ual impact, and was natural to create using common 
woodworking tools. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Components, front  and  back 
 
TECHNICAL DETAILS 
Each of the three MTC units is connected to the host 
computer via a serial interface that sends pressure infor-
mation for every taxel (72 per pad) at a maximum rate of 
200Hz.  For a detailed discussion of the inner workings 
of Tactex hardware, please consult their website.  The 
host computer is a Macintosh running Max/MSP [5].  
Max objects resolve individual points of contact, or cen-
troids, interpolating position to less than 1mm.  The 
software is capable of resolving up to 10 discrete cen-
troids per pad.  Sound is generated either in MSP, Rea-
son (a commercial software synth) [7], or external midi 
devices. 
 
 
SOUND GENERATION AND TUNING 
Playing Samples 
The very first sound generating patch I created for the 
original flat Tactex MTC was for sample playback and 
includes various ways to control the speed of a sample or 
produce ‘scratching’ effects.  Three basic modes are 
entailed in the playback design.  These modes are: Lin-
ear, Polar and Angular.   
Linear Mode 
In the linear mode one half of the pad is a fader-like 
speed control ranging from zero to several times real 
time, backwards and forward, with zero at the center.  
The computer keyboard is used to trigger and stop play-
back of looping sounds.  On the other half of the pad the 
sample is simply mapped linearly to the x-axis with a 
fingertip acting like the playback head itself. 
Polar Mode  
Here Cartesian coordinates are converted to polar coor-
dinates with the length of the sample scaled to 2 pi radi-
ans.  The sound plays as the musician draws a circle 
around the center of the pad. 
Angular Mode 
Angular mode controls the speed of playback as circles 
are continuously drawn on the pad, backward or for-
ward.  Playback speed is linked to the angular velocity of 
a centroid instead of directly mapped to positions on the 
circle. 
 
For the back pad, the linear mode works best due to 
some difficulty in moving the thumb in a smooth circle.  
On the front pads I prefer the angular mode as it is more 
intuitive and there is a clear visual connection to what 
the audience hears.  A fourth mode is in the works: linear 
velocity.  Here one can effectively scribble on the pad 
with playback speed linked to centroid velocity in any 
direction.  This removes discrete position from the ve-
locity calculation, allowing the location of a moving 
centroid to be independently used for other parameters. 
In all modes, careful buffering of the input data is re-
 
 NIME02-03
quired to smooth playback and prevent warbled or pixel-
lated sound, while still allowing for interesting accelera-
tion and deceleration of the playback speed.  Many fas-
cinating effects can be created by varying the buffering 
coefficients and other parameters. 
The pads are also useful for simple realtime playback of 
sound effect samples mapped to different areas on the 
pad and crossfaded as centroids move along the surface. 
There is great potential for use in sound-design and sur-
round control. 
Percussion 
Another patch uses percussion modeling objects from 
the PeRColate library [6] to simulate a shaker on the 
pad.  Figure 3 shows one possible configuration.  A 
range of textures can be created with various gestures on 
the pad, from simply tapping in rhythm to stroking 
across the pad.  It is easy to create sounds beyond the 
palette of the modeled acoustic instrument.  While the 
patch shows promise in terms of sonic interest, much 
faster pad sampling rates would be needed, and perhaps 
a faster host computer, to make a musically viable per-
cussion instrument. 
 
Figure 3.  Shaker   mapping 
 
Tuning 
As stated at the beginning of the paper, most of the work 
has focused on experimenting with tunings that will al-
low accurate musical control over pitches played on the 
Ski.  For pitch-based playing, sound can be generated 
within Max/MSP, or by using iac-bus midi to play other 
software synthesizers.  I have programmed patches for 
midi output, however each centroid generates multiple 
controller data on its own channel, thus creating a cum-
bersome volume of midi data. 
Experience on several traditional instruments has influ-
enced the development of the ski tunings.  Certainly the 
manual, percussive nature of keyboard technique is pre-
sent, albeit without individual keys and with continuous 
control of position and pressure after contact is made.  
The scaling of the surface has similarities to a stringed 
instrument in that one pitch component is mapped verti-
cally, with lower pitches toward the top of the pad.  
Unlike a string, pitches are spaced evenly instead of 
logarithmically.  Spending many hours with kalimbas 
[3], mbiras, and some exposure to the harp family con-
vinced me to experiment with a symmetrical arrange-
ment for the left and right hands, so that the same notes 
(and unisons) could be played by both hands, in com-
plimentary positions.  For this reason the pads are di-
vided in the center making left and right halves mirror 
images, with lower pitches in the center of the pad, and 
higher toward the edges.  If a line is drawn on the pad 
representing a unison, it looks basically like a ‘v’ shape 
(figure 4).  The ‘v’ unison evolved by combining the 
string-like vertical pitch component, horizontal symme-
try, and a desire to have accidentals reachable by extend-
ing or retracting the fingers horizontally.  To customize 
the scaling to individual players the angle of the unison 
can be adjusted, and some curvature applied. 
Figure 4. Basic tuning 
 
Using such a scaling with a comfortable hand position 
will result in the following pitch relationships at the 
‘home position’ (first finger and fourth finger at the top 
and side of the bezel, respectively; thumb at top corner 
of back pad; see Figs. 1 and 4):  
thumb  - root 
first finger - fifth 
second finger - sixth 
third finger - octave 
fourth finger - tenth 
Accidentals are reached by simply extending the finger 
toward the center, edges, or up and down by a small 
amount; roughly one fingertip-width per half step. The 
back pad is mapped similarly to the front so that inter-
vals will be consistent as one moves up and down the 
instrument. 
Even using such simple pentatonic relationships between 
fingers, it is still difficult to ‘play’ the instrument in a 
precise and repeatable way, especially when moving 
around to different parts of the pad. However, I do find 
that I can quickly reference back to the home position 
and, like any musical instrument, things get better with 

 
 NIME02-04
plenty of practice. Pitch can be quantized or not. I have 
set up a time response where a note is initially quantized, 
then becomes unquantized over a specified period of 
time. A crossover time between 100 and 1000ms allows 
for bending of notes that begin ‘in tune’. 
There are many possibilities for continuous control of 
events.  A simple one that I have implemented is the use 
of pressure for volume and/or filter cutoff (in an analog 
synth model).  The first two pressure values for a cen-
troid are used to calculate velocity, then subsequent val-
ues are used for continuous control.  Another idea tested 
uses distance traveled along the unison line as a control-
ler.  This way a note can be phrased by moving one way 
or the other on the unison to change volume or timbre.  
The effect is generated only when the event stays on or 
near the unison line.    
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
There are still more tuning options to explore, as well as 
ways to refine the current systems.  I am working on a 
way to quantize pitch to the relative spacing of events 
instead of physically to the pad itself. In practice I have 
found it easiest to think of the relationship between notes 
in a polar way.  That is, events are positioned at an angle 
and distance from a related or nearby event.  Also, each 
time a new event is quantized to this polar ‘grid’ the grid 
itself should center on the new event, affecting only sub-
sequent events, not ones in progress.  It is hoped that this 
will make it easier to play consistently and in-tune.  In 
another tuning map experiment the ‘home position’ will 
produce a diatonic rather than pentatonic basic scaling.  
Also, I would like to explore ways to incorporate just 
intonation and microtonality into the system.  As the 
fine-instrument tuning evolves, it will be interesting to 
define graded simplifications of that system as a way to 
teach the technique.  This way the student can use the 
same physical interface from beginner to virtuoso simply 
by changing refinement levels in software.  Above all, 
the instrument should challenge the musician and reward 
diligent practice with increased musicality at every level 
of expertise [1]. 
Inherent limitations in the hardware contribute to limit-
ing the musical precision of the instrument.  The first 
such limitation is speed.  At 5ms per scan of the pad, 
data is simply not generated soon enough to play quickly 
in precise time.  In addition, if the device was sampling 
at rates above 1kHz properties such as velocity and ac-
celeration could be calculated with much higher resolu-
tion.  The host computer plays a significant part here as 
well.  A recent upgrade from a 466MHz G3 to a 
500MHz G4 made a pronounced improvement in per-
formance.  There are other areas where speed hinder-
ances are unclear; for instance, the USB to serial inter-
faces required to connect the MTCs to newer computers.  
A second limitation is the density of individual sensors 
on the surface.  In its current form, discrete events are 
difficult to resolve unless they are more than roughly an 
inch apart, meaning the area covered by comfortably 
spaced, adjacent fingertips will be interpreted as one 
centroid.  There are ways to address this problem using 
more advanced software, but I believe a combined solu-
tion will ultimately be needed.  I have yet to bridge the 
seam between the two front pads in software, so cur-
rently they behave as separate devices sounding an oc-
tave apart.  It is reasonable to expect some of these prob-
lems to be resolved in future generations of the technol-
ogy.  A larger, faster, more precise surface will be de-
veloped and may one day include flexible visual and 
haptic displays.  For the time being I am working with 
visual and tactile markers applied to the pad with adhe-
sive.  An interesting idea is employed on the Interval 
Stick where a scalloped surface along the ribbon aids 
positioning yet still allows continuous unquantized con-
trol. 
The body of the instrument has proven to be somewhat 
larger than needed.  Even if the entire surface were 
sensitive, it probably wouldn’t need to be quite so long. 
A retractable leg would allow the instrument to be 
adjusted to the individual whether in standing or sitting 
position.  Perhaps a strapped-to-performer arrangement 
is worth exploring. On the Chapman Stick [2] a standoff 
attaches at the waist and a shoulder strap supports the 
upper end.  The instrument is self-supporting (one can 
let go of it completely) and allows freedom of movement 
on stage.  Another improvement would be to include a 
touchpad on the instrument body to control the host 
computer.  Furthermore, other kinds of sensors can be 
added to the body to capture overall motion, position, 
and contact with feet, legs, or floor. 
 
CONCLUSION 
The Ski is generating interest from musicians and non-
musicians alike.  Sample playback and percussion 
patches are very intuitive to use so that nearly anyone 
can begin making interesting sounds as soon as they pick 
it up.  The musical tuning is much more difficult to gain 
control over, yet the experienced musician will find that 
practice leads to improvement, rather than frustration 
with the limits of the instrument.  
I am already using the Ski in performance situations and 
have made ample use of it in the studio for sound-design 
purposes.  It is well suited to bass parts as well as long 
textures, clusters, and beating tones, due to the ability to 
bend each note individually.   
Sound samples of the Ski can be found at: 
http://underdog.sytes.net:8080/huottsound/ski 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Many thanks to Brian Slater and Rob Inkster from Tac-
tex for their generous support thro ughout the project.  
Special thanks to Ernie Reimer, David Moulton, Bill 
Verplank, and Gideon D’Arcangelo for their input on 
instrument design and tunings. 
 
 NIME02-05
REFERENCES 
[1] Buxton,W.A.S.(2000)Round Table In Wanderley 
and Battier (eds.)Trends in Gestural Control of Mu-
sic, Ircam Centre Pompidou,Paris,France. 
[2] Chapman Stick, Stick Enterprises    www.stick.com 
[3] Hugh Tracey Kalimba, African Musical Instruments 
Ltd., Grahamstown, South Africa 
[4] For a description of the Interval Stick: 
http://www.ideo.com/studies/interval.htm 
[5] Max/MSP, Cycling ’74   
www.cycling74.com 
[6] PeRColate Objects, Dan Trueman and R. Luke Du-
Bois, http://music.columbia.edu/PeRColate/ 
[7] Propellerheads Software, Reason software synth 
www.propellerheads.se 
[8] Tactex Controls, Smart Fabric technology 
www.tactex.com 
 