Creating PedagogicalEtudes for Interactive Instruments
Jennifer Butler
University Of British Columbia
Vancouver, B.C. Canada
+1.604.999.1143
jaebutler@yahoo.com
ABSTRACT
In this paper I discuss the importance of and need for
pedagogical materials to support the development of new
interfaces and new instruments for electronic music. I describe
my method for creating a graduated series of pedagogical
etudes composed using Max/MSP. The etudes will help
performers and instrument designers learn the most commonly
used basic skills necessary to perform with interactive
electronic music instruments. My intention is that the final
series will guide a beginner from these initial steps through a
graduated method, eventually incorporating some of the more
advanced techniques regularly used by electronic music
composers.
Id e s c r i b et h eo r d e ro ft h es e r i e s ,a n dd i s c u s st h eb e n e f i t s( b o t h
to performers and to composers) of having a logical sequence of
skill-based etudes. I also connect the significance of skilled
performers to the development of two essential areas that I
perceive are still just emerging in this field: the creation of a
composed repertoire and an increase in musical expression
during performance.
Keywords
Pedagogy, musical controllers, Max/MSP, etudes, composition,
repertoire, musical expression
1. INTRODUCTION
The inspiration for developing a series of concert-etudes for
interactive musical instruments grew from my experiences
creating and performing music with a P5 glove (see figure 1).
Like most composers working in this field, I was not only
designing the music, but also learning how to perform on this
new instrument. Predictably, I found myself limited by my lack
of technical skill. I observe this to be a common problem
among composers and instrument designers in this field, with
performances featuring interactive electronics often sounding
more like demonstrations or experiments than musical
performances.
As a musician with numerous years of training, I was not
surprised that I needed to put in significant time to become
proficient on this instrument. However, it is not only time that is
needed to learn an instrument, but also a method. Currently,
there are no existing methods for learning how to play a P5
glove, or any other interactive electronic instrument. The
creation of such a method will, I believe, help to guide both
composers and instrument builders in the development of a
composed repertoire for interactive instruments, and an increase
in the expressive capabilities of both the performers and the
instruments they use.
Figure 1. The p5 glove
2. THE ETUDES
2.1 Providing a Musical Context
Since the eighteenth century, it has been common practice for
composers and performers to write etudes for the development
of technique on virtually every established instrument. All
instrumentalists who have achieved some level of virtuosity on
their instruments have done so through d iligent practice of
technical exercises such as scales, arpeggios, tone practice, and
composed etudes.
Wanderley and Orio [6] describe another important purpose of
etudes: evaluation of different instruments. They describe a
method used to compare interactive music systems. This
method uses short, repetitive “musical tasks.” With traditional
musical instruments, they explain, “this task is facilitated thanks
to the vast music literature available. This is not the case [for]
interactive music instruments that have a limited, or even
nonexistent, literature.”
Etudes fulfill an important role in learning an instrument by
providing an ingredient that short repetitive exercises cannot: a
musical context for the techniques they are teaching. [3] As a
composer, I propose that instead of compensating for the lack of
repertoire, we start composing a literature for interactive
electronic music instruments.
2.2 Virtuosity
Historically, one important role of the etude has been to build
virtuosity. For the purposes of this paper, I am using the
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
NIME08,J u n e5 - 7 ,2 0 0 8 ,G e n o v a ,I t a l y
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
77
definition of virtuosity put forward by Dobrian and Koppelman
[1]: “the ability to callupon all the capabilities of an instrument
at will with relative ease.” As the authors point out, when
working with computers it does not make sense to judge
virtuosity only by the factor of speed, because computers can
unquestionably play faster than humans.
When a performer has achieved virtuosity on an instrument,
many levels of control and technique have become
subconscious, and “when control of the instrument has been
mastered to the point where it is mostly subconscious, the mind
has more freedom to concentrate consciously on listening and
expression.” [1]
Virtuosic performers are highly valuable to composers and
instrument designers. Without virtuosic performers, and
instruments capable of adequate expression, composers cannot
hear their music fully realized. In many cases, instrument
designers and programmers have to rely on their own, often
limited, performing skills when first testing a new piece or
instrument.
Etudes help to develop virtuosity, and therefore play a crucial
role in further developing a repertoire for an instrument.
Without etudes, players of acoustic instruments would not be
able to handle the technique needed to perform musical works,
and composers would not have performers to play the music
they imagine. As it says in the New Grove Dictionary, “the true
virtuoso has always been prized not only for his rarity but also
for his ability to widen the technical and expressive boundaries
of his art.” [4]
3. STARTING AT THE BEGINNING
3.1 Ordering the Series
My initial series of etudes includes ten graduated studies that
introduce the basic skills needed to manipulate different
elements of musical sound. This series is designed for a
beginner or novice performer on interactive instruments. The
etudes are designed to create a non-intimidating experience for
am u s i c i a nw i t hl i t t l eo rn op r e v i o u se x p e r i e n c ew i t he l e c t r o n i c
music.
In choosing which musical elements and types of controls to
include in the etudes, and in which order they will appear, I
have also created a priority list. Undoubtedly, my etudes focus
on the skills and musical elements most likely to be needed for
my own compositions. However, I have tried to make the
etudes stylistically diverse. By the end of the series the
performer will have experience with: triggers, toggle, and more
fluid or constant parameters.
3.2 The Etudes
Each etude contains four elements: 1 – a basic description of the
purpose and intent of the etude, including a simulation
performance of the etude; 2 – a graphically notated score; 3 –
the Max/MSP etude patch; and 4 – a Max/MSP patch that will
be used to connect the interactive instrument to the etude patch.
Etude 1 introduces the performer to different approaches to
rhythm and synchronization. At times rhythmic freedom is
encouraged, and at times strict rhythm is required. Etude 2
focuses on pitch control, while Etude 3 focuses on dynamic, or
volume control. Etude 4 combines the elements of rhythm,
pitch, and volume control. Etude 5 focuses on spatialization and
localization, and Etude 6 on timbre and envelope manipulation.
Etude 7 combines the elements used in the first six etudes.
Etude 8 introduces different methods of synthesis (for example:
granular and FM), and Etude 9 is a study in changing tempos.
Etude 10, the final etude in the series, brings together all skills
learned in the earlier etudes.
Each of these introductory etudes is notated along a timeline
that the performer must follow, using a clock that has been
placed in the etude patch. (see figure 2). The main goal is for
the performer to become fluent enough on the instrument in
these basic control parameters so that when further complexity
is added the performer will be ready.
Figure 2. Example of Notation
Complexity is increased gradually throughout the series. It is
understood that the level of complexity might depend on the
characteristics of each interactive instrument. The main method
of adding complexity is to increase the number of different
control elements (for example, the number of triggers or
different layers of sounds to be controlled) or by increasing the
speed at which these elements need to be controlled. The first
three etudes use only one dimension, layer, or direction of
moveable data (constant flow between 0 and 127). Etudes 5 and
6w i l li n v o l v et w os u c hl a y e r s .F o re x a m p l e ,o n es t r e a mo fd a t a
could control volume, and the other spatialization. With some
instruments or mappings, the gestures that control this data may
be completely separate (such as with a keyboard, or different
pedals), and with others they may be more connected (such as
with a wii, glove, or mouse). The final etudes will be the most
complex: including many control parameters and requiring
more intricate synchronization.
However, it is important to keep in mind that for now this is a
series of beginner etudes, designed to prepare a beginning
performer for future compositions that may require a much
higher level of complexity and technique.
4. COMPATIBILITY
4.1 A Universal Interface
One of the most important features of these etudes is their
adaptability to many different controllers. Each etude is
designed so it is playable by any device that can produce the
required types of data. The interface for each etude lists the data
needed and provides the necessary links into the etude. For
example, Etude 1 requires an instrument that can produce eight
separate triggers for sample playback (see figure 3).
Different mappings and interpretations can easily be tried with
each etude. This flexibility will allow performers to practice
different movements for different musical parameters, helping
them to assess which of the movements will work best.
Performers can gain a deeper understanding of the particular
strengths and weaknesses of their instrument.
The etudes do not require specific movements, so the performer
can choreograph all the gestures. For example, depending on
the instrument being used, different actions can activate each
trigger; different parameters (position, amplitude, pitch) can
produce the same types of continuous numbers – yet the
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
78
resulting sounds will always be the same. Similar gestures,
listening skills, and types of coordination are used by a large
number of interactive instruments. Therefore, the skills a
performer develops while learning this series of etudes on one
controller will very likely be transferable to other controllers.
Traditional etudes are also typically practised using a variety of
approaches that challenge players in a variety of ways (for
example, with different articulations or dynamic levels).
Figure 3. Etude 1 Interface
4.2 The Etude Patches
Each etude will have two Max/MSP components. The primary
component is the etude patch (see figures 3 and 5). This patch
contains all the programming needed for each etude, and should
not be edited. Each etude patch includes an On/Off switch,
reset button, simulation button, and clock. The patch shows all
the needed information for performing the specific etude.
Each etude will also come with an optional User Interface (see
figures 4 and 6). This interface will include all the “send
objects” needed to communicate with the etude patch, as well as
information about the type of data that the etude patch is
programmed to receive. Performers will need to edit this patch
or create a new patch that sends the necessary information from
their interactive instrument into the etude patch.
4.3 A Shared Repertoire
Having a notated repertoire that can be performed by different
musicians, as well as different instruments, is important to the
development of any musical genre. Currently there is no such
repertoire for interactive electronic instruments, and
consequently no way to make musical comparisons between
performers or instruments.
There is also extensive historical precedent for sharing
repertoire across instruments, especially when the repertoire for
one instrument is lacking. For example, several sonatas in the
violin canon (Franck, Mozart, and Prokofiev) are commonly
also played on the flute, and the Bach Sonatas for solo cello are
performed on many instruments, including trombone and
marimba. The various strengths and weaknesses of each
instrument become quickly apparent when repertoire is shared.
Also, many composers, notably John Cage, have written pieces
for open instrumentation. Performances of these works can
vary widely depending on the instruments chosen.
Figure 4. Etude 1 User Interface
Figure 5. Etude 2 Interface
4.4 Point of Reference
One significant role these etudes will fill is providing a reliable
point of reference when making comparisons between
performers, performances, different instruments (level of
subtlety and expressiveness achievable; ease of learning;
performer reactions), and different mappings. Each etude will
also focus on different musical or control elements, allowing a
user to quickly determine the controller’s effectiveness and
ability in each aspect of music.
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
79
The etudes may also be a good test of which type of controller
might be best suited for a certain piece of music. This could be
especially useful while the piece is still being composed. A
more skilled performer could easily learn these basic etudes on
several different controllers and quickly evaluate their
effectiveness on many musical levels. As Wanderley and Orio
state, “Musical tasks are already part of the evaluation process
of acoustic musical instruments, because musicians and
composers seldom choose an instrument without extensive
testing to how specific musical gestures can be performed.” [6]
Figure 6. Etude 2 User Interface
5. CONCLUSIONS
My primary goals in writing these etudes are to:
1. Create a learning environment in which beginners can
experience a non-intimidating introduction to interactive
performance.
2. Encourage other composers and performers to create their
own etudes and pieces that can be exchanged to broaden the
level of shared knowledge, and help to define the skills needed
for performing on interactive electronic instruments.
3. Create a tool that will guide performers and instrument
builders towards higher levels of control and musical
expression.
Interactive electronic music is an emerging field that has yet to
solidly establish a repertoire or performance practice. I believe
one of the most important steps in developing both of these
fundamental parts of a musical genre is to create a method for
learning performance technique. In the near future I hope to see
strong performances of well-written pieces replacing the
demonstrations and experiments that currently occupy many
concert spots. For this to occur I believe composers, instrument
designers and performers must work together.
These etudes can strengthen such collaborations by providing a
foundation for evaluation of both the instrument and the
performer. This basis for evaluation is an essential ingredient in
building a lasting repertoire for interactive instruments.
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Ia mv e r yg r a t e f u lt oD r .B o bP r i t c h a r da n dD r .K e i t hH a m e lf o r
their support of this project, programming help, and generous
feedback on my work. Thank you also to my husband Michael
Begg for his invaluable editing skills. This project is supported
in part through the Social Science and Humanities Research
Council of Canada, grant 848-2003-0147, and by the University
of British Columbia Media And Graphics Interdisciplinary
Centre (MAGIC) the UBC Institute for Computing, Information
and Cognitive Science (ICICS), and the School of Music.
7. REFERENCES
[1] Dobrian, C., and Koppelman, D. “The ‘E’ in NIME:
Musical Expression with New Computer Interfaces”.
Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on New Interfaces for
Musical Expression (NIME06), Paris, France, 2006.
[2] Fels, S., Gadd, A., and Mulder, A. “Mapping transparency
through metaphor: towards more expressive musical
instruments”. Organised Sound 7:2, 109-126. Cambridge
University Press, 2002.
[3] Ferguson, H., and Hamilton, K. L. “Study”.Grove Music
Online. L. Macy, ed.http://www.grovemusic.com
[4] Jander, O. “Virtuoso”.Grove Music Online.L. Macy, ed.
http://www.grovemusic.com
[5] Lazzetta, F. “Meaning in Musical Gesture”.Trends in
Gestural Control of Music,M. M. Wanderley and M.
Battier, eds. Paris, Fr: IRCAM - Centre Georges
Pompidou, 2000.
[6] Wanderley, M. M., and Orio, N. “Evaluation of Input
Devices for Musical Expression: Borrowing Tools from
HCI”. Computer Music Journal26:3, 62-76. MIT Press,
2002.
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME08), Genova, Italy
80