AlphaSphere - from Prototype to Product
Adam Place
nu desine limited, United Kingdom
PMStudio, Watershed,
1 Canon’s Road, Harbourside
Bristol, BS1 5TX, 
adam@nu-desine.com
Liam Lacey
nu desine limited, United Kingdom
PMStudio, Watershed,
1 Canon’s Road, Harbourside
Bristol, BS1 5TX, UK 
liam@nu-desine.com
Tom Mitchell
University of the West of England
Dept. of Computer Science &
Creative Technology
Bristol, BS16 1QY , UK  
tom.mitchell@uwe.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
This paper explores the design process of  the AlphaSphere, an 
experimental new musical instrument that has transitioned into 
scale production and international distribution. Initially, the 
design intentions and engineering processes are covered.
 The paper continues by briefly evaluating the user testing 
process and outlining the ergonomics, communication prototcol 
and software of  the device. The paper closes by questioning 
what it takes to evaluate success as a musical instrument.
Keywords
AlphaSphere, OSC, MIDI, HCI, open source, C++, JUCE, GUI
1. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The AlphaSphere is beginning to be adopted as a musical 
instrument, but how can its success as an instrument be 
evaluated?  The advent of computer music has seen a 
democratisation of  the music making process, however music 
software itself  is increasingly moving away from the mouse 
and keyboard, towards new and original modes of interaction. 
In this paper we will chart the process that led to this concept 
becoming a commercially available musical instrument.
2. DESIGN PROCESS
The design and development of the AlphaSphere was a 
collaborative process which was led by the principal developer. 
The design was refined through input from  multiple 
collaborators which included instrumentalists, composers, 
electronic musicians, record producers, audio engineers, music 
therapists and academics of both music and design disciplines.
2.1 Conception
The AlphaSphere was originally conceived as an interface to 
explore and catalogue electronic sound. It was designed as a 
tactile tool, which offered an alternative to writing sonic ideas 
down and therefore prioritised the exploration of  the sounds 
themselves rather than the symbols or written notation which 
represents them1. The intention was that by creating an object 
with flexible programmable elements, musical/sonic syntax i.e. 
notes, could be explored, arranged and quickly discarded if 
necessary. As the concept was refined it became apparent the 
AlphaSphere had potential beyond a research tool for ideas on 
sonic and musical structure, and had potential as an expressive 
musical instrument.
2.1.1 Shape
The original idea for the shape of  the device was a dome, 
however a spherical shape was eventually determined as it was 
surmised that the form  would lend itself to pitch exploration, 
with lower tones mapped to the underside of the sphere, middle 
tones to the middle and higher tones to the top of  the sphere. 
Initial ideas for the shape drew on inspirations from acoustic 
instruments such as the PANart Hang and the tuning system 
which it uses3, and also that the tuning system  for an instrument 
such as the Steel Pan4 could be represented in a convex form.
2.1.2 Pad interaction design
Initially the pads were intended to act as standard event 
triggers, however as the concept evolved it was decided that 
these should have a tactile malleable feel. The first prototypes 
of the pads were produced by layering up putty stretched over 
espresso cups until a durable tactile surface was created.
2.2 Concept prototype
The first prototype was built using the main PCB of a MIDI 
keyboard and an array of  paper espresso cups glued together to 
create a modular sphere (see Figure 1). Each of the espresso 
cups had latex stretched over them, with a magnet and a reed 
switch on the underside that allowed the user to trigger single 
notes. There were a number of problems with this prototype, 
namely the spherical form contained gaps that prevented 
seamless play around the sphere. The spherical design itself 
was inspired by a design found on the website - Instructables2.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of  this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee  provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for  profit or  commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
NIME’14, June 30-July 03, 2014, Goldsmiths, London, UK.
Copyright remains with the author(s).
Figure 1. Early AlphaSphere prototype showcased at NUA.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
399
2.3 Engineering
Moving to an engineered prototype saw the design of a CAD 
model (see Figure 2), the initial intention was to close the gaps 
that existed in the original form. By giving the pads alternate 
sized shapes the gaps could be reduced and also provide tactile 
feedback to help users navigate around the sphere. Eight pads 
per row would allow for an entire octave and therefore allow a 
circle of fifths to be mapped around each row5.
As this CAD model was adapted for production a number of 
design iterations were produced, and it became apparent that if 
the pads were arranged diagonally this would ensure that the 
form  was distributed evenly, this also had the result that the 
spherical form comprised a hexagonal lattice (see Figure 3), 
which would allow the mapping of  notational arrangements 
such as the harmonic table or the Wicki-Hayden arrangement6.
2.3.1 AlphaSphere 0.1
In this prototype the pads were mounted on a spherical frame, 
and used a form of carbonised rubber sheeting  as a sensor 
input. A current flowed across the pad sheet and as pressure 
was applied the resistance increased, this resistive change could 
be measured to trigger sound. Individual pad lighting was 
trialled, with LEDs illuminating each pad. There were a number 
of issues with this design, especially with the carbonised rubber 
pads which did not emit a clean signal. It provided useful 
insights into the direction of the design and illuminated pictures 
of the prototype generated initial user interest (see Figure 4).
Figure 4. AlphaSphere 0.1 illuminated with internal LEDs.
2.3.2 AlphaSphere 0.2
After further research, sensors which quantified the 
displacement of  the pad mechanically were selected, these 
converted pad manipulations into data. In 0.2 the structure was 
reproduced using only 3 parts, (i) top three rows, (ii) middle 
row and (iii) bottom two rows (see Figure 5), and did not 
require an internal frame as 0.1 did. The carbon-loaded rubber 
was replaced with latex rubber, which was much more elastic 
and easier to play, but suffered visible wear after medium  
usage. The pad depths were increased as the sensor mechanism 
allowed for the possibility  of controlling a greater range. The 
lighting was moved inside the sphere to a single RGB LED unit 
that  changed colour as pads were pressed. 0.2 could be used to 
play music, but the depth of  the pads meant that they were not 
as responsive as they could have been with a shallower depth.
2.3.3 AlphaSphere 0.3
The intention of AlphaSphere 0.3 was to move towards an 
ergonomic, manufacturable design which utilsed the new 
sensor mechanism  and user feedback (see Section 3 - User 
Testing). The main challenge of this prototype was to create a 
structure that was self-supporting, robust and could be adapted 
for injection moulding. The modular design was influenced by 
the structure of  the geodesic dome 7. By using the rotational 
symmetry of  the design, a frame was created out of 48 
individual parts that were bolted together - pads were then 
mounted onto this frame. The pad depth was reduced to utilise 
the optimum  sensitivity of the sensors and the latex rubber was 
replaced with more robust silicon rubber.  The PCB was 
contained within the base of the device, rather than a box on the 
side as in 0.1 and 0.2. On the strength of the function and 
aesthetic of  this prototype - orders for over 100 units were 
attracted which supported the transition into manufacture.
2.4 Production
It was determined that it became viable to produce injection 
moulding tools once orders for over 15 units were received, at 
this point the design was refined for batch manufacture.
2.4.1 AlphaSphere 0.4 and beyond
The next iteration, AlphaSphere 0.4, was created to fine tune 
the design for manufacture. The bolts for the frame were 
replaced with a clip mechanism as the form was fully designed 
for the injection moulding process. The pad-caps were threaded 
so that they could be screwed on and off, and the middle two 
pad sizes were modified so the sizes changed with a constant 
ratio. A wider base was created for stability, which also allowed 
for a larger printed circuit board. The PCB itself was adapted a 
number of  times in readiness for Electro Magnetic 
Compatibility (EMC) testing as a Professional MIDI unit, 
reference EN55103-1:2009 for environments E1 - E48.
Figure 2. Early AlphaSphere CAD render.
Figure 3. AlphaSphere CAD render exhibiting diagonal 
columns which form a hexagonal lattice.
Figure 5. AlphaSphere 0.2 structure with parts annotated.
i
ii
iii
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
400
3. USER TESTING
Throughout the design process input was invited from users, 
ranging from specifically targeted musicians, to musicians who 
approached the development team, to children and members of 
the general public.
3.1 Alpha testing
3.1.1 Methodology
Undertaken with 0.2, Alpha testing took place with a series of 
structured interviews and questionnaires. Largely conducted at 
the site of development, with the development team  present, 
feedback was collected directly from the participants.
3.1.2 Conclusions
Process led to reduction in size of the device, so sphere could 
comfortably fit between the hands. It also led to the standard 
pad arrangements shifting so diatonic notational arrangements 
could be played fluidly from row to row, rather than notes 
repeating when progressing between rows (see Figures 6 & 7).
3.2 Beta testing
3.2.1 Methodology
The Beta testing process saw the device used live on tour by 
two electronic music producers. This real-world testing process 
allowed the development team to assess different users 
understanding of  the AlphaSphere through the questions which 
were asked by the performing musicians. One of  the Beta 
testers was aged under 20 years old and successfully set-up and 
used the AlphaSphere on tour, however the other Beta tester, 
aged over 40 had difficulty setting-up the AlphaSphere with the 
software and was not able to use the AlphaSphere at all.
3.2.2 Conclusions
The beta testing process was not extensive enough to draw 
significant conclusions, other than that the prototype devices 
were sufficiently robust to use in a live environment, and that 
the ease of set-up could be improved.
4. ERGONOMICS
4.1 Form
As part of the design process, the ergonomics of the device 
were refined. A number of ergonomic principles which were 
not immediately apparent at the conception of  the device, 
became core to what the instrument now provides.
4.1.1 Pad Size
Pad Male Female
Largest 85mm Hand Breadth 87mm 76mm
Smallest 22mm Index Finger Breadth 21mm 18mm
The pad sizes of the AlphaSphere are directly related to the 
anthropometry of  the human hand 9 (see Table 1) The largest 
pads are designed to be similar to the breadth of the average 
human hand and the smallest pads are designed to be similar to 
the average size of the tips of the index finger (see Figure 8).
4.2 Pad interaction design
4.2.1 Tactility
The pads of the AlphaSphere are designed to offer the 
instrumentalist feedback through the feel and depth of the pads. 
As outlined in Sections 2.3.2 & 2.3.3 - AlphaSphere 0.2 & 0.3 
attention was paid to the depth of the pads, with the optimum 
depth being found for the current sensor mechanism. The 
material and padding of the pads are designed to feel malleable 
in order to improve the experience of the musician.
4.2.2 Control
Each pad sends two messages when pressed - a pressure value 
and a velocity value. Pressure is sent as a value between 0 and 
511 depending on how much physical pressure is applied to the 
pad. Velocity is sent as a value between 0 and 127 depending 
on how much force is applied to a pad when struck.
4.2.3 Future development
Touch sensitivity could be improved, specifically to aid fast 
percussive actions, the amount of  force required should be 
reduced. Also, the endpoint of  the virtual pressure value is at 
approximately two thirds the depth of the physical pad, 
meaning there is space at the bottom  of the pad, so increasing 
pressure won't continue to change the value.
5. COMMUNICATION PROTOCOL
5.1 OSC
AlphaSphere 0.1 and 0.2 used the Open Sound Control (OSC) 
protocol for communicating with the computer. OSC was 
implemented as it is a protocol with high data resolution 
capabilities and an open-ended naming scheme, ideally suited 
for communicating between music software and hardware.
5.2 Serial
In 0.3 the device’s connection type was changed from  Ethernet 
to USB to allow it to be bus-powered, and adopted the Serial 
protocol. The AlphaLive software would create a virtual MIDI 
device or a MIDI output port, at this point OSC conversion 
support was implemented so OSC could still be used.
5.3 MIDI & HID
A problem  which emerged in Beta testing phase is that virtual 
MIDI devices are only supported on Mac OS X, and third-party 
MIDI routing software is required to connect the device to 
MIDI software on Windows. The solution to this was to make 
the device a composite USB device; a device with a MIDI 
interface for communicating with external MIDI software but 
with a second interface for communicating with AlphaLive to 
Figure 6. Two rows of 
C-major scale in 0.2
Figure 7. Two rows of 
C-major scale in 0.3
Table 1. Human hand and fingertip average size compared 
to rubberised part of largest and smallest AlphaSphere pad.
Figure 8. Human hand with render of largest and smallest 
AlphaSphere pad size on palm and index fingertip.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
401
program  the MIDI messages. The HID protocol was selected 
rather than the Serial protocol, as HID is class compliant and it 
would also allow the device to be used as a computer input 
device/gaming controller. HID & MIDI is the current protocol.
5.4 Future
The main problem with the current communication protocol is 
that the MIDI messages are being generated within AlphaLive, 
rather than from  the device itself. This can be rectified by 
moving MIDI message generation onto the device’s firmware.
6. ALPHALIVE SOFTWARE
6.1 Concept
AlphaLive is intended to be an application that allows the 
device to be programmable in an easy and intuitive way. The 
two main factors in the design and development process were – 
create an application that would allow the device to control 
sound in as many ways as possible, and to create a user-
interface that reflected the design of the hardware. 
AlphaLive was originally developed using Max/MSP  (see 
Figure 9) as it would allow AlphaSphere users to customise the 
software to fit to their specific needs. However as features 
increased it was decided that C++ and the JUCE library10 
should be used. Developing the software in a lower-level 
language allowed more control over the design of the GUI, and 
the JUCE library was used due to its strong audio and MIDI 
support. Using JUCE also meant the software could remain 
open-source, so the software could be customised by the user.
6.1.1 Back-end design
The concept behind programming the AlphaSphere is the idea 
of independent pads – a pad is selected and given functionality 
that is independent from other pads. This is the main 
component behind the design of the back-end of AlphaLive.
6.1.2 GUI design
The arrangement of the pads in the GUI changed throughout 
the software development process. Initially it was a polygon 
structure with the rows arranged in straight lines (see top image 
of Figure 10), however distinguishing the mapping relationship 
between the pad arrangements on the hardware with this 
interface layout was difficult. Therefore the layout was changed 
to a circular structure (see bottom images of Figure 10) to 
increase the ease of comparing the hardware and software. 
Various layouts were experimented with in order to develop the 
best mapping relationship (see bottom right of Figure 10).
6.2 Future
There are many ways that AlphaLive could be further 
developed. The Sampler and Sequencer modes could be 
improved so that the application could act as a standalone 
music production suite that would prevent the need for any 
external MIDI or OSC software. This would also be useful for 
exploiting the devices key features for controlling sound in 
ways that is impossible via MIDI/OSC. AlphaLive could also 
be improved as a MIDI/OSC mapping editor to allow closer 
integration with applications that come with extensive 
mapping/scripting capabilities for third-party controllers.
7. CONCLUSION
How can the success of the AlphaSphere as a musical 
instrument be evaluated?  AlphaSphere concerts are becoming 
more frequent occurrences, and some initial playing styles have 
emerged. However, the instrument has yet to be mastered and 
performed virtuosically. As we generally understand that 
virtuosity constitutes success with an instrument, to evaluate 
the success of  the AlphaSphere as a musical instrument, surely 
a virtuoso must emerge.
8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Our thanks to the members of the nu desine team, the 
Watershed, Dr. Chris Nash and the JUCE Library community.
9. REFERENCES
[1] Nattiez, J., Music and Discourse: Toward a Semiology of 
Music. Princeton University Press (1990).
[2] Buckminster F_cker, R., Dixie Cup Spherical 
Dodecahedron. instructables.com/id/Dixie-Cup-Spherical-
Dodecahedron/ (2013).
[3] Rohner, F., and Schärer, S., History, Development and 
Tuning of the Hang. International Conference on Noise 
and Vibration Engineering (2007).
[4] Kronman, U., Steel Pan Tuning: A Handbook for Steel Pan 
Making and Tuning. Musikmuseet (1991)
[5] Place, A., Lacey, L., and Mitchell, T., AlphaSphere. New 
Interfaces for Musical Expression (2013).
[6] musicnotation.org/wiki/instruments/wicki-hayden-note-
layout/
[7] Davis, T., Geodesic Dome. geometer.org/mathcircles  
(2004).
[8] Electromagnetic compatibility. Product family standard for 
audio, video, audio-visual and entertainment lighting 
control apparatus for professional use. British Standards 
Institution (2013).
[9] Pheasant, S., and Haslegrave, C.M., Bodyspace: 
Anthropometry, Ergonomics and the Design of Work. CRC 
Press (2006), 144.
[10] http://rawmaterialsoftware.com/juce.php
10. ONLINE CONTENT
http://www.alphasphere.com
Figure 9. The first version of AlphaLive, made in Max/MSP.
Figure 10. Development of AlphaLive’s Pad Layout section.
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression
402